Title       : Cell Division in a Filamentous, Sporulating Bacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9724038

Award Number: 9724038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina M. Henkin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen E. Kendrick  (Principal Investigator former)
              Charles J. Daniels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Kendrick  9724038  To deposit a septum at the correct time in the cell cycle
              and at the correct location, a unicellular bacterium must be able to monitor
              the completion of DNA replication and the segregation of the newly replicated
              DNA, locate the center of the cell, and initiate the centripetal growth of new
              cell wall and cytoplasmic membrane.  Because binary fission is the only means
              by which most commonly studied bacteria reproduce, many of the genes required
              for cell division are essential and thus cannot be readily dissected by
              mutation analysis.  Unlike other bacteria, Streptomyces grows as branched,
              filamentous, multinucleoidal cells that undergo multiple septation events to
              form chains of spores.  Key events in Streptomyces differentiation include the
              massive and relatively synchronous septation necessary to form the compartments
              destined to become the spores, and the extensive growth of the differentiated
              structures prior to septation.  To identify structural, enzymatic, and
              regulatory proteins responsible for this dramatic change in cell structure,
              this project focuses on two proteins required for sporulation septum formation:
               FtsZ and the septum-specific penicillin-binding protein.  These experiments
              will identify the factors involved in the developmental regulation of ftsZ in
              Streptomyces griseus by using an integrative reporter system, mutant analysis,
              and the analysis of proteins required for transcription of ftsZ.  The gene
              encoding the septum-specific penicillin-binding protein of S.griseus will be
              isolated and its nucleotide sequence determined; in another experiment this
              gene will be disrupted to confirm its role in septum formation.    Cell
              division is an essential property of all organisms.  To reproduce, each cell
              must divide to generate viable daughter cells.  The analysis of cell division
              in filamentous bacteria is a logical system to use to study molecular events
              central to the correct timing and location of cell division.  By characterizing
              the cell division machine ry in these bacteria, this research will help to
              build the cornerstones of cell growth.
