Title       : Neurosteroid Potentiation of GABAa Receptor-Mediated Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9724139

Award Number: 9724139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Bitran dbitran@holycross.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holy Cross College
	      1 College Street
	      Worcester, MA  01610    508/793-2011

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                  Non-technical Summary  Principal Investigator:  Bitran, D.  
               Proposal Number:IBN9724139              Neurochemical Analysis of Motivated
              Behavior                                  The long-term goal of this project is
              to explore how  chemical systems in the brain control motivated behavior. 
              Among motivated behaviors, ingestive behaviors such as  feeding and drinking
              have formed the focus of such studies.  To develop general principles to
              explain the control of  motivated behaviors, the results from studies on a
              variety  of behaviors (e.g., reproductive behavior, aggression) are  needed. 
              To date, little is known about the neurochemistry  of the motivational
              components of female reproductive  behavior.  The PIs have pursued studies
              showing a link  between the mesolimbic dopamine system and the control of  the
              incentive (e.g., reward) properties of female  reproductive behavior, using
              female hamsters as our  experimental model.  The studies in this proposal are 
              designed to further pursue this link between neural dopamine  pathways and
              female reprodcutive behavior in three specific  ways.  First, the PIs intend to
              continue microdialysis  studies demonstrating proximal relationships between
              female  reproductive function and extracellular dopamine levels in  the nucleus
              accumbens.  The PIs have demonstrated that  experienced female hamsters show
              higher, and more sustained  extracellular dopamine levels during interactions
              with males  compared with inexperienced females.  As sensitization of 
              responsiveness is one property of dopamine neurons  repeatedly activated with
              drugs, the PIs will explicitly  test whether this augmentation of nucleus
              accumbens dopamine  levels in experienced female hamsters reflects a sensitized
               response of these neurons to stimuli received during mating  encounters.  This
              would be the first such demonstration of  sensitization of dopamine neurons
              resulting from the  expression of a naturalistic behavior.  Our second goal is 
              to provide a broader neurolo gical perspective on the  relationship between
              dopamine and female mating behavior.  To date, the nucleus accumbens and dorsal
              striatum are the  only brain regions in which in vivo measurements of dopamine 
              during mating encounters have been taken.  The PIs intend to  extend this
              analysis to other behaviorally-relevant  dopaminergic terminal fields, such as
              the frontal cortex,  medial preoptic area, and amygdala.  In the context of
              these  experiments the PIs will determine the degree to which  dopamine in each
              of these areas is related to the expression  of female mating behavior or some
              other factor associated  with social encounters.  A key issue in the
              interpretation  of these behavioral findings centers around the degree to 
              which individual dopaminergic neurons project to multiple  targets.  That is,
              do similarities or differences in  dopaminergic activity in each terminal field
              derive from the  activity of the same or different dopamine neurons.  This is 
              an unresolved issue for any species, and the PIs propose to  determine
              quantitatively the degree to which individual  dopamine neurons innervate
              multiple terminal fields.  Together these studies will provide a framework for
              defining  how functional dopaminergic pathways regulate different  components
              of female reproductive behavior, providing a  basis for developing
              generalizations of the role of  dopantine in motivated behavior.
