Title       : Glucose Signaling in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9724050

Award Number: 9724050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Gaber r-gaber@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9724050  Gaber        The expression of many genes in the yeast
              Saccharomyces  cerevisiae, is regulated by the availability of glucose or other
               hexoses.  For example, in the presence of low glucose  concentrations some
              genes are transcriptionally induced whereas  others are only induced when the
              cell is exposed to high  concentrations of glucose. In addition, many genes,
              like those  involved in the transport and metabolism of galactose, are 
              transcriptionally repressed by glucose.  The integration of both  positive and
              negative transcriptional regulation in S. cerevisiae  involves a complex,
              sometimes redundant network of signaling  pathways.  The identity of glucose
              signaling molecules remains  largely unknown despite intensive efforts toward
              their discovery.  Recently, a novel glucose signaling pathway was discovered,
              in  which Snf3, a membrane protein with a resemblance to glucose  transporters,
              was found to be required for the negative  regulation of HXT6, a glucose
              transporter gene that undergoes  transcriptional repression in response to
              moderate or high levels  of glucose.  This negative role of Snf3 on HXT6
              expression in  response to glucose is unique.  Also unusual is the expression
              of  HXT6 in the complete absence of glucose; all other glucose  transporter
              genes require either low or high concentrations of  glucose to induce
              expression.  Moreover the expression of SNF3 in  cells deleted for the
              functional HXT genes is insufficient to  confer either growth on glucose or
              glucose uptake.  Thus Snf3 may  function more like a glucose receptor than a
              transporter and its  principal role appears to the elicitation or maintenance
              of the  appropriate signaling pathway that allows the cell to respond to  the
              availability of glucose by inducing or repressing downstream  target genes.    
                  One goal of the proposed research is to identify proteins  that participate
              in the Snf3-dependent signaling pathway.  A  genetic characterization will
              determine the effects of known  mutations on Sn f3 signaling.  Genetic screens
              will also be  carried out to identify mutations in genes that specifically 
              affect this pathway.  The genes identified through the mutant  screens will be
              cloned and the proteins they encode will be  determined.  These results will
              enable the construction of  molecular tools that are required to assess the
              relative  positions and roles played by specific proteins  in this pathway. 
              This research will lead to the identification of the molecular  mechanism
              involved in transducing the glucose signal, and  lead  to an understanding of
              how a membrane protein of the glucose  transporter family can maintain a
              glucose availability signal  that is transmitted to the nucleus where it can
              enhance or  repress transcription of specific genes.  %%%            This
              research is examining how a membrane protein which  is similar in sequence to
              glucose transporters, can negatively  regulate glucose transporter genes  that
              are repressed in  response to moderate or high levels of glucose.  The results
              of  these studies in yeast will lead to our understanding of the  mechanism by
              which cells can respond to different levels of  glucose in their environment.  
               ***
