Title       : Upgrade of NMR Instrumentation in a College Wide Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9724392

Award Number: 9724392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Okamura william.okamura@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Angle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Morton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Justin K. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Mark Midland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stewart N. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raphael Zidovetzki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Y. Switzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities   (CRIF)
              Program and the Major  Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program and   the Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) will assist the   Department of Chemistry
              at University of California @ Riverside to   upgrade a 300 MHz and a 500 MHz 
              NMR Spectrometer. This equipment will   enhance research in a number of areas
              including the following: (1) total   synthesis of natural products, (2) NMR
              characterization of pollutant   transport through porous media, (3)
              structure-function played by H-bonded   protons with large H-chemical shifts in
              the insulin hexamer, (4)   conformation analysis and the relationship to
              biological activity, (5)   stereochemistry of side chain crosslinking in
              peptides and proteins, and   (6) synthesis, structural and biological studies
              of biomedically   significant natural products.   Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
              (NMR) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool   available to chemists for the
              elucidation of the structure of molecules.   It is used to identify unknown
              substances, characterize specific   arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
              to study the dynamics of   interactions between molecules in solution. Access
              to state-of-the-art   NMR spectrometry is essential to chemists who are
              carrying out frontier   research. The results from these NMR studies are useful
              in the areas such   as polymers, catalysis, and in biology.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
