Title       : Molecular Mechanism of Polarized Growth in Pollen Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9724047

Award Number: 9724047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhenbiao Yang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9724047  Yang    Tip-growing pollen tubes grow directionally toward the ovules
              to delivery sperms to the embryo sac and   thus are critical for sexual
              reproduction in higher plants.  Pollen tubes also present an attractive model  
              system for the study of polarized growth, partly because they are haploid and
              can be easily cultured.  The   long-term goal of this project is to elucidate
              molecular pathways that govern polarized cell growth in   pollen tubes.  We
              have identified a rho-type small GTP-binding protein, Rop1, that preferentially
                expressed in pollen and pollen tubes and is localized to the apex of pea and
              Arabidopsis pollen tubes.    Antibody microinjection experiments indicate that
              Rop1 plays a pivotal role in pollen tube growth likely   by modulating
              Ca2+-dependent exocytosis.  The goal of this proposed work is to confirm the
              role of Rop1   in polarized tube growth using a reverse genetics approach and
              to investigate underlying molecular and   cellular mechanisms for the function
              of Rop1 in pollen tubes.  The role of Rop1 will be genetically tested   using
              transgenic Arabidopsis plants that express dominant positive and negative
              mutant Rop1 alleles   under the control of a pollen tube-specific promoter. 
              The transgenic pollen tubes will be analyzed for   changes in tip growth and in
              vivo guidance.  The transgenic pollen tubes expressing Rop1 dominant   mutant
              alleles will also be analyzed for changes in the behavior of secretory vesicles
              using TEM and the   rapid freeze and freeze substitution technique and for
              changes in the influx of extracellular Ca2+ and the   tip-focused intracellular
              Ca2+-gradients using a Ca2+-selective vibrating probe and ratiometric ion  
              imaging.  These careful analyses will test the notion that Rop1 controls
              polarized cell growth by   modulating Ca2+ signaling-dependent polarized
              exocytosis.  To further understand the underlying   mechanism for Rop1-mediated
              polarized growth, Rop1 effectors will be identified by cloning genes   encoding
              Rop1 partners using  interactive cloning techniques such as the yeast
              two-hybrid method.  Rop1   effectors are expected to interact specifically with
              GTP-bound Rop1 (dominant positive mutant) but not   with GDP-bound Rop1
              (dominant negative mutant).  These studies will establish a solid foundation
              for   our long-term goal of elucidating molecular pathways that lead to
              directional pollen tube growth.  This   work may also generate a broad impact
              on understanding the molecular basis of polarized growth in   higher organisms
              as well as produce useful information for manipulating sexual reproduction in
              higher   plants, such as engineering male sterility for hybrid production.   
              The polar growth of pollen tubes is an interesting and significant process in
              which a germinating pollen   tube extends in a single direction to mediate
              fertilization and reproduction in plants. The PI has identified   a protein
              (ROP1, GTP-binding protein) involved in the signal transduction system that
              appears to control   the polar growth of pollen tubes through calcium fluxes.
              With this preliminary data as a base the PI will   use mutants of ROP1 to
              examine the function of the protein. Using light microscopy assays the role of 
               ROP1 in inducing a calcium fluxes will be visualized and correlated with
              electron microscopy of the   intracellular events that are required to extend
              the pollen tube. ROP1 must interact with other proteins in   cascade that
              transmits signals through the cell. Proteins that interact with ROP1 will be
              identified and   characterized. This research is of fundamental importance in
              describing a critical process in the   reproduction of plants. Practical
              applications of the research include modifying plant reproductive growth   to
              create superior plants.    ***
