Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Integrated Environmental Research and Education in
               Recent Sediments and Surface Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9724190

Award Number: 9724190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106166             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Bierman pbierman@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea Lini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724190  Bierman    This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation 
              (MRI) Program, provides $106,166 as partial support of the  costs of acquiring
              equipment to be used in integrated  studies of surficial and environmental
              geology at the  University of Vermont. Specifically, the equipment to be 
              purchased will include a real-time kinematic global  positioning system
              receiver and hand-held GPS field unit, a  carbon/nitrogen analyzer and a whole
              core magnetic  susceptibility system. This equipment will benefit the 
              analytical needs of these young researchers and their  students for a variety
              of interesting and environmentally  significant studies including, landscape
              evolution research  that relies on AMS dating of exposed surfaces using 
              cosmogenic nuclides, studies of tectonic and post-glacial  isostatic tilting in
              New England fluvial terraces,  documenting historical lake level changes and
              coastal  wetland transgression in response to rising sea level,  investigating
              the carbon dynamics of coastal wetlands, and  assessing nitrogen
              transformations in forested ecosystems  and through aquatic food webs.  The GPS
              equipment will help  to carefully document the geographic location of samples
              for  subsequent exposure age dating and will provide accurate  delineation of
              changes in lake and wetland shorelines  through time.  The C/N analyzer is
              necessary for  characterization of lake and marsh sediments and will 
              complement the stable isotopic investigations of co-PI  Andrea Lini in studies
              of nutrient dynamics in coastal,  lacustrine and forest ecosystems.  Finally,
              the magnetic  susceptibility system will be invaluable for stratigraphic 
              control in the tectonic, isostatic and geomorphologic  studies of Bierman as it
              will aid in the correlation of  individual strata.  ***
