Title       : RUI: Sex, Hormonal, and Age-Related Factors in Endogenous Pain Inhibition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9724068

Award Number: 9724068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72767              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy F. Sternberg wsternbe@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Sternberg, W.  IBN-9724068  The goal of this research is to elucidate the
              mechanisms of pain inhibition in male and female mice.  The experience of pain
              is dependent not only on peripheral activation of pain receptors but also on
              influences from higher brain centers that modulate the pain experience. Pain
              usually serves as a warning signal, preventing further use of the injured area
              to promote healing; however,  there are situations when pain perception would
              be counter-adaptive such as during conditions of "fight-or-flight" when the
              brain perceives a threatening situation and temporarily blocks any incoming
              pain messages to allow the organism to cope with the potentially pain producing
              event, and live to fight or flee again.  This phenomenon of pain inhibition
              during threatening events is known as "stress-induced analgesia", or SIA.  Many
              animals, including humans, exhibit SIA responses under a wide variety of
              "stressful" laboratory and real-life situations.  That the brain has the
              ability to inhibit pain perception implies that there may be ways of
              artificially activating these systems to treat pain in individuals who are
              unable to experience pain relief by currently available methods, such as those
              suffering from chronic pain.   It is believed that non-traditional methods of
              producing analgesia such as hypnosis, acupuncture, or even placebo analgesia,
              are due to the activation of endogenous pain inhibitory pathways.  Another
              minimally invasive way to activate the brain's own mechanisms of pain relief is
              to use pharmaceuticals which mimic the action of the neurotransmitters which
              are normally used to communicate between neurons in the pain inhibition
              pathway.   Morphine works in this way to produce analgesia by binding to
              receptors in pain inhibitory pathways which normally accept the brain's own
              opiate peptides (the endorphins, enkephalins and dynorphins).  However,
              morphine has several liabilities when used in a clinical setting over prolonged
              periods (such as is necessary for the treat ment of chronic pain), so
              investigators are currently examining other non-opioid neurotransmitters which
              play a role in pain inhibition as possible candidate systems for analgesic drug
              development. One system that has been implicated in non-opioid SIA is the
              excitatory amino acid class of neurotransmitters (glutamate and aspartate)
              which bind to the NMDA subtype of receptor.  Recent research has established
              the existence of NMDA-mediated SIA in mice; however, this appears to be
              specific to male mice only.  The non-opioid analgesia displayed by female mice
              following the same stressor (3-min cold water swim), while equivalent in
              magnitude to that exhibited by males, cannot be characterized as being
              NMDA-mediated, and therefore must involve other neurotransmitters.  Follow-up
              research determined that females have a mechanism of non-opioid analgesia that
              is specific to their gender, and is dependent on the presence of estrogen for
              it's expression.  The goal of the PI is to determine which neurotransmitters
              are responsible for non-opioid analgesia in female mice of varying ages, and 
              how varying hormonal states influence the neurochemical nature of the analgesia
              exhibited following swim stress.  This should lead to a better understanding of
              the neurotransmitters that underlie non-opioid SIA in female mice and may
              contribute to the development of analgesic drugs that will be particularly
              effective at combating pain in the female.
