Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Spatially Distributed Hydrologic Models
               and Spatial Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9724720

Award Number: 9724720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13900              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Tarboton dtarb@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 0000,5941,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724720  TARBOTON      Spatially  distributed  hydrologic  models  are  being 
              used  increasingly  in environmental management and  design.  They  have  the
              advantage that they can capture to a large  degree  the spatial variability in
              hydrologic processes and can give  spatially   distributed   predictions.  
              However   spatially  distributed models suffer from problems associated with 
              the  large  number of variables involved. When calibrated against  integrated 
              quantities, such as basin outflow, they  do  not  generally represent internal
              processes correctly.  The  work  proposed has the objective to develop and
              formalize  methods  for  using  spatially distributed data and  spatial 
              pattern  comparison  in  the  validation  and  testing  of  spatially 
              distributed  models.  This  work  will  be  a  collaboration  between  David
              Tarboton at Utah State University and Charles  Pearson  and Ross Woods at NIWA,
              New Zealand. David Tarboton  has   distributed  hydrologic  modeling 
              experience  in  the  semi-arid  western  U.S.,  while  Woods  and  Pearson  
              have  experience  in hydrologic modeling focusing on scale  issues  in  New
              Zealand and Australia. Data from the Reynolds  Creek  experimental watershed in
              Idaho, USA as well as  the  Buller  and  Grey Rivers on the South Island of New
              Zealand will  be  used.  The  research will develop methods that extend  model 
              calibration  and  validation  from  reliance  on  integrated  measures only to
              the use of spatially distributed data.  The  benefits  will be greater
              reliability of model  results  and  forecasts  and better understanding of
              spatially distributed  hydrological processes due to better representation  of 
              the  internal watershed dynamics and variability.
