Title       : Acquisiton of Workstation Computers, Rapid Prototyper and Digital Scanner for a
               Cross-Departmental Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9724186

Award Number: 9724186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard T. Leeper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Murat Tiryakioglu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Arthur D. Shindhelm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Western Kentucky University (WKU) is committed to achieving and maintaining
              excellence in teaching through the introduction and application of new
              knowledge in education, and the integration of research and education. 
              Research conducted at VIKU, especially in the Ogden College of Science,
              Technology, and Health (OCSTH) is aimed to involve students at graduate and
              undergraduate level in projects which will not only develop human resources in
              science, technology and health, but create the next generation of educators,
              researchers and administrators for both industry and academia.  The purpose of
              this proposal is to establish a Cross-Departmental Workstation Laboratory,
              supported by a Rapid Prototyping Machine and a Digital Scanner, that will
              create a `Virtual Factory` environment to involve faculty and students in
              production-systems related research and the integration of this research into
              instruction.  The laboratory will at the same time provide departments and
              cross-departmental units either new opportunities or enhanced capabilities in
              research and research training in a broad spectrum of disciplines.  The
              `Virtual Factory` will create an environment that simulates the part design,
              design review and analysis, process design, analysis and optimization, and
              prototyping stages typical in industry.  Workstation computers and advanced
              computer design and analysis softwares will be used during these stages in
              addition to the Digital Scanner, which will be utilized to convert shop
              drawings into three dimensional solid geometry in computers, and the Rapid
              Prototyper, which will provide researchers a plastic prototype of the final
              design.  In addition these activities will be integrated with the existing
              Flexible Manufacturing Cell established through prior NSF and state funds as
              well as donations from industry, so that a complete system from part design to
              final product will be available to interested parties including Federal
              agencies, industry, research institutions, and public and private
              organizations.  This setting will enable the students and faculty at NWU share,
              integrate and apply new knowledge in projects on manufacturing production
              systems with the interested parties.  The proposed equipment will also be used
              in a variety of research projects by faculty and students from a broad spectrum
              of disciplines for research and research-training.  Among these disciplines are
              computer science, physics, astronomy, mathematics, biology, engineering
              technology and industrial technology.  Some of these projects will require a
              multi-disciplinary effort which will be greatly enhanced by the availability of
              the proposed equipment.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
