Title       : Discrete Ca2+ Release Events in Skeletal Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9724045

Award Number: 9724045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin F. Schneider mschneid@umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724045  Schneider     Large depolarizations of a skeletal muscle fiber produce 
              high activation of transverse tubule (TT) voltage sensors,  causing massive
              release of Ca2+ ions via activated  sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ release
              channels and  generating a global rise of cytosolic   Ca2+  or  "macroscopic"
              calcium transient. Using laser scanning  confocal microscopy and the
              fluorescent Ca2+ indicator fluo-  3, we have recently shown that if  the extent
              of voltage  sensor activation is drastically reduced, the large,  spatially
              uniform macroscopic calcium transients seen during  high activation decomposes
              into a stochastic population of  highly localized "microscopic" calcium
              transients.  These  very small amplitude, spatially and temporally discrete 
              calcium "sparks" appear to underlie the macroscopic calcium  transient in
              skeletal muscle, occurring in large numbers and  at high frequency due to
              activation of large numbers of TT  voltage sensors during large
              depolarizations.  We have also  found that similar calcium sparks can be
              activated at triad  junctions either by the TT voltage sensors or by myoplasmic
                Ca2+ .  A fascinating and extremely exciting possibility is  that a calcium
              spark could be produced by the opening of an  individual SR calcium release
              channel or by a group of a few  channels that function as an integrated unit. 
              Thus,  characterization of the properties of individual calcium  sparks may now
              provide for the first time the possibility of  determining the open time and
              Ca2+ efflux rate of an SR  channel or of an integrated functional unit of a few
               channels under conditions that maintain the normal  physiological control of
              the SR channels by the TT membrane  voltage sensor in skeletal muscle. The
              general objective of  the present proposal is to thoroughly characterize the 
              discrete SR calcium release events in terms of open time and  calcium efflux
              rate and to determine how these properties  vary with the mechanism and
              conditions of channel  activation.  The spatio-tem poral spread of fluorescence
               within the myofibril-sarcomere during and after individual  calcium release
              events will be monitored at a higher time  resolution than previously available
              by using an acousto-  optic laser scanning confocal system.  The resulting high
               spatio-temporal resolution calcium spark images will be  analyzed using
              computer modelling of the calcium binding,  transport and diffusion within the
              sarcomere to determine  the event open time and calcium efflux rate underlying
              each  spark.  These release channel properties will then be  characterized as a
              function of fiber depolarization to  determine possible effects of the level of
              TT voltage sensor  activation on single SR release event duration and calcium 
              efflux rates during physiological activation of skeletal  muscle.  We will also
              carefully test whether fiber  repolarization, which rapidly deactivates the
              voltage  sensors, can shorten the event open time of channels opened  by the
              voltage sensor.  The properties of ligand gated  openings will be compared with
              those of voltage sensor gated  openings in the same fiber to establish whether
              channel open  time is an intrinsic property of the release channel or is 
              determined by the mechanism by which the channel was opened.  The rising phase
              of the calcium sparks will be carefully  examined for possible evidence of
              secondary opening of  ligand gated channels by calcium ions released by a 
              neighboring channel directly activated by the voltage  sensors. The proposed
              studies are highly significant to the  basic understanding of control of
              calcium release channels  in skeletal muscle since they will provide the first 
              detailed characterization of the open times and efflux rates  of channels or
              integrated units of a few channels under  physiological control by the TT
              voltage sensor.  It is  extremely important to determine the extent to which
              these  properties of functionally coupled channels correspond to  those of
              channels studied previously in  reconstituted systems without volt age sensor
              coupling.  The  proposed characterization of single SR  channel properties in
              functioning fibers represents a major  technical and conceptual advance in the 
              understanding of intracellular calcium channels and the  activation of skeletal
              muscle.    Calcium ions regulate a wide variety of physiological  processes
              that are at the very basis of how living  systems move, respond to stimuli and
              regulate growth and  physiology. Rapid release and translocation of  calcium
              within cells mediates many of the responses  essential to life. This award will
              support research  that will allow direct visualization of the rapid release of 
              calcium in muscle fibers. The function of muscle  is dependent on regulation by
              calcium. The PI will examine  the interrelationship of the function of 
              membrane channels that conduct ions with the release of a  calcium pulse. In
              other experiments the  amount of calcium released during an event will be
              measured  and the distribution of calcium events in  response to intracellular
              and extracellular stimulation. The  results of this research will provide 
              fundamental information of a critical regulatory process of  all living cells. 
              ***
