Title       : A Proposed Seminar on Guatemalan Development and Democratization: Proactive
               Responses to Globalization; Guatemala, August 21-23, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9724082

Award Number: 9724082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Chase-Dunn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724082  Chase-Dunn    This Americas Program award will fund a seminar on 
              Guatemalan  development and democratization, focusing on  proactive responses
              to globalization.  Organizers are Dr.  Christopher Chase-Dunn, Johns Hopkins
              University, Baltimore,  Md.,  and Dr. Nelson Amaro, Universidad del Valle,
              Guatemala  City, Guatemala.  The seminar will bring together social  scientists
              and policy experts from the United States  and  Guatemala, to present research
              and analyses of the  trajectory of Guatemalan social change in  its comparative
               regional and global context.  The main purpose is to further  policy-relevant
              social scientific research on the issues of  Guatemalan economic development
              and democratization in the  context of changing global constraints and
              opportunities.  Researchers will evaluate a range of proactive responses to 
              forces that should be considered by participants from all  sectors of
              Guatemalan society, as well as by those abroad  who are interested in
              facilitating Guatemalan democracy and  development.    Guatemala is the largest
              country in Central America, and the  last to negotiate an end to civil war.  
              The peace process  has created an important moment in Guatemalan history. 
              Formerly excluded groups are becoming participants in legal  and institutional
              processes for formulating policies of  development and democratization.   While
              the process still  has a long way to go before Guatemala can be considered a 
              full-fledged member of the family of democratic nations, the  direction of
              recent developments is clear.  The prospect of  a new multiethnic nation that
              recognizes the cultural,  political and economic rights of its poorest and
              least  powerful citizens is a real possibility for the first time  in decades. 
                The focus of the seminar will be on the most salient  problems and their
              potential solutions during the next two  decades.  The dissemination of the
              results will help social  scientists share perspectives and formulate research 
              strategies that are relevant for  policies that can  contribute to resolving
              the emergent problems in post-war  Guatemala.  ***
