Title       : Epidermal Growth Factor Modulation of Gonadotrope Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9724066

Award Number: 9724066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwen V. Childs childs@mbian.utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xuemo Fan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg T. Nagle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9724066  Childs    Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is produced mainly by pituitary
              gonadotropes or growth hormone cells.  All pituitary cell types have receptors
              for EGF as well, which suggests that this growth factor is an important
              regulator in the pituitary.  This study will focus on possible regulator roles
              for EGF in the reproductive system, specifically in controlling pituitary
              gonadotropes.  The first objective will be to test the hypothesis that EGF
              regulates cell division in gonadotropes.  This will be done with cell growth
              assays on cultures of purified gonadotropes (enriched to 90-95% gonadotropes). 
              Cytochemical assays will also be used to prove that the gonadotropes are
              dividing.  The second objective will be to learn if EGF affects differentiation
              of gonadotropes during diestrus as the cells are being prepared for the
              enhanced secretory activity needed for ovulation.  Studies for this second
              objective will also test EGF effects on the gonadotrope expression of estradiol
              receptors.  EGF receptors appear on 60% of gonadotropes before the estradiol
              receptors.  The PI will test the hypothesis that EGF works trough the EGF
              receptors to stimulate theh expression of estradiol receptors.  Progress in the
              field has already shown that EGF is important to the reproductive system as a
              growth factor.  It promotes the development and function of cells in both the
              gonads and the hypothalamus.  Little is known about its role in the pituitary,
              however.  This study is one of the few studies in the world that will define
              its role in the regulation of pituitary gonadotropes during the estrous cycle.
