Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: String Theory and Field Theory Dualities and
               Integrable Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a9724831

Award Number: 9724831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39264              (Estimated)
Investigator: Itzhak Bars bars@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hubert Saleur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof Pilch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas P. Warner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Nemeschansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9724831  Bars    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Itzhak Bars of the University of  Southern
              California, and Professor Tohru Eguchi of the  University of Tokyo in Japan. 
              The researchers will be  undertaking studies relating to string theory and
              field  theory dualities and integrable models.  The objectives of  the research
              are to study:  (1) dualities of superstrings  and super-p-branes and their role
              in non-perturbative  computations in string theory, supersymmetric gauge
              theories  and superconformal field theories in four dimensions, (2)  theories
              with extended supersymmetries and hidden dimensions  beyond ten which are
              crucial in the construction of the  fundamental theory that lies behind string
              theory, (3)  integrable models and their role in duality symmetries of  field
              and string theories, representation theory of W-  algebras and quantum gravity
              and (4) problems in condensed  matter physics, such as the Kondo problem.   
              This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories  that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The collaboration will
              unite the theoretical high energy  physics group at the University of
              California with the  theoretical group from the University of Tokyo.  In 
              addition, younger scientists will be included in the  project.  It is
              anticipated that the research could  contribute further to an all-embracing
              theory of physical  phenomena.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, 
              this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and  promote
              international understanding and cooperation.  ***
