Title       : US-Turkey Workshop: Industrial & Environmental Applicationsof Direct and Large
               Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flows Istanbul, Turkey, July 6-9, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9724106

Award Number: 9724106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sedat H. Biringen biringen@spot.Colorado.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9724106  Biringen    Description: This award is for support of participation of 
              US scientists in a "US-Turkey Workshop on Industrial and  Environmental
              Applications of Direct and Large Eddy  Simulation ", to be held in Istanbul,
              Turkey,  July 6-9,  1998, at Bogazici University.  The US organizer is Dr.
              Sedat  Biringen, Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences at  the
              University of Colorado at Boulder.  The Turkish co-  organizer is Dr. Haluk
              Ors, Department of Mechanical  Engineering at Bogazici University, in Istanbul.
               The  workshop is to consist of invited and contributed papers  covering:
              mathematical modeling of turbulent flows;  turbulent closures and modeling;
              solution algorithms; error  analysis; high performance computing and parallel
              processing  relevant to turbulence simulation; industrial applications;  and
              environmental and geophysical applications.  The  workshop will also include
              discussions of areas where joint  research projects can be initiated between US
              and Turkish  scientists.    Scope: This award allows six American scientists
              from highly  regarded academic institutions (one is from the National  Center
              for Atmospheric Research in Boulder) to travel to  Istanbul, Turkey to meet
              with  Turkish scientists, to  discuss scientific and technical developments in
              this area  of fundamental research which has many wide applications in 
              industry and in the environment.  They plan to focus  attention on the
              scientific questions that can be dealt with  through US-Turkish scientific
              cooperation.  There is  potential for considerable benefits from collaboration 
              between the US and Turkey with its strong base of  researchers and graduate
              students in the areas of applied  mathematics and engineering.  Areas of
              applications in the  US are many.  In Turkey there are several questions
              related  to the environmental impact of the South Anatolia Irrigation  Project
              (GAP) which includes building very large dams on two  major rivers, with
              resulting changes in water flows.  This  is an area of  importance to the Turks
              but also of scientific  benefit to the US scientific community.  The proposal
              meets  INT criteria for supporting activities intended to enhance  scientific
              collaboration between US and foreign scientists  in areas of mutual interest,
              and by supporting two junior US  scientist (including one woman) to gain
              international  experience that could be helpful to their career.  ***
