Title       : U.S-Netherlands Cooperative Research on the Response of Large Aggregates to
               Storms in the North Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9113034

Award Number: 9113034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15996              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Wells   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Luettich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1620,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports John T. Wells and Richard                                  
              Luettich of the Institute of Marine Sciences of                                
              the University of North Carolina to collaborate                                
              in physical oceanography with Doeke Eisma and                                  
              others of the Netherlands Institute for Sea                                    
              Research.  The objective of their research is to                               
              increase understanding of the behavior of large                                
              particle aggregates in the shallow coastal areas                               
              under natural conditions.  Dr. Wells and his                                   
              group are currently carrying out research on                                   
              this off the coast of North Carolina.  Funding                                 
              from this award will enable them to extend this                                
              observational program to a second set of field                                 
              sites in the North Sea where similar studies are                               
              being carried out by Dutch researchers under the                               
              direction of Doeke Eisma.  Both field efforts                                  
              will benefit from techniques developed                                         
              independently in each other's laboratories.                                    
                                                                                             
              Understanding the behavior of particle                                         
              aggregates in shallow water bodies is a very                                   
              difficult problem about which almost nothing is                                
              known.  It is also a very important problem,                                   
              with both fundamental and immediately applicable                               
              implications.  The fundamental scientific                                      
              interest is in understanding geological                                        
              processes in marine systems (erosion,                                          
              deposition, etc.) while the practical value is                                 
              the implications for understanding the transport                               
              and fate of marine pollutants, which are known                                 
              to become attached to fine particles that often                                
              form large aggregates.
