Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Reaction-Diffusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1992 
File        : a9113072

Award Number: 9113072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivar Stakgold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator studies two reaction-diffusion problems                  
              arising in chemical engineering and one from climatology, each                 
              exhibiting a free or moving boundary.  The first problem concerns              
              an exothermic reaction of fractional order in a reactor or                     
              catalyst particle.  There may then exist a dead core (a region                 
              where the reactant concentration vanishes) whose boundary evolves              
              in time.  Particular attention is paid to a high chemical                      
              diffusivity approximation known as the shadow system.  The second              
              problem treats the interaction between fluid and solid phases,                 
              a frequent phenomenon in chemical and materials                                
              engineering. Various properties of the combustion of a porous                  
              solid are studied, such as the conversion time, the conversion                 
              front, and the penetration front.  The validity of the so-called               
              pseudo-steady-state approximation is examined in a more general                
              setting than previously considered.  The climatology problem                   
              concerns the dependence of ice-covered regions on parameters such              
              as the solar constant and the infrared radiation constants that                
              appear in the energy balance equation.                                         
                   This study deals with aspects of reaction-diffusion systems.              
              The name originated with problems such as the combustion of                    
              coal as oxygen diffuses through the hot coal and reacts with                   
              it, converting it to products.  The corresponding mathematical                 
              model also appears, with some modifications, in other settings:                
              for instance, in catalytic converters, in ecological competition,              
              in the spreading of contaminants and in their removal, in                      
              propagation of impluses along nerves, and in climate modeling.                 
              The investigator's interest lies both in the mathematical                      
              framework and in specific applications.  Using techniques                      
              developed recently, he directs his efforts to obtaining estimates              
              for quantities of physical interest such as the time required for              
              conversion of the solid in a gas-solid reaction and to finding                 
              the effect on the earth's icecaps of a change in the amount of                 
              greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
