Title       : International Collaborative Research on Youthful Misbehavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1993      
File        : a9113871

Award Number: 9113871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ineke H. Marshall ineke@cwis.unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2200

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              Since the early seventies there has been growing interest in using             
              the self-report method as a means of obtaining measures of juvenile            
              misbehavior.  The self-report method has now gained widespread use             
              among researchers, both in the United States and abroad.  During               
              a 1988 Nato Workshop on Self-Report Methodology in Criminological              
              Research, the idea of developing a large-scale International Self-             
              Report Delinquency Project (ISRDP) was proposed.  Leading                      
              researchers from fifteen countries examined how to develop a                   
              suitable cross-national instrument to measure delinquency.  After              
              some pilot tests, full studies are now being launched in the                   
              Netherlands, Germany, France, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, North                
              Ireland, United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States.                        
                                                                                             
              This project is the United States part of the International Self-              
              Report Delinquency Project.  The objectives of the ISRDP are (1)               
              to examine cross-national variability in patterns of correlates of             
              self-reported misbehavior among youth and (2) to obtain measures               
              of cross-national variability in the relative rank ordering of the             
              prevalence of different types of youthful misbehavior.  Data will              
              be collected from a midwestern, urban community using a probability            
              sample of 1,000 youth between the ages of 14 and 21.  The                      
              researchers will collaborate with other participants in the ISRDP              
              on the analysis of the findings.                                               
                                                                                             
              International collaboration on the design, data collection, and                
              data analysis of self-reported delinquency will provide a much                 
              needed stimulus to the advancement of our understanding of the true            
              nature and extent of youthful crime in modern industrial societies.            
              Participation in this unique research endeavor will allow further              
              exploration of the feasibility of collecting cross-nationally                  
              comparable self-report data using a standardized questionnaire and             
              will permit testing of the generalizability of theoretical                     
              propositions regarding the correlates of delinquency across                    
              different cultures.
