Title       : U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Study of the Solar Wind Acceleration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9113284

Award Number: 9113284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14650              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Coles coles@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1523,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Dr. W. A. Coles and two graduate students of               
              the University of California at San Diego to collaborate in space              
              physics research with Ruth Esser and others of the Auroral                     
              Observatory, University of Tromso, Norway, Egil Leer of Oslo,                  
              Jussi Markkanen of Finland, and Eckart Marsch of the Max Planck                
              Institute for Aeronomy, Lindau, Germany.  Much of the leading                  
              theoretical work on solar wind acceleration is now done in Europe              
              (notably in Norway and at this German institute.)  The U.S. PI and             
              his students will benefit substantially from the opportunity to work           
              directly with these leading theorists.  Together they propose to               
              continue observations of the solar wind velocity that were begun at            
              the European Incoherent Scatter Radar Facility (EISCAT) in                     
              northern Scandinavia during the summer of 1990, when Dr. Coles                 
              was on sabbatical.  Despite limits on the observing time, the 1990             
              data have permitted the first quantitative comparison of theoretical           
              radial acceleration profiles with measurements.  More time will be             
              available to them in the coming few summers, which will enable                 
              them to make many more observations and drastically decrease the               
              velocity estimation errors.  This extra observing time does require            
              much more work, and the graduate students as well as several                   
              European collaborators are necessary for its success.                          
                                                                                             
              The basic aim of this proposal is to improve understanding of the              
              earth's plasma environment.  The plasma is formed by ionization of             
              the atmosphere by solar radiation.  This "ionosphere" interacts with           
              the outer atmosphere of the sun, the "solar wind", in a                        
              magnetically controlled region called the "magnetosphere."  The                
              proposed collaborative research is directed at understanding the               
              mechanisms which create and accelerate the solar wind, causing the             
              sudden changes in its velocity which are responsible for ionospheric           
              disturbances.  Such disturbances have a number of important                    
              geophysical and practical symptoms, including auroral displays,                
              high frequency communications blackouts, fading on satellite                   
              communication links, and long distance power line upsets.
