Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Qualitative Analysis of Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9113139

Award Number: 9113139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Levi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   When two or more simply behaving relaxation oscillators are               
              coupled, new and complex qualitative behavior arises in many                   
              cases. This research aims at understanding these effects by                    
              exploring the geometry of the phase flow using previously                      
              developed analytic insights and estimates.  In another direction,              
              the investigator extends the theory of adiabatic invariance to                 
              slowly varying ergodic systems by using combinatorial and                      
              geometric ideas.                                                               
                   When two simple oscillators such as an electric circuit or a              
              biological cell, each behaving in a simple periodic fashion, are               
              coupled, the resulting system can acquire totally new features                 
              such as chaotic behavior, bifurcations, etc., of which there                   
              seems to have been no hint in the individual components.  The aim              
              of this research is to describe and to explain phenomena of this               
              sort in differential equations that model coupled biological,                  
              electric, or mechanical systems.  In a different direction, the                
              phenomenon of adiabatic invariance is of fundamental importance                
              in the theory of dynamical systems; it arises when a system                    
              undergoes a slow change over a long period of time.  Somewhat                  
              unexpectedly, a system may develop a "memory": some quantities,                
              called the adiabatic invariants, change little over the course of              
              the system's evolution.  (The simplest example is a pendulum on a              
              string whose length is, say, halved slowly; in this case the                   
              ratio of the energy to the frequency changes very little; this                 
              ratio is an adiabatic invariant).  Adiabatic invariants arise in               
              the study of elecromagnetically confined plasmas, in particle                  
              accelerators, in planetary motion and in many other cases.                     
              Although the subject is about 80 years old, there is no                        
              satisfactory analysis of this phenomenon for an important class                
              of chaotic systems.  This is a serious gap in the subject                      
              considering the fact that adiabatic invariance is a basic aspect               
              of Hamiltonian dynamical systems.  It is proposed to develop a                 
              rigorous theory of the phenomenon of adiabatic invariance for                  
              chaotic systems.  Such a theory would be of fundamental                        
              significance for applications of dynamical systems                             
              as well. As an example, it would be a small but important                      
              building block in the long-open problem of providing a rigorous                
              foundation for the theory of ideal gases -- modeling a gas by a                
              system of many colliding hard spheres in a vessel of changing                  
              size and shape.
