Title       : An Observational and Model Investigation of Orogenic Blocking in the Western
               United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1994   
File        : a9113898

Award Number: 9113898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320907             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. McKee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  McKee has been awarded a grant to continue his studies of the             
              interaction between diurnally varying up- and down-valley winds and            
              the overlying synoptic-scale flow. These are separated by an                   
              intermediate layer between valley top and mountain top. Its dynamic            
              state  determines the degree of coupling between these two circula-            
              tion systems. This coupling is poorly understood. In the  past,                
              difficultys in observing this layer impeded the development of                 
              adequate theoretical treatments of the important complex of                    
              processes occurring there. McKee hypothesizes that in the western              
              U.S. orogenic (mountain) blocking, in which the lower air is                   
              prevented from flowing over the mountain tops, is the primary                  
              phenomenon controlling this layer. He plans to use recently                    
              developed observational systems in a field program during the first            
              grant year, and subsequently to use the field measurements in                  
              conjunction with the CSU-RAMS numerical model to investigate the               
              evolution and duration of mountain blocking. The study is intended             
              to confirm or reject the hypothesis that areas west of the                     
              Continental Divide are blocked for extended periods during the                 
              winter, to define the length of the primary season for blocking,               
              and to provide increased understanding of the nature of the                    
              phenomenon.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                   Orogenic blocking is likely to be important for climate                   
              because of its effects on vertical heat and moisture transports,               
              and on the effective drag on overlying large scale circulations                
              exerted by complex terrain at their lower boundary. It also has                
              many important practical consequences  in terms of local                       
              meteorology (e.g. air quality and valley winds).
