Title       : Support for Computerization and Maintenance of Botanical Systematic Collections
               at the California Academy of Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1993      
File        : a9113496

Award Number: 9113496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209074             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Almeda falmeda@cas.calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Daniel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis E. Breedlove  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94118    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1129,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                   Dr. Frank Almeda is the Senior Curator of the Botany                     
              Department in the California Academy of Sciences, and he has                   
              designed a significant computerization program for the department.             
              Dr. Almeda proposes to establish a computer linkage to the national            
              computer network Internet for the Botany Department and the entire             
              Academy. In so doing, the Botany Department will join several other            
              large California herbaria in an ambitious program of database                  
              development. The University Herbarium at the University of                     
              California at Berkeley is implementing the Specimen Management                 
              System for California Herbaria (SMASCH), a networked computer                  
              database of California plant specimens. The computerization program            
              designed by Dr. Almeda will allow the Academy's important plant                
              collections to become a part of the SMASCH database as it develops.            
                    The proposed plant database initiative has implications beyond           
              the collections at the California Academy of Sciences. Natural                 
              history museums and herbaria are establishing world-wide networks of           
              information sharing, and these computerized information resources              
              will revolutionize research on biological diversity. Research                  
              scientists in earth sciences, geography, economics, as well as                 
              biology will draw on these databases for information that is                   
              presently unavailable. Future generations of scientists will depend            
              on data resources such as these as they investigate global climate             
              change, evolutionary history, and other integrative research                   
              questions.
