Title       : Research Training Group in Ecological and Social Science Challenges of
               Conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9113293

Award Number: 9113293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1283301            (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Fahey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,9260,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research                  
              Training Group in Ecological and Social Science Challenges of                  
              Conservation at Cornell University.  The faculty group is a                    
              mixture of senior and junior investigators who come from a                     
              variety of disciplinary backgrounds, but share a common interest               
              in the ecological, economic and social aspects of conservation.                
              The funds will provide stipends for graduate students and will                 
              defray part of the cost of the trainees' research and of needed                
              technical assistance.  In addition, funds will be used to                      
              purchase equipment to be used by trainees and to bring                         
              investigators from other research and academic institutions to                 
              the campus for an annual workshop on conservation.  Institutional              
              commitments will allow the participation of additional numbers of              
              graduate students and of undergraduates, and will also defray a                
              portion of the costs of equipment, of technical assistance and of              
              the workshop.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              One of the serious problems for conservation efforts is the                    
              recurring cycle of poverty and environmental degradation found in              
              many regions of the world.  Common elements of the cycle are                   
              population expansion which stimulates agricultural expansion onto              
              marginal lands, expanded fuelwood requirements, and consequent                 
              soil degradation and species extinction.  This training program                
              will focus on two contrasting socioecological settings in the                  
              Dominican Republic and Costa Rica and will make use of existing                
              institutional arrangements and research activities.  These                     
              activities examine demography and population growth, the                       
              interaction of natural and agricultural systems, soil                          
              conservation, education and management in biosphere reserves, and              
              related ecology studies.
