Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Vibratory Grinding of Structural Ceramic
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1993    
File        : a9113345

Award Number: 9113345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11340              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guruswami Sathyanarayanan gs00@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1446,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for a sabbatical visit by                  
              Professor G. Sathyanarayanan of Lehigh University to the                       
              Technical University of Berlin, Germany, to collaborate in                     
              manufacturing engineering research with Professor Gunter Spur and              
              others of that University and the nearby Fraunhofer Institute for              
              Production Systems Engineering and Design Technology.  The                     
              participating universities have longstanding research programs                 
              focused on the grinding of structural ceramics that will benefit from          
              the stronger linkage established through this sabbatical visit.  The           
              proposed joint research will evaluate the effect of vibratory                  
              grinding on the rate of removal of ceramic material as well as the             
              strength and surface integrity of the ground ceramics.  The results            
              will be used to develop a model of vibratory grinding as a                     
              prerequisite to controlling the process in a manufacturing setting.            
                                                                                             
              Structural ceramic materials possess extraordinary characteristics of          
              hardness, strength and resistance to heat, wear and corrosion.                 
              However, the same characteristics make them difficult to be                    
              shaped.  Machining flaws have been identified to be the major                  
              contributor in degrading the strength of structural ceramics.  These           
              flaws are most often cracks that are introduced during the grinding            
              operation.  While many of these flaws can be removed by                        
              secondary finishing, this adds to the production cost.  New                    
              effective methods such as vibratory grinding are needed to produce             
              finished structural ceramics that are competitive with metal                   
              components.  The fundamental goal of this collaboration is to                  
              establish the necessary manufacturing science base for ceramic                 
              grinding, and thereby to enhance U.S. competitiveness in the                   
              finishing of structural ceramics.
