Title       : Evaluating Change in Behavioral Potential: A Study of Households with Young
               Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9113062

Award Number: 9113062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99513              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Aitken   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Recent changes in family arrangements and employment patterns have          
              renewed scholarly interest in the behavior of family members and in the        
              ways that family members make locational decisions, both individually          
              and collectively.  Some of the most abrupt shifts in householders'             
              behavior comes immediately after a child is born.  This project will           
              analyze the impacts of the birth of a child on the activities and              
              responsibilities of a sample of San Diego metropolitan household               
              members, paying special attention to the ways that individuals' alter          
              their use of time.  Impacts on spatial behavior, including changes in          
              places of work, commuting patterns, and shopping behavior, also will be        
              examined.  Data will be gathered through a series of questionnaires to         
              be administered annually over a five-year period to members of a large         
              number of different types of households.  These questionnaires will            
              elicit data on household member's daily activities, on their family and        
              other responsibilities, and on their mobility.  Qualitative and                
              statistical analyses of these data will be complemented by detailed            
              time-budget surveys of a subsample of families taken at three times for        
              each family (before the birth of a child, immediately after the birth,         
              and four years later).  One of the largest health-maintenance                  
              organizations in the San Diego area is providing additional financial          
              and in-kind support to assist in completion of this project.                   
                 This project should provide valuable new information about the ways         
              that members of different types of household alter their use of time and       
              their behavior in space after the addition of a child to the family.           
              Data from the questionnaires, time-budget surveys, and interviews will         
              provide new insights about changes in behavior resulting from abrupt           
              transformation of families and about the relationship of those changes         
              to family members' attitudes and feelings and to associated geographic         
              conditions.  Resulting analyses should also provide new information            
              about broader issues of household formation and persistence, home-work         
              relationships for family members, and gender differences in temporal and       
              geographic adjustments.
