Title       : Ultrashort Pulse Propagation and Amplification in New Cr-Doped LiSAF and LiCAF
               Solid State Laser Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9113726

Award Number: 9113726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William H. Carter                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin C. Richardson mcr@creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Chai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Silfvast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A new avenue of opportunity in the field of intense,                           
              ultrashort laser pulse technology and its applications                         
              has opened as a result of the development of the                               
              laser materials Cr-doped LiSAF and Cr-doped                                    
              LiCAF.  These materials, like no others yet                                    
              developed, display the most attractive characteristics                         
              of a solid state laser material required for the                               
              generation of ultra-intense, ultrashort laser pulses.                          
              They have high gain and energy storage properties,                             
              good optical properties, a high damage threshold and                           
              can be grown in large sizes.  Moreover, they uniquely                          
              combine long fluorescence lifetimes (  70 us for                               
              LiSAF and 130 us for LiCAF) and the broadest                                   
              spectral emission bandwith known (220nm for                                    
              LiSAF), making possible, for the first time, the                               
              amplification with high gain, of ultrashort (< 100fs)                          
              pulses with flashlamp-pumped, large diameter, solid                            
              state laser modules.  The implications will be                                 
              considerable for future applications of ultrashort, high                       
              intensity laser technology, in the development of                              
              laboratory x-ray lasers, sub-picosecond x-ray studies,                         
              and particle acceleration.                                                     
                                                                                             
              We will make a comprehensive investigation of all the                          
              physical properties of these two materials associated                          
              with their use as high gain amplifiers of ultrashort                           
              laser pulses.  This will include a full examination of                         
              the basic spectral and atomic properties of Cr-doped                           
              LiSAF and LiCAF pertaining to broadband pulse                                  
              amplification, their capacity to amplify short pulses,                         
              the effectiveness with which chirped pulse                                     
              amplification (CPA) can extract energy, and those                              
              material properties affecting their use in wide                                
              aperture, multi-segmented array (MSA) amplifiers.                              
              This study will therefore address all the issues                               
              necessary to incorporate these new materials as a                              
              major laser amplifier medium.  Armed with data                                 
              produced by this study, we will then be able, in future                        
              work, to move forward towards the construction of                              
              lasers capable of emitting tens, perhaps hundreds of                           
              joules in times of less than 100fs, focusable to                               
              intensities greater than 1020W/cm2.
