Title       : Promoting East-West Exchange on Scientific Freedom and Responsibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9113520

Award Number: 9113520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24306              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Frankel Mfrankel@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Cave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 5915,7915,
Abstract    :
              At this time, as a result of political and economic changes,                   
              scientists and engineers in Eastern Europe confront new issues of              
              scientific freedom and responsibility.  The initiation of East-                
              West exchanges to explore these issues promises intellectual and               
              practical benefits to all parties.  This project is designed as a              
              planning effort; it will initiate such exchange and lead to                    
              further exchanges in workshops involving scientists, engineers,                
              and other specialists from the U.S. and Eastern Europe.  In this               
              planning effort, a U.S. delegation composed of project staff and               
              three Advisory Committee members will travel to Eastern Europe to              
              meet with counterparts, four of whom have been chosen to be                    
              members of the Advisory Committee.  The trip will be preceded by               
              a careful process of preparation to develop a framework and                    
              agenda for discussion.  This process will generate a background                
              paper with review comments by four academic specialists to be                  
              circulated for feedback from the Advisory Committee members prior              
              to the trip.  The aim is to ensure not only that cooperative ties              
              are formed by that knowledge useful for further research and for               
              policy is generated.  The institutional resources of the American              
              Association for the Advancement of Science have already been used              
              to identify and secure the commitment of appropriate key people                
              in Eastern Europe.  These are very good institutional resources                
              for carrying out this project effectively.  The outcome is to be               
              a detailed plan for workshops to follow.  From this planning                   
              effort and the workshops, reports will be produced to reach                    
              appropriate audiences in the research and policy communities.                  
                                                                                             
              The proposal is a modest request for support to enable a well                  
              selected group to oprepare for an undertake travel to initiate                 
              East-West exchanges with counterparts in Eastern Europe on issues              
              of scientific freedom and responsibility.  The principal                       
              investigators and project associates are well qualified.  The                  
              Eastern European representatives have been carefully chosen.  The              
              institutional support is very good.  The project plans are good                
              and have been developed with requisites for academic research                  
              in mind.  Support is highly recommended.
