Title       : Semiconductor Physics and Photonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9113219

Award Number: 9113219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hyatt M. Gibbs hyattgibbs@worldnet.att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephan W. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Galina Khitrova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on semiconductor                                         
              heterostructures grown in a Riber 32P molecular                                
              beam epitaxy machine dedicated exclusively to                                  
              nonlinear optics, probably the only one in the                                 
              world.  Over the last several years considerable                               
              experimental and theoretical capabilities and                                  
              experience have been acquired and developed to                                 
              understand the band-edge nonlinearities of                                     
              semiconductors and to design, fabricate, and                                   
              operate nonlinear optical devices.  Having under                               
              one roof capabilities for design, growth, fabrication,                         
              linear and nonlinear spectroscopy, and many-body                               
              theory has accelerated this process, leading to                                
              synergistic interactions.  In the area of nonlinear                            
              materials, research will focus on the bandstructure,                           
              optical nonlinearity, and gain of strained layer                               
              superlattices, relevant as materials for low-power                             
              nonlinear devices and low-threshold lasers.                                    
              Research on waveguide structures includes                                      
              nonlinear directional couplers with and without                                
              current injection, as many-n phase shifter by current                          
              injection, and a 10-um intersubband-transition laser.                          
              Research on etalon structures concentrates on all-                             
              optical switches for optical communication, low-                               
              power slow-response etalons, and the sensitivity to                            
              external feedback of vertical-cavity surface-                                  
              emmitting lasers.  All findings for nonlinear optics                           
              apply equally well to optoelectronics, since the                               
              steady-state room-temperature band-edge                                        
              properties of a semiconductor are determined                                   
              solely by the carrier density however generated.  //
