Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Effective Hamiltonian Theories of Molecular
               Electronic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1992    
File        : a9113106

Award Number: 9113106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20170              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl F. Freed k-freed@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1952,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds to permit Dr. Karl F. Freed,                         
              Department of Chemistry, University of Chicago, to pursue                      
              with Dr. Hosung Sun, Department of Chemistry, Pusan                            
              National University, for 24 months, a program of                               
              cooperative research on effective Hamiltonian theories of                      
              molecular electronic structure.  Their research formerly                       
              was supported under NSF Grant No. INT-8713123.  These                          
              scientists and members of their research groups will                           
              continue their treatment of effective operators for                            
              properties other than energy in order to provide a more                        
              sensitive test of the utility of ab initio                                     
              quasidegenerate many-body perturbation methods (QDMBPT).                       
              They will continue to develop the necessary methods for                        
              calculating dipole moments, transition dipoles, diagonal                       
              and off-diagonal spin-orbit couplings, other nonadiabatic                      
              couplings, relativistic corrections, etc.                                      
                                                                                             
              The ab initio and semiempirical theories of molecular                          
              electronic structure provide two distinct approaches to                        
              determining the relationship between observed properties                       
              and electronic structure.  The present project is an ab                        
              initio attempt to develop the mathematical tools with                          
              which molecular properties can be calculated.  The two                         
              scientists bring complementary skills to bear on the                           
              collaborative research.  Dr. Freed will provide much of                        
              the formal input, the connections with semiempirical                           
              methods, and the students to do some of the programming                        
              and carry out the applications.  Dr. Sun will supervise                        
              the sophisticated aspects of algorithm and code                                
              development, with some contributions to formal theory and                      
              applications.  Their past collaboration has been highly                        
              successful.  This project is relevant to the objectives                        
              of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks                      
              to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and                          
              Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of                        
              scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and                      
              through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.                           
              Korean participation in the project is supported by the                        
              Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
