Title       : Dissertation Research: Consonantal Effects on Tone in Musey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1991   
File        : a9113377

Award Number: 9113377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron M. Shryock  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              In Musey, a Chadic language of northern Cameroon and southwestern              
              Chad, the initial consonant of a word constrains the possible tone             
              patterns which a word may exhibit.  The nature of this                         
              relationship appears to be different from cases of tonal                       
              dependence on consonants attested in other parts of the world.                 
              Furthermore, the connection between the initial consonant and the              
              tone pattern of a word is especially unclear in Musey because the              
              phonetic nature of many of the contrasting consonants is itself                
              obscure.  This dissertation project will analyze the tone system               
              and investigate the relationships between consonant type                       
              fundamental frequency, and tone in Musey.  Fieldwork will be                   
              conducted in Northern Cameroon. The student will examine tone in               
              Musey and then construct and record the materials for a series of              
              acoustic, aerodynamic, and perceptual experiments.  The data                   
              collected will be analyzed in the field using portable phonetic                
              instrumentation; supplementary analyses will be conducted at the               
              UCLA Phonetic Laboratory as well.  This study will provide a                   
              comprehensive analysis of the Musey tone system, with particular               
              attention given to consonantal effects on tone.  The phonetic                  
              experiments will determine the phonetic characteristics of an                  
              obscure consonantal contrast and examine the phonetic effects of               
              these consonants on fundamental frequency.  The phonetic analyses              
              will provide new data leading to reconsideration of the                        
              interdependence between phonetic and phonological effects of                   
              consonants on fundamental frequency and tone and the implications              
              for a theory of the synchronic and diachronic relationships                    
              between consonants and tone.
