Title       : Structure-Reactivity Studies of Quinone Methides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1993     
File        : a9113616

Award Number: 9113616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Skibo eskibo@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Various quinone methides, which are proposed to be key                         
              intermediates in the formation of naturally occurring products,                
              will be prepared and studied. The objectives of this study will be             
              to: (1) obtain a structure-activity relationship for the fate of               
              quinone methides, (2) to generate quinone methides by laser flash              
              photolysis and study their properties directly, and (3) to trap                
              quinone methides as cyclopropyl derivatives. Structure-activity                
              relationships involving the reactions of electrophiles and                     
              nucleophiles with quinone methide derivatives of naphthalene,                  
              anthracene, isoquinoline, and indole will be pursued. These                    
              derivatives are chosen because of their similarity to natural                  
              products. The laser flash generation of quinone methides will                  
              allow UV-visible spectral studies of these intermediates, quinone              
              methide pKa determinations, and kinetic studies of the fate of the             
              quinone methide. To provide further evidence for quinone methide               
              intermediates, benzimidazole derivatives will be formed where the              
              intermediate quinone methide will be trapped as a                              
              spirocyclopropane derivative.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of              
              Professor Edward Skibo at Arizona State University. Quinone                    
              methides are reactive intermediates that have been proposed to be              
              key intermediates in the synthesis of naturally occurring                      
              molecules that are found in plants. Since quinone methides are                 
              very reactive, they are normally produced in very low                          
              concentration and cannot be detected directly by spectroscopic                 
              methods. In this research, these intermediates will be generated               
              by an intense light source to give high concentrations of the                  
              quinone methides so that they can be detected by spectroscopic                 
              measurements. The presence of these intermediates will also be                 
              detected indirectly by trapping reactions to give a product that               
              is indicative of these intermediates. In addition, a relationship              
              between the structure of quinone methides and their reactivity                 
              with other species will be determined. These studies will make it              
              possible to understand the origin of a large class of natural                  
              products and to develop new methods for the reductive cleavage of              
              DNA.
