Title       : Theoretical and Empirical Dimensions of the Emerging International Regulatory
               Order
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9113267

Award Number: 9113267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74968              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Braithwaite   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6589

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 1372,
Abstract    :
              With the internationalization of trade and capital, national                   
              regulatory agencies have encountered mounting problems of                      
              transnational corporations evading international law.  Many assume             
              that the era when business can be effectively regulated is past                
              since it would be difficult to create an international system of               
              law with enforceable sanctions.  While this concern may be well                
              placed, we can understand more about the potential and limits of               
              law if we consider it in the context of other aspects of a global              
              regulatory culture.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The purpose of the research being undertaken by Dr. Braithwaite is             
              to develop a theory of the emerging international regulatory order             
              based on a model of legal pluralism in which multiple actors and               
              institutions, working through a variety of formal and informal                 
              mechanisms, can affect regulatory outcomes.  Data from four nations            
              (the United States, Australia, Papua New Guinea, and Poland) for               
              nine areas of regulation (companies and securities regulation, the             
              regulation of competition, financial regulation, taxation,                     
              corruption, environmental protection, the regulation of hazardous              
              products, affirmative action, and the regulation of air travel)                
              will be used.  Analysis focuses on ten different types of                      
              organizational actors that exert regulatory influence in the                   
              emerging international regulatory order, the relationships among               
              them, and the different mechanisms that mediate their influence.               
              Formal and informal sanctioning, modeling, external regulation, and            
              self regulation are all hypothesized as important.  The theory aims            
              to define and specify how the interaction between mechanisms and               
              actors works in shaping an international regulatory system.                    
                                                                                             
              The results of the research will not only enhance our understanding            
              of regulatory processes beyond the nation-state but also will                  
              contribute substantially to knowledge about diffusion processes and            
              transnational ordering.  From a scientific perspective, the study              
              holds promise of generating new theory that fuses national and                 
              international perspectives on regulation.  From a policy                       
              perspective, the lessons of the theory that is developed can be                
              applied to the specification of new means and possibly more                    
              effective means by which transnational business may be regulated.
