Title       : Direct Methods in Organic Electron Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1993  
File        : a9113899

Award Number: 9113899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Dorset dorset@hwi.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hauptman-Woodward Med Res
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  14201    /   -

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Douglas Dorset is supported by a grant from the Theoretical                
              and Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division                  
              and the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials Research                 
              to perform electron crystallography of organic and polymeric                   
              samples.  Dorset will extend the direct phasing methodology                    
              which has been widely used in X-ray crystallography to organic                 
              structure determination by electron crystallography.  These                    
              methods may be based on the probabilistic estimate of phase                    
              invariant sums, as in X-ray crystallography, or may also                       
              include phase information from high resolution electron                        
              microscope "lattice images".  Systems which have already been                  
              studied include small organic molecules, n-paraffins, lipid                    
              lamellae, linear polymers, and large fused ring systems.  The                  
              methodology will be extended to the investigation of other                     
              compounds and polymers for which no X-ray crystal structures                   
              exist.  If this research is successful then Dorset will have                   
              developed electron crystallography as a reliable method for ab                 
              initio structure analysis and refinement.                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Molecular structures with atomic resolution continue to be the                 
              primary test bed for ab initio electronic structure theories.                  
              They also provide important insights on the molecular level                    
              interpretation of material properties.  Although X-ray crystal                 
              structures have been the primary source of this information,                   
              not all chemical compounds form large enough crystals to be                    
              studied by this technique.  Dr. Dorset's approach which uses                   
              electron diffraction is applicable to microcrystalline samples,                
              and still provides vital atomic resolution information on                      
              chemical structures.
