Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Preservation of Historic Stained Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9113269

Award Number: 9113269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18130              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Lanford Lanford@thor.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0115000   Historical Sites                        
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 1774,
Abstract    :
              This award supports William A. Lanford and a graduate student                  
              of the University at Albany, SUNY, to collaborate in studies                   
              of the surface chemistry of glass with Dieter R. Fuchs and                     
              others of the Fraunhofer Institute for Glass Research in                       
              Wurzburg, Germany.  The scientific goal of their research is                   
              to improve understanding of the mechanisms leading to the                      
              corrosion of glasses.  This requires sophisticated techniques                  
              of chemical and physical analysis to characterize the state of                 
              the glass surface as it is changed by exposure to water and                    
              gases.  The collaborating Fraunhofer Institute has world class                 
              facilities for traditional glass chemistry.  Among other                       
              activities, the German group is currently very involved in                     
              research to provide a sound basis for treatments to conserve                   
              historic stained glass.  They have developed some glass                        
              compositions to use as test models for appropriate                             
              experiments, and are working on various coatings to protect                    
              old glasses from further deterioration.  The U.S. team at the                  
              Accelerator Laboratories of SUNY Albany brings to the                          
              collaboration special expertise and equipment for nuclear                      
              reaction analysis and various spectrometric methods that are                   
              necessary for the surface characterization.  They will also                    
              participate in experimental analysis of new coatings developed                 
              originally for use in the microelectronic industry.                            
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will increase knowledge of the                    
              chemical reactivity of glass surfaces, a subject with diverse                  
              implications in industry and every day life.  The proposed                     
              collaborative research will make an immediate contribution to                  
              the current international effort to preserve historic stained                  
              glass, through the involvement of the German institute in a                    
              NATO sponsored project on this subject.  Sound conservation                    
              efforts require as complete knowledge as possible of the                       
              mechanisms leading to the corrosion of these glasses.
