Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems and Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9113250

Award Number: 9113250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris W. Hirsch hirsch@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator studies several interrelated questions                   
              concerning neural networks, learning algorithms, and theoretical               
              dynamical systems.  A primary goal is to discover how certain                  
              features of nonlinear dynamics, and in particular the dynamic                  
              attractors (limit cycles, chaotic attractors, fractals)                        
              apparently found in biological systems, can be useful for pattern              
              learning, recognition, and retrieval.  To test the results, nets               
              that recognize handwritten digits will be built.  The normal form              
              projection algorithm, a new method of constructing networks, will              
              be used.  A key feature of a net built this way is that its                    
              underlying dynamics is explicitly isomorphic to any of a class of              
              standard, well-understood nonlinear dynamical systems.  This                   
              system is chosen in advance, independent of the patterns to be                 
              stored and the learning algorithm used.  The projection algorithm              
              decouples certain dynamical features -- stability, basin                       
              geometry, and rates of convergence -- from others that are more                
              problem-dependent, such as preprocessing, learning rules, and                  
              reconstruction of data. Related theoretical issues in dynamical                
              systems will be investigated.                                                  
                   A neural net is a network of relatively simple computational              
              nodes, typically summing or damping devices whose output depends               
              nonlinearly on their inputs.  The connections between nodes may                
              themselves be weighted so that certain inputs or outputs are more              
              influential than others.  If one views a net as a dynamical                    
              system, the rest points of the system are what the net "knows."                
              The theoretical knowledge and practical experience gained in this              
              project may lead to greater understanding of the design                        
              principles that underlie the superior performance of biological                
              systems in pattern recognition, robotics, and adaptive behavior,               
              and to greater insight into memory, learning, and motor control                
              in biological networks.  Practical consequences arise in the                   
              applications of these ideas to problems in pattern recognition,                
              signal processing, process control, and general interfaces                     
              between people and machines.
