Title       : The Conceptual Design of Chemical Processes with Waste Minimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1994   
File        : a9113049

Award Number: 9113049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241434             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Douglas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              It is not unusual in the chemical industry to initiate the                     
              first design study within one week of a chemist's,                             
              biochemist's, microbiologist's or polymer scientist's                          
              discovery of a new reaction system or a new material.  The                     
              goals of this first design are to see if the process is                        
              profitable, to see if environmental problems will be                           
              encountered, to determine the best few process flowsheets, and                 
              to guide the development of a database that is needed for a                    
              final design.  Thus, the focus is on understanding the                         
              problem, rather than obtaining a rigorous solution.  For this                  
              reason, short-cut models normally are used for the evaluations                 
              in the initial study, and then rigorous design calculations                    
              are introduced in subsequent design studies after the best                     
              alternatives have been identified.  The method can be                          
              approximated on the computer by using hierarchical methods,                    
              going from a conceptual design to a detailed design to a final                 
              design.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This work involves automatic implementation of the first step,                 
              the conceptual design phase of the procedure.  In this stage,                  
              the designer identifies the possible process alternatives,                     
              selects process units, identifies possible pollution problems,                 
              etc.  This conceptual design problem is often characterized by                 
              a very large number of possible processes that can use a given                 
              reaction chemistry to transform the raw materials to the                       
              desired product (and some by-products).  Both a large number                   
              of structural alternatives (that is, equipment selection and                   
              streams), as well as values of the design variables (which                     
              effect the stream flows and equipment sizes) are encountered.                  
              Rules based on artificial intelligence will be developed to                    
              choose between these numerous alternatives.  Specifically, the                 
              PI plans to develop new synthesis procedures for  the                          
              separation of vapor-liquid-liquid-solid mixtures that will                     
              make the hierarchical decision procedure applicable to the                     
              conceptual design of most chemical processes.  The code he                     
              plans to develop will include a systematic procedure for                       
              exploring process alternatives, as well as the quick screening                 
              of these alternatives; and, be a good starting point for more                  
              detailed algorithmic synthesis studies (mixed integer                          
              nonlinear programming and simulated annealing).  The code will                 
              also indicate when pollution problems will result from the                     
              design decisions and suggest process alternatives to avoid                     
              environmental problems.  In addition, the software will be                     
              shared with other undergraduate and graduate institutions (it                  
              is to be distributed by the CACHE Corporation) to be used for                  
              the teaching of process design.
