Title       : Orographic Effects on Cold Fronts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1992   
File        : a9113487

Award Number: 9113487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145600             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Knight   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The strength, movement, and associated precipitation of fronts            
              traversing orographic features can be significantly affected by the            
              terrain.  Dr. Knight will continue his studies of frontal inter-               
              action with topography via two approaches.  A two-dimensional                  
              numerical model based on the primitive equations of meteorology                
              will be used to calculate the suite of physical processes involved             
              in the interaction.  The model cold front will be formed by the                
              shear flow induced by an evolving non-linear baroclinic Eady wave              
              (the theoretical analogue of a developing midlatitude cyclone).                
              The effect of varying mountain sizes and atmospheric stabilities               
              will be simulated, in both the presence and absence of atmospheric             
              moisture.  Under the second approach, the model's simulations will             
              guide the observational analysis of case studies of cold fronts                
              crossing the Appalachians.  Observed fronts that are significantly             
              affected by the mountains will be compared with those that are not.            
              In addition to elucidating aspects of the interaction, the case                
              studies will provide a partial check on the verisimilitude of the              
              model simulations.  Better understanding of the interaction may                
              lead to improved predictions of precipitation in mountainous                   
              terrain, a key aid in water resource management.
