Title       : Constitutional and Legal Change in Eastern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1993 
File        : a9113837

Award Number: 9113837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Elster   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cass Sunstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen T. Holmes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael McConnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne-Marie Slaughter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Since 1989, seven countries in Eastern Europe have begun the                   
              transition from one-party rule to constitutional democracy:                    
              Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and               
              Yugoslavia.  Historically unprecedented, this wave of constitution-            
              writing presents an exceptional opportunity for the study of                   
              constututionalism, comparatively and transnationally.  Although the            
              American and French experiences at the end of the eighteenth                   
              century took place at the same time, the sharp dissimilarities                 
              between the two countries limit the fruitfulness of comparative                
              study.  But contemporary developments in Eastern Europe are ideal              
              for comparative and transnational study for a number of reasons.               
              All of the countries have emerged from a comparable period of                  
              Communist Party rule.  Also, all have pre-constitutional                       
              traditions.  And, along with the liberalization and democratization            
              of political institutions, all are undertaking transitions from                
              central planning to a market economy.                                          
                                                                                             
              This project will enable the construction of a data bank for                   
              unprecedented, comparative and transnational study of the                      
              sociolegal dynamics of constitutionlism.  Specifically, comparable             
              data from each of the seven Eastern European countries will be                 
              collected, translated, coded, and archived according to the                    
              following analytic categories: legislative-government relations;               
              electoral laws; the formation of political parties; the formation              
              and implementation of basic rights; constitutional courts and                  
              judicial review; institutionalization of the liberal concept of                
              private property; federalism and local government; ethnic,                     
              religious and linguistic minorities; degree of autonomy of state               
              agencies and corporations; restitution and retribution; and the                
              constitution-making process.  These data will be available on                  
              Microsoft Word and Macintosh.  Scholars will be informed about                 
              additions to the data bank through a quarterly newsletter.
