Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Quantum-Well Optical Waveguides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9113993

Award Number: 9113993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13534              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Hechtman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman J. Horing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hong-Liang Cui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research program on the use of semiconductor                              
              microstructures as optical waveguides involves                                 
              methods that are computationally intensive.  The                               
              Engineering Research Equipment Grant will provide                              
              a workstation with the computational facility needed                           
              to carry out this work.  The goal of this project is to                        
              determine the characteristics of new, novel integrated                         
              electro-optic devices.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The PI will propose to investigate a new, developing                           
              research area focused on quantum well                                          
              microstructure optical waveguides (QWOWG).                                     
              Briefly, QWOWG is defined as an optical waveguide                              
              with quantum well (QW) boundaries, confining                                   
              mobile charge, on the boundary or the vicinity of a                            
              guiding structure, modifying the propagation                                   
              characteristics of the structure.  Such modified                               
              propagation characteristics will be analyzed in the                            
              studies.  Moreover, with electron-wave tunneling                               
              between QWs, excitation of higher QW subbands, and                             
              electromagnetic Floquet modes due to QW periodic                               
              patterns, such structures have ample mechanisms for                            
              anomalies.  It is these anomalies that may prove                               
              useful for new devices.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Two dimensional (2D) and/or three dimensional                                  
              (3D) QWs are represented in any of a variety of                                
              planar patterns in terms of a frequency and spatially                          
              dependent nonlocal complex conductivity, o.  QW                                
              conductivity calculations, will be carried out in terms                        
              of quantum-mechanical linear-response theory,                                  
              employing a Schroedinger Green's function                                      
              formulation as appropriate.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Determination of the propagation characteristics of                            
              QW microstructure waveguides involves extensive                                
              computation using a modified form of the spectral                              
              domain method (SDM).  In the PI's treatment using                              
              this technique, a surface current vector field of                              
              arbitrary strength serves to represent the QW                                  
              pattern.
