Title       : New Tools for the Computer-Aided Design of Nonideal Distillation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1991  
File        : a9113717

Award Number: 9113717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Doherty mdoherty@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The area of computer aided process design has advanced                         
              substantially in the recent past.  Among some of these recent                  
              developments are new methods to design complex industrial                      
              systems.  There is an economic incentive to develop such                       
              engineering tools provided they are simple and accurate and                    
              are able to discriminate between process alternatives very                     
              early in the life of a project in order to eliminate designs                   
              that are unsafe, uncontrollable, as well as uneconomic.  An                    
              area of both commercial and academic interest which has not                    
              been successfully addressed to date is the design of nonideal,                 
              multicomponent distillation systems.  When the process streams                 
              form an ideal mixture, existing conceptual design methods                      
              provide efficient means for narrowing down the possible                        
              distillation sequences to a small number of promising                          
              alternatives.  These can then be designed and costed in more                   
              detail using simulator-based techniques.  For nonideal and                     
              azeotropic mixtures, however, there exist no procedures or                     
              tools for choosing between different nonideal distillation                     
              sequences without carrying out extensive full-scale computer                   
              aided simulations and costing.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The PI plans to develop a new class of techniques for computer                 
              aided analysis, design and synthesis of nonideal and                           
              azeotropic distillation systems.  The methods exploit                          
              geometric properties of the nonlinear discrete dynamical                       
              system representation of the steady state composition                          
              profiles in the composition state space.  The procedure can be                 
              extended to include multicomponent reactive distillation                       
              columns.  The technique also provides a procedure for                          
              determining the minimum flows and the number of theoretical                    
              stages in each column section for reflux ratios above the                      
              minimum without the necessity of lengthy iterative schemes, as                 
              is the current practice.  The PI plans to look at commercially                 
              important situations including non-sharp splits, multiple-feed                 
              columns, and tangent pinches.
