Title       : Ion Binding and Reactivity in Association Colloids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1994     
File        : a9113331

Award Number: 9113331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence S. Romsted romsted@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              New approaches will be developed for probing interfacial                       
              compositions of association colloids and vesicles over a wide                  
              range of surface charge densities and solution compositions.                   
              Product distributions from dediazoniation of an aggregate bound                
              hydrophobic aryl diazonium salt will provide a "snapshot" view of              
              interfacial nucleophile composition. This probe will be used to                
              estimate, simultaneously, interfacial concentrations of water, and             
              counterions, and also alcohol distributions and counterion                     
              selectivities. The effect of surface charge density on counterion              
              binding and aggregate size and shape of micelles composed of                   
              amphoteric surfactants with phospholipid-like head groups will be              
              determined by NMR, spectrophotometric, and potentiometric methods.             
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the research             
              of Professor Laurence S. Romsted at Rutgers University. Reactive               
              species (aryl diazonium salts), bound to aggregated molecules                  
              (colloids  and vesicles), will undergo reaction with solvent and               
              other molecules at the aggregate-water interface to give a                     
              "snapshot" view of this interface. The effect of surface charge                
              density on the aggregate and the shape of the aggregate will be                
              determined by employing a variety of instrumental techniques.                  
              These studies will allow for a better understanding of an                      
              important biological process where the enzyme phospholipase A2                 
              binds to phospholipid vesicles (aggregates).
