Title       : Planning Grant on Cross-Racial Eyewitness Identification in the Context of
               Multi-Racial and Multi-Cultural Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9113829

Award Number: 9113829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14619              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy S. Malpass   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Plattsburgh
	      
	      Plattsburgh, NY  12901    518/564-2000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 1372,
Abstract    :
              Global forces are underway that result in opportunities for visibly            
              different ethnic groups to interact in public contexts on an                   
              increasingly equal basis.  The effects of increased social                     
              interaction and of changing social and legal contexts on                       
              perceptions of and memory for individuals of other groups is a                 
              topic of perennial scholarly interest.  The accuracy of cross-                 
              racial eyewitness identification is an important area of concern;              
              yet, there is no consensus in the scholarly community about the                
              psychological mechanisms which affect these judgments.  This is an             
              area in which there are interesting theoretical developments that              
              have implications for both formal and informal interactions among              
              people of different groups.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project is for a planning grant to facilitate development of              
              a research project that will assess factors associated with global             
              changes in racism, discrimination, and ethnic conflict.  The                   
              project being planned will focus, in particular, on the effects of             
              social structure, social experience, and attitudes on cross-racial             
              identification in the Republic of South Africa as the legal system             
              of apartheid or "separateness" is dismantled. At the core of the               
              approach is the notion that the relative heterogeneity of the                  
              social resources afforded by a particular group will determine the             
              ability of individuals to differentiate on the basis of facial and             
              other appearance.  The more homogeneously another race is viewed               
              in social terms, the less likelihood of individual recognition.                
              During this planning period the investigators will (1) establish               
              a multi-national, multi-discipline, multi-racial research team that            
              will participate in the research; (2) travel to South Africa to                
              discuss research plans and study materials; and (3) develop a                  
              comprehensive plan for the subsequent research.                                
                                                                                             
              This research addresses an important dimension of racial and social            
              conflict and has specific implications for cross-racial eyewitness             
              identification and reliability.  The results of the study will                 
              enable revising existing theory to accommodate multicultural                   
              dimensions of racial bias.  The research will also contribute to               
              our understanding of broader issues of social perception.
