Title       : Modeling of the Teleconnections in the African Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1993  
File        : a9113511

Award Number: 9113511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredrick Semazzi fred_semazzi@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jae-Kyung Schemm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1303,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   A Significant body of empirical studies indicated that                    
              continental-scale climate anomalies play an important part in                  
              determining the variability of the African climate.  One of these              
              decadal-scale climate anomaly regimes concerns the simultaneous                
              phase reversal, in the precipitation anomaly distribution,                     
              between equatorial and tropical Africa.  This continental-scale                
              concurrence happens despite the fact that the rainy season in                  
              each latitudinal band over the continent comes at different                    
              phases of the annual cycle.  Clearly, a continental-scale                      
              teleconnection mechanism appears to be involved in the                         
              development and maintenance of these climatic conditions.  The                 
              PI's solutions obtained form a steady-state multi-level linear                 
              model, indicate that the interaction between the large-scale                   
              African orography and the climatic fluctuations in the basic                   
              state could help to produce the observed teleconnections in the                
              African climate.  The PI will extend his previous investigations               
              by performing a series of numerical simulations based on the NCAR              
              Community Climate Model (CCM).                                                 
                                                                                             
              This investigation will be aimed at two distinct but closely                   
              related and complementary objectives which may be stated as                    
              follows. (1) Employ the National Center for Atmospheric Research               
              (NCAR) Community Climate Model (CCM) to investigate the observed               
              three-way connection between the global sea surface temperature                
              (SST), the continental-scale teleconnections in the African                    
              climate, and the regional Sahelian droughts.  The numerical                    
              integrations will be based on two versions of the NCAR GCM, an                 
              earlier model designated CCM1, and a new version CCM2, in which                
              extensive enhancements have been implemented.  (2) Introduce and               
              test a new hypothesis concerning the role of the interaction                   
              between the large-scale orography of Africa and the mean zonal                 
              flow in promoting the observed teleconnections in the African                  
              climate.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Through this investigation the PI hopes to clarify some of the                 
              important physical mechanisms responsible for the continental-                 
              scale teleconnections in the African climate.  In addition this                
              study will help to assess the relative performances of CCM1 and                
              CCM2 in simulating the variability of the tropical climate, thus               
              contributing toward further improvements in the models.
