Title       : RUI: Dispute Settlement and the Maintenance of Community in a Context of
               Cultural and Legal Pluralism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9113904

Award Number: 9113904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Just   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The analysis of legal systems, like the analysis of social systems,            
              requires at its base an understanding of the categories of meaning             
              by which participants themselves comprehend their experience and               
              orient themselves toward one another in their everyday lives. The              
              day to day sharing, or contesting, of basic understandings are                 
              crucial aspects of the creation of moral communities that form the             
              cultural basis of social life.  Nowhere is the significance of                 
              these understandings brought into sharper focus than in the arena              
              of disputing.  In the social study of law, law is part of culture              
              and is understood in cultural terms.                                           
                                                                                             
              This project is an ethnographic study of dispute settlement in                 
              three neighborhoods of contrasting social composition and religious            
              orientation in the Indonesian city of Yogyakarta, Java.  The study             
              looks at dispute settlement at its least institutionalized levels,             
              especially mediation by community and religious leaders.  Through              
              interviews, extended case-study methods, and participant                       
              observation, the following issues are explored: (1) indigenous                 
              conceptions of dispute and disputing, order, and amity; (2)                    
              strategies and tactics employed by Javanese in resolving disputes;             
              (3) institutions and techniques available for the resolution of                
              disputes and the choices made for settling disputes; (4) effect of             
              the choices on subsequent rhetoric of disputing; and  (5) how                  
              communities create and maintain moral cohesion and how social                  
              differentiation informs these issues.                                          
                                                                                             
              The research will result in substantial contributions to our                   
              understanding of the ways in which communities are created and                 
              maintained, particularly in a context of cultural and legal                    
              pluralism; of the evolution of legal systems; and of Javanese                  
              society.  By extension and implication, the results will have                  
              relevance to any of the world's socially and legally pluralistic               
              societies, especially developing and developed countries facing                
              social transformation.
