Title       : Collaborative Research: Updating Ambiguous Beliefs: Bayesian and Non-Bayesian
               Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1991  
File        : a9113108

Award Number: 9113108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30568              (Estimated)
Investigator: Itzhak Gilboa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Bayesian approach to decision making under uncertainty                     
              prescribes that a decision maker have a unique prior probability               
              and a utility function such that decisions are made so as to                   
              maximize the expected utility.  This paradigm was justified by                 
              axiomatic treatments but challenged by several classes of evidence:            
              experimental results incompatible with the consistency condition               
              implied by the Bayesian approach, difficulties people have in                  
              specifying a prior probability, and economic phenomena                         
              contradictory to the theoretical results.                                      
                                                                                             
              Among many models suggested to generalize the Bayesian approach are            
              the nonadditive probabilities model and the multiple priors model.             
              These models have passed an important test: they have been                     
              axiomatized.  However, these one-shot decision models shed little              
              light on the problem of dynamically updating probabilities as new              
              information is gathered.  The natural question then is: what are               
              the reasonable ways for economic agents to update beliefs over                 
              time?                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This study will deal with this problem axiomatically and suggest               
              plausible updating rules which satisfy some basic requirements.                
              A family of pseudo-Bayesian rules, each of which may be considered             
              a generalization of Bayes' rule for a unique additive prior, will              
              be presented and studied.  A family of classical updating rules,               
              each of which starts out with a given set of priors, possibly rules            
              some of them out in the face of new information, and continues with            
              the Bayesian updates of the remaining ones, will also be studied.              
                                                                                             
              The assumption of a unique given prior probability is clearly                  
              unrealistic.  New political circumstances, technological advances,             
              new firms, and new products are all counter-examples in which the              
              assumption of a unique prior is unreasonable.  Consequently, this              
              study will provide important theoretical foundation upon which we              
              build our understanding of the adjustment of economic agents to new            
              phenomena or new information.
