Title       : Signal Transduction Pathways in Regulation of Cell Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9113470

Award Number: 9113470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley B. Russell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Meharry Medical College
	      1005 Dr D B Todd, Jr Blvd
	      Nashville, TN  372083501    615/327-6200

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1117,
Abstract    :
                Human dermal fibroblasts constitute a suitable system to                     
              study growth regulation.  These cells alternate between                        
              states of proliferation and quiescence under the control of                    
              growth factors, hormones, and extracellular matrix proteins                    
              elaborated by the fibroblasts.  Complex interconnected                         
              pathways transmit these extracellular signals to growth                        
              processes in the cell.  The objective of this proposal is to                   
              elucidate this signal transduction network.  A mutant cell                     
              type derived from benign dermal tumors, keloids, will be                       
              used to help unravel the regulatory network.  The keloid                       
              mutation modifies growth regulation by phorbol esters,                         
              prostaglandins and transforming growth factor beta,                            
              substances that may act as positive or negative effectors of                   
              growth.  Signal transduction pathways of these regulators                      
              are incompletely understood; however, several important                        
              intracellular messengers have been implicated.  Methods to                     
              be used include measurements of prostaglandin synthesis,                       
              prostaglandin receptors, and intracellular concentrations of                   
              cyclic AMP, Ca2+ and inositol phosphates after exposure of                     
              normal and keloid cells to effectors that differentially                       
              regulate DNA synthesis in these cell types.  The temporal                      
              pattern of signal transduction intermediates in normal and                     
              keloid cells should reveal the signalling pathways of these                    
              regulators and may clarify the complex interactions that                       
              coordinate and modulate growth-associated activities.                          
                Three minority graduate students will participate in the                     
              research with three researchers in the Microbiology                            
              Department at Meharry Medical College.
