Title       : Collaborative Research on the Influence of Cultural Context and Migration on
               Perceptions of Law and Justice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9113863

Award Number: 9113863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89356              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Allan Lind   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6589

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The growth in international trade, advances in communication and               
              technology, ease of travel, and changes in immigration patterns                
              make it more likely that disputes will arise between individuals               
              of different national, cultural, and ethnic backgrounds.  In recent            
              years, sociolegal scholars have begun to investigate how cultural              
              variation in preferences for dispute resolution procedures is                  
              related to individual psychological processes.  This study will                
              extend this work by examining how procedural preferences are shaped            
              by a person's culture of origin, acculturation to new social forms,            
              gender, social status, and economic resources.                                 
                                                                                             
              This comparative study conducted in the United States, Germany, and            
              Hong Kong systematically analyzes patterns of procedural                       
              preferences, attitudes toward various forms of regulation, and                 
              dispute-related beliefs and behaviors.  These three sites have been            
              the target of substantial migration.  Two experimental studies will            
              be conducted, involving approximately 500 participants at each                 
              site, to test whether differences in preferences for types of                  
              dispute resolution reflect differences in values or differences in             
              beliefs about the effective or appropriate means to reach their                
              goals.  One study will focus on preferences about options available            
              for dealing with disputes (such as ignoring the conflict, ignoring             
              the disputant, or direct negotiation).  The second will consider               
              the means available to resolve the conflict (such as mediation or              
              adversarial adjudication).                                                     
                                                                                             
              The project will contribute to our understanding of transnational              
              issues by advancing our knowledge of how culture, ethnicity,                   
              recency of migration, and other social factors interact to shape               
              individuals' legal attitudes and reactions to a variety of laws,               
              disputing fora, and disputing options.  From a global perspective,             
              the results will have major significance for increasing our                    
              knowledge of what drives preferences for one form of law or                    
              regulatory regime over another and of why people of diverse                    
              cultural origins differ in their views about what constitutes a                
              fair procedure or law.
