Title       : RUI: Collective Phenomena in Highly Correlated Systems: Study of the Fractional
               Quantum Hall Effect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1993    
File        : a9113876

Award Number: 9113876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Rezayi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9229,9251,
Abstract    :
              This renewal award for Research at Undergraduate Institutions is               
              for continued research on the fractional quantum Hall effect.                  
              Numerical work is proposed to investigate outstanding problems in              
              the fractionally quantized Hall effect which is observed in a two-             
              dimensional electron gas subject to a transverse magnetic field.               
              The electron layer is formed at the semiconductor interface of a               
              high quality Gallium-Arsenide heterostructure device.  The recent              
              availability of very high mobility samples offers a unique                     
              opportunity to probe strongly correlated systems in the extreme                
              quantum mechanical limit, where collective phenomena occur.  In                
              addition, the more recent optical measurements of the quantum Hall             
              states have provided another dimension in experimental probes of               
              the quantum Hall effect.  The proposed research addresses the                  
              nature of half-integral and hierarchy states of the fractional                 
              quantum Hall effect as well as the physical conditions which                   
              stabilize them.  Additional areas of research include understanding            
              edge states; the quantum fluid to classical Wigner crystal cross-              
              over; optical signature of quantum Hall states; and, the                       
              possibility of fractional quantum Hall effect in a two-dimensional             
              electron-hole fluid.  Also proposed is a finite-size numerical                 
              study of a model Hamiltonian for which the Kalmeyer-Laughlin chiral            
              spin fluid ground state is exact.  Chiral spin fluids are similar              
              to quantum Hall states and support fractional statistics (semion)              
              excitations.                                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              The quantum Hall effect is due to a unique state of matter - a two-            
              dimensional electron fluid.  The cooperative behavior of electrons             
              in two-dimensions is markedly different from their behavior in the             
              more familiar three-dimensions.  The proposed research will use                
              numerical and analytical techniques to study a number of properties            
              of this strange two-dimensional system which are of current                    
              interest.  Besides providing insight into the underlying physics of            
              this strange state of matter, the results may also be of interest              
              in device fabrication and for high temperature superconductivity.
