Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Instabilities in Flows with Strongly
               Temperature Dependent Viscosity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1995   
File        : a9113116

Award Number: 9113116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe Matalon matalon@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5950      SWITZERLAND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1406,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Moshe Matalon of Northwestern                    
              University to collaborate in a study of fluid dynamics with                    
              Professor Philippe Metzener of the Mathematics Department                      
              of the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL).                        
              The goal of their research is to gain fundamental                              
              understanding of the basic mechanisms of instability in                        
              liquids for which viscosity depends strongly on                                
              temperature.  They will examine in detail two important                        
              physical mechanisms of instability: thermal instability                        
              that arises when a fluid layer is heated from below, and                       
              shear instability.  The collaborators bring complementary                      
              strengths in applied mathematics to the proposed research,                     
              which involves mathematical modeling, mathematical analysis                    
              and numerical calculations.  Professor Matalon's strengths                     
              are in mathematical analysis.  He has expertise in                             
              asymptotic and perturbation methods derived from work on                       
              combustion problems and the mathematical modeling of                           
              chemically reacting flow problems. Professor Metzener has                      
              extensive experience studying problems of convection; he                       
              and his research group have strong computational and                           
              numerical skills.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Most previous work on instabilities in fluid flows has                         
              assumed a constant viscosity in the fluid.  While this has                     
              produced useful basic information, it is recognized that                       
              instabilities will be modified if the viscosity varies with                    
              temperature.  Such is the case in many real world systems,                     
              ranging from the movement of magma below the surface of the                    
              earth to the processing of industrially important polymers.                    
              Thus the results of this research will have a broad range                      
              of applications.
