Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Atomic Structures and Transition Rates in
               Multiply-Ionized Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1992   
File        : a9113201

Award Number: 9113201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur E. Livingston Livingston.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5937      SWEDEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1241,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-Swedish cooperative research               
              in experimental atomic physics between A. Eugene Livingston of                 
              the University of Notre Dame and Indrek Martinson of the                       
              University of Lund in Sweden.  The primary objective is to                     
              advance knowledge of the energy structure and transition rate                  
              properties in selected heavy ions by measuring their atomic                    
              structures and transition rates.  Using primarily the techniques of            
              fast-ion-beam excitation, the investigators will perform experiments           
              on the (1) Rydberg transitions in sodium-like ions; (2) spectra and            
              lifetimes in nickel-like atomic structures and transition rates in             
              high-Z x-ray lasers; and (3) lifetimes in zinc isoelectronic                   
              sequence.  The investigators will participate in specific joint                
              experiments and conduct in parallel the analysis and interpretation            
              of data.  The proposed theories and experiments have applications              
              in plasma physics and astrophysics and could contribute to the                 
              development of new energy sources.                                             
                                                                                             
              The project will benefit from the complementary capabilities and               
              facilities of the investigators.  Livingston and his Notre Dame                
              group offer a strong theoretical program in atomic structure theory.           
              Dr. Martinson's experimental group in Lund are experts in                      
              determining energy levels and transition rates of highly ionized               
              atoms. The accelerator capabilities at Notre Dame and Lund offer               
              differing energy ranges and this will prove advantageous for                   
              experimentation over a wide range of ionization stages.
