Title       : Particles in rf Plasma Processing Discharges: Generation, Transport and Plasma
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9113215

Award Number: 9113215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227492             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Kushner mjk@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Glow discharge radio frequency (rf) discharges, as used for                    
              plasma materials processing, are inevitably contamined by                      
              particulate matter.  These particles, or "dust", result from                   
              gas phase nucleation, polymerization or sputtering of                          
              surfaces.  At one extreme, the yield of microelectronic                        
              devices and thin films fabricated in contamined plasmas are                    
              known to be poor.  Particles, however, are also intentionally                  
              produced in discharges for starting materials to fabricate                     
              nonphase solids.  The methods of generation, transport and the                 
                                                                                             
              effects of particles on plasma dynamics are largely unknown.                   
              We propose to computationally investigate the conditions with                  
              lead to formation of particles, the effects of particles on                    
              the characteristics of rf discharges, and how particles from                   
              the plasma contaminate surfaces.  In doing so, we will also                    
              investigate methods whereby the formation of particles can be                  
              intentionally enhanced as in the synthesis of nanocrystals.                    
                                                                                             
              The single greatest cause of reduced yields of microelectronic                 
                                                                                             
              devices prepared by plasma processing is particle                              
              contamination.  Therefore, understanding the method of                         
              generation, transport and effects on plasma parameters of                      
              particles will have an important impact on microelectronics                    
              fabrication and the specialty powders industries.
