Title       : The Role of Evolutionary, Population and Community Responsesin Analysis of
               Global Environmental Change: A Workshop Proposal; Friday Harbor, Washington;
               September 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1991      
File        : a9113069

Award Number: 9113069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63225              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Kareiva kareivap@zoology.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond B. Huey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel G. Kingsolver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                      Ecological discussions of environmental change have                    
              emphasized either physiological responses of individual organisms              
              or ecosystem.level responses of entire trophic levels and                      
              functional groups.  Largely missing from these discussions has                 
              been significant input from the domain of classical population,                
              evolutionary, and community ecology.  Yet these fields should be               
              playing a key role in discussions of the ecological consequences               
              of environmental change.  Population and community interactions                
              serve as links by which the physiological consequences of                      
              environmental change are integrated into ecosystem.level                       
              responses.  Moreover, evolutionary and community ecology have                  
              recently developed a rich empirical and theoretical foundation                 
              that has the promise of catalyzing..perhaps even directly                      
              offering..predictions about long.term consequences of massive                  
              climatic and land.use shifts.                                                  
                      This workshop is being held to address the potential                   
              contributions of evolutionary, physiological, population, and                  
              community ecology to issues of environmental change.                           
              Participants will evaluate existing contributions as well as                   
              suggest directions for new research.  In addition, the workshop                
              will attempt to link its findings to the physiological and                     
              ecosystem.level contributions that have emerged from previous                  
              ecological syntheses.                                                          
                      To share the evaluations with a large audience, the                    
              organizers will rapidly produce an edited book (to be published                
              by a commercial publisher) that details the existing insights of               
              evolutionary and community ecology pertinent to environmental                  
              change, and that highlights and sets out directions for future                 
              research.  In addition, a brief summary of the report will be                  
              published in the Ecological Society of America's new publication,              
              Ecological Applications, which will thus reach a wide readership             
              free of charge.  Finally, the participants will also prepare a                 
              concise summary of the workshop geared to a general nontechnical               
              audience; this "layperson's" report could be distributed among                 
              government officials by NSF.
