Title       : Cliometrics Conferences, 2003, 2004, and 2005
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0214123

Award Number: 0214123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90014              (Estimated)
Investigator: Price V. Fishback pfishback@bpa.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Cliometrics Conference brings together scholars performing frontier research
              in the study of the history of the world's economies.  Each year a group of 40
              to 50 scholars who specialize in the application of economics and statistics to
              the study of the history of economies are invited to the conference.  The
              conference is designed to give scholars feedback on their research.  We urge
              scholars to submit papers that are in relatively early stages of development. 
              At the typical conference twelve papers are selected for presentation and the
              papers are printed and distributed to all of the participants in advance.   All
              participants agree to read all of the papers and attend all of the sessions. 
              At the opening of the session for each paper, the person who wrote the paper
              has five minutes to introduce the paper and then the floor is opened for an
              intensive discussion by all of the participants.  Those who present their
              research at the conference often suggest that the experience is like listening
              to 15 to 30 referees in one setting.  Thus, the scholar has an opportunity to
              get feedback from leading scholars in the field in this setting.   Scholars who
              attend but do not present papers often find that they get helpful insights on
              their own research from discussions with other participants during breaks and
              meals at the conference, as well as during the actual sessions.  Often, the
              discussions of the papers also expand the breadth of knowledge for participants
              who do not specialize in specific subfields of economic history.  Another goal
              of the conference is to provide a forum for scholars new to the field to get
              exposure for their research and to meet more established scholars.   Typically,
              about 15 to 30 percent of the participants are assistant professors who
              recently received their degrees or are advanced graduate students in the latter
              stages of writing a dissertation.  

The Cliometrics Conference plays an
              important role in improving and disseminating research on the history of the
              world's economies.  The meetings bring together researchers in intimate
              sessions where active discussion of economic history research is the rule.  As
              a result, both established scholars and scholars new to the field obtain
              extensive feedback on their own research and also learn about new research by
              others.  The conference helps to speed the process of bringing research from
              its early stages to final publication.   Further, the conference serves to
              disseminate the results more widely, as descriptions of the discussion are
              published and disseminated on the world-wide web.   The research discussed at
              the conference typically provides historical context for current  public policy
              issues, including globalization, the role of government in the economy,
              technological change and its impact on the economy, financial markets, and a
              host of other topics related to economies.  

