Title       : Making Syntax of Sense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0214270

Award Number: 0214270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309668             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kathryn Bock kbock@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kathryn Bock will conduct three
              years of psycholinguistic research on the cognitive processes involved in
              producing number and gender agreement in normal spontaneous speech. The project
              will compare agreement in English, Dutch, and Russian using laboratory tasks
              that measure the accuracy, timing, locus of attention, and cognitive demands
              associated with the production of agreement in verbs and pronouns. The research
              addresses how speakers tacitly identify the conceptual and perceptual
              precursors of number and gender and tests competing views about how number and
              gender information are used when producing agreement under the typical
              time-pressures associated with speaking.

The devices of number and gender
              agreement are linguistic flags to the parts of sentences that belong together
              mentally, serving to bridge meaning and the grammatical form of the utterances
              that speakers use to express their thoughts. The bridge is well travelled: Even
              in English, a language with relatively simple agreement requirements, speakers
              call on the operations that implement agreement more than once in every five
              seconds of running speech. Also, despite intuitions to the contrary, agreement
              is surprisingly reliable. By the age of 4, the normal, spontaneous use of
              number agreement is almost 95% correct. The implication is that an explanation
              of the workings of agreement can enhance our currently negligible scientific
              understanding of how human perceptions and conceptions are transformed into a
              medium that allows them to be communicated with precision to other people.

