Title       : Population, Environment, and Land Tenure in Burkina Faso
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0214481

Award Number: 0214481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie C. Gray lcgray@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,5928,9229,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research project will investigate the environmental and socioeconomic
              effects of population change in southwestern Burkina Faso, a region of
              widespread immigration.  It examines an on-going debate in African studies
              literature about the role of population growth in causing environmental
              degradation.  The investigator argues that the scale of investigation is
              important in determining conclusions.  In the cotton-growing zone of
              southwestern Burkina Faso, population growth has led to large reductions in
              forest cover and fallow periods.  Yet analyses at the macro-level may ignore
              other types of population-induced landscape changes, such as the micro-level
              adaptive responses of farmers.  Although the research in this project counters
              dominant neo-Malthusian portrayals of the relationship between people and their
              environments in this region, population growth has led to several important
              socioeconomic and institutional dislocations, particularly in the arena of
              wealth distribution, land rights, community relations, and government policy. 
              Among the questions that the research will ask are:  How have demographic and
              socioeconomic changes affected the environment at multiple spatial scales?  How
              are norms about land tenure changing with population influx by migrants,
              particularly regarding rights, agricultural investment, tenure security,
              conflict, and conflict resolution?  How do international environment, land, and
              population policies interact with other government policies to affect changes
              on the local level, and how do local farmers react to new policies?  The
              research project will be a one-year pilot project in three villages using
              different methodological frameworks.  Principal methods will include structured
              and unstructured interviews, aerial photographic interpretation, soil and
              vegetation sampling, and collection of national level data and policy
              reports.

This research project will have important outcomes for the
              advancement of scientific knowledge.  It will contribute to a growing
              literature on how African environments are changing, on how population growth
              is affecting local resource use, and on land tenure relations and agrarian
              change.  This research also will contribute to development of more effective
              policies dealing with land rights in sub-Saharan Africa at a time when many
              governments, through pressure from international institutions, are rethinking
              land policy in ways that have serious implications for the welfare of
              villagers.

