Title       : Twin Boundaries in Superconducting YBa2Cu3O7-x: Twin Boundary Energy and Its
               Dependence on Dopants, Additives, and Processing Parameters for Engineering
               Fine Twins.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0214650

Award Number: 0214650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Siu-Wai Chan sc174@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Effective pinning of magnetic fluxes is imperative of sustaining critical
              current. Otherwise a voltage drop is induced by moving magnetic flux lines and
              resistance develops.  It is now recognized that flux-pinning by twin boundaries
              in YBa2Cu3O7-d (YBCO) exists but is highly dependent on the direction of
              flux-line motion.  Their presence has helped the YBCO to exhibit higher
              critical current densities at high temperatures and high magnetic fields than
              those of the Bi, Hg and Tl cuprates despite their higher critical temperatures.
                It follows that a higher twin density leads to a larger flux-pinning force
              and a higher critical current density in magnetic fields and temperatures that
              are more attractive for applications.  Yet very few efforts have been in
              engineering fine twins and twin domains to exploit their flux-pinning
              properties.  Our project is to come up with methods to engineer fine twin
              structure. To identify these methods, we first need to know the value of the
              twin boundary energy and its dependence on a number of materials processing
              parameters. Information on twin boundary energy and its dependence on
              processing parameters allows the optimization of twin structure by controlling
              these processing conditions. This information can be exploited to produce the
              best twin morphology, which leads to maximum flux pinning and high critical
              current density. Specifically, equipped with the information, we can refine the
              twin structure in YBCO systematically. This allows the systematic investigation
              of critical current density (Jc) by magnetization and twin microstructure by
              microscopy in search for optimal twin structure for enhanced critical current
              density.  Our proposed work will address the twin contribution to flux pinning
              and critical current density with the goal to obtain the optimal composition,
              additive, oxygenation and processing conditions for maximum flux pinning and
              highest Jc. This area of microstructure research is much ignored and can also
              provide excellent research training for graduate students.

Impact: The major
              problem, for industrial applications of high temperature superconductors, is
              their low critical-current density (a measure of current that can be
              transmitted without electrical resistance) caused by poor current transmission
              at the grain boundaries and insufficient flux-pinning centers at application
              temperatures and magnetic fields.  Twin boundaries in the high temperature
              superconductor YBa2Cu3O7-d (YBCO) are ubiquitous and have been proved to be
              effective pinning centers of magnetic fluxes in YBCO for (i) the practical
              range of operation at temperature ranging from -230 C to -190C and (ii)
              magnetic fields of the order of 20,000 times of the earth's magnetic field. New
              methods for engineering twin morphology will emerge from this proposed work
              that can be applied to YBCO coated tapes which can help to solve the long
              standing problem of low critical current density of the high temperature
              superconductors and allow board applications. Twinning as a material phenomenon
              affects important material properties in ferroelectrics, ferromagnetics,
              ferroelastics and intermetallic compounds with martensitic-transformation.  As
              such, what we learn from twinning in YBCO, can be directly applied to these
              technologically important materials to optimize their properties.  


