Title       : Identification, Estimation and Computation in Multi-Unit Auctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0214222

Award Number: 0214222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Pesendorfer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Estelle Cantillon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research studies identification and estimation in simultaneous multi-unit
              first-price auctions with and without combination bidding. The following issues
              are pursued: First, theoretical properties of bidding equilibria are examined.
              Conditions under which combination bidding may arise even in the absence of
              cost synergies are explored. It is shown that combination bidding may also
              serve as a tool to leverage market power across the different units. As a
              result, the welfare consequences of allowing combination bidding in the first
              price auction are ambiguous, and depend on the importance of the cost
              synergies. Second, it is investigated under what conditions bidders' private
              information can be identified from observed bid data under the assumption that
              bidders behave optimally. It is shown that synergistic effects are not
              identified if bidders are restricted to submit bids for stand-alone units only.
              A necessary condition for identification of synergies is that bidders are
              permitted to submit a full set of combination bids. Third, an estimation method
              is investigated that enables to quantify private information and synergistic
              effects in multi-unit auctions from observed bid data. The estimation method
              extends the single object method by Guerre, Perrigne and Vuong (2000) which is
              based on the first order condition of optimally chosen bids to a multi-object
              setting. Parametric estimation methods are considered. Fourth, data on auctions
              held by the London Transportation authority to award contracts to service bus
              routes have been collected. Two special features of these auctions are that
              several bus routes are auctioned at the same time, and that bidders may submit
              combination bids in addition to stand-alone bids. In other words, the London
              bus routes market is an example of a combinatorial auction. Fifth, the research
              develops numerical methods to calculate equilibrium outcomes in multi-unit
              first-price auctions under alternative auction rules. Specifically, equilibrium
              outcomes for auctions with and without combination bids will be compared.
              

This research complements recent theoretical advances in the design of
              multi-unit auctions by studying the identification and estimation problem and
              providing empirical evidence on a specific multi-unit auction market. The
              research is one of the first attempts to study identification and estimation in
              multi-unit auctions in general. It will advance empirical methods for
              multi-unit auctions. In addition, the analysis will develop tools to assess
              properties of multi-unit auction markets. Welfare gains (or losses) of
              permitting combination bidding in the London bus routes market will be
              determined. The magnitude of cost synergies and their effects on the efficiency
              of multi-unit auctions will be investigated. The adequacy of the current
              awarding scheme will be investigated. It will provide general guidance for
              markets in which multi-units are sold simultaneously. 

