Title       : The Effect of Educational Vouchers on Academic and Non-academic Outcomes:
               Experimental Evidence from a Natural Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0214308

Award Number: 0214308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414066             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Slonim rlsl8@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Bettinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Educational vouchers are one of the most hotly contested policies for improving
              the educational opportunities of disadvantaged students.  The research presents
              new evidence on the effects of educational vouchers on recipients.  Data for
              this research come from the Children's Scholarship Fund (CSF) of Toledo, Ohio. 
              CSF offers 4-year renewable, private school scholarships to low income, K-8th
              grade students in Northwest Ohio.  Between 1998 and 2001, almost 4,000 families
              applied for CSF scholarships, and CSF awarded more than 1,500 scholarships by
              lottery.  The study improves on existing research in two distinct ways.  First,
              since CSF administered the scholarships randomly, unsuccessful applicants
              provide an unbiased control group for voucher recipients.  Second, whereas most
              voucher research relies strongly on test scores to measure educational
              outcomes, this study develops means to assess both academic proficiency and
              behavioral characteristics that schools may influence.

Some of the outcome
              measures (e.g. test scores, school attendance, disciplinary problems, grade
              retention, parental involvement and educational attitudes) in the study are
              similar to other previous research on educational vouchers.  This study
              introduces also decision-making experiments as a means of measuring voucher and
              private schooling effects on personal characteristics, including
              overconfidence, generosity/altruism, patience and trust.  The inclusion of
              non-cognitive behavioral outcomes moves research beyond test scores to measure
              the effect of schooling on the development of "behavioral and personality
              traits." Recent literature argues that these behavioral characteristics
              influence economic development and prosperity.  If the study finds that voucher
              recipients are less overconfident, more generous, more patient and/or more
              trusting, then it may suggest that vouchers and private schooling help students
              to become less overconfident, more generous, more and/or more patient.  If this
              study finds that private schools and vouchers affect these behaviors in
              students, then researchers and policymakers may have to reevaluate cost/benefit
              analyses of private schools and vouchers based on test scores alone.

