Title       : Model Studies of Reversibly Interacting Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0214146

Award Number: 0214146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Shull k-shull@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The PI proposes to study interactions between surfaces and interfaces to which
              well-characterized distributions of adhesion molecules have been added.  The
              molecules are based on block copolymers consisting of hydrophobic and
              hydrophilic portions that are localized at a solid/liquid or liquid/liquid
              interface.  Experiments are designed to study a variety of attractive
              interactions between two such interfaces in aqueous media.  These attractive
              interactions are reversible, and result from specific interactions between
              functional groups attached to the hydrophilic portions of the block copolymers.
               Proposed experiments include studies of hydrophobic interactions between
              functional groups that are attached to the ends of the polymer chains,
              hydrogen-bonding interactions between functional groups that are attached to
              the ends of the polymer chains, and strong hydrogen-bonding interactions
              between a model receptor/ligand pair that has been well-characterized by the
              biophysics community.  The experiments will determine the ways that collective
              forces from individual adhesion molecules result in quantifiable attractive
              interactions between surfaces bearing multiple adhesive groups.  The proposed
              research will define the role of the surface, the effects of spatial
              distribution of adhesive molecules (uniformly distributed or clustered) and the
              lateral mobility of the adhesive molecules in the plane interface.  A series of
              contact experiments have been designed that are sensitive to interfacial
              interaction energies spanning several orders to magnitude.

The research
              provides a necessary link between the molecular-level information that is
              becoming increasingly available as a result of recent advances in nanoscience
              and nanotechnology, and the information that is needed for the appropriate
              design of biomaterials or self-assembling systems, where the relevant length
              scales are often in the micron range.  Development of experimental methods and
              theoretical models that can be utilized to make this connection between
              'nanoscopic' and 'microscopic' properties will be an important outcome of this
              research.  A micromechanics laboratory with enhanced capabilities for studies
              of 'soft' materials will also be available to scientists throughout
              Northwestern University and the their collaborators.  In addition, graduate and
              undergraduate students will be trained in aspects of surface science and
              mechanics, and in both physical and chemical aspects of polymer science.

