Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Too Close for Comfort:
               Elite Cues and Strategic Voting in Multicandidate Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0214677

Award Number: 0214677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3600               (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Aldrich aldrich@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The act of voting is one of the most sacred acts in a democracy. It is in the
              voting booth where citizens register their preferences over who should lead
              their nation. In some ways it seems a clear and simple act.: one should vote
              for the candidate they most prefer. However, in the presence of third parties,
              the evidence shows that many third party supporters abandon their fIrst
              preference to vote for their second preference. The mechanism behind this
              choice usually lies in the situation in which a voter's fIrst preference has no
              chance of winning so that voters do not want to cast a "wasted vote." Political
              scientists have formalized this logic in mathematical terms, taking into
              account the probability of a voter being decisive between pairs of candidates
              and their difference in utility between these pairs. 
While many studies have
              found that this model performs well in accounting for levels of strategic
              voting in different elections, one problem plagues these studies, namely most
              do not use a measure of the probability term that accounts for whether the
              voter will be decisive between pairs of candidates. While the logic behind
              strategic voting makes sense intuitively, the probability that one will cast a
              decisive vote will always be close to zero in a large electorate, such as the
              United States. If voters know that the probability of their vote being decisive
              is essentially zero, then why would they not just vote for their first
              preference? Riker and Ordeshook themselves acknowledged this problem and argued
              that people will systematically inflate the probability of being decisive, thus
              the p term will not be zero (1968). They argue that people might inflate the
              probability on their own accord or because of messages sent by elites
              indicating that p is much higher than it objectively is. 
Though this
              justification seems credible, few studies have examined whether people do
              inflate probabilities in the context of multicandidate elections (Blais, 2000)
              and whether elites play a role in influencing the variables in the voter's
              calculus (Hsieh et al, 1997). This research proposal address this question in
              the literature by examining elite cues in multicandidate elections. The primary
              purpose of this research is to show that one solution to the puzzle of why we
              even see strategic voting lies in the efforts by elites to influence the
              probability and utility terms in the individual's calculus. There are three key
              questions that the research seeks to answer. First of all, do elites try to
              send signals to convince voters to abandon their first preference and vote for
              their second preference? Second, are these signals effective? Finally, are
              there individual and contextual factors that account for who will accept such
              messages and who will not? 
The first hypothesis is that third party voters
              respond to persuasive cues by elites to abandon their first preference and vote
              for their second preference. Thus, the individual's perception of the variables
              in the individual calculus will be a function of the messages sent at the elite
              level. The results should show that individuals who receive messages
              encouraging them to vote strategically exhibit higher levels of such voting
              than individuals who do not receive these messages. Second, the effectiveness
              of such messages will be contingent on contextual factors, such as the source
              and type of message, as well as individual factors, such as one's level of
              political sophistication, external and internal political efficacy, and past
              voting behavior. An experimental design can clearly test these hypotheses by
              randomly assigning subjects to control and treated groups. 
This project makes
              several important contributions to political science. First of all, the project
              builds on the literature on strategic voting by filling in a missing part of
              the puzzle, the efforts by elites to influence the variables in the voter's
              calculus. The project also speaks to the literature on political persuasion.
              Most studies of persuasion look at the effect of messages on respondent's
              opinions on 
various issues. This study examines whether such messages can
              actually change the behavior of voters. Finally, this project contributes to
              the campaign and election literature, where the main fmding has been one of
              minimal effects for campaign messages. There might in fact be a stronger effect
              of campaign messages once we examine voters who have an incentive to switch
              their vote. 





