Title       : Collaborative research: Complex dynamics, criticality and cascading events in
               power system blackouts and communication networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0214369

Award Number: 0214369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Dobson dobson@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Large scale utility electrical power transmission systems such as the power
              system of the Western United States can and do suffer cascading events leading
              to widespread blackouts. These blackouts severely impact the public, commerce,
              and government and are a vulnerability in the nation's infrastructure.  Rather
              than focusing on the detailed causes of individual blackouts, this project
              addresses the global, complex system dynamics of a long series of blackouts.
              New models, simulation and analysis methods will be developed to capture the
              essentials of criticality, self-organization and cascading failure. Particular
              attention will be given to the power tails of probability distributions of
              blackout sizes that occur in North American blackout data and generally in
              systems at criticality.  These power tails imply that large, catastrophic
              blackouts are much more likely than predicted by conventional risk analyses.
              The project will develop new risk analysis methods and explore operating
              techniques to mitigate the risks of major blackouts.  Communication networks
              such as the Internet also develop major cascading disruptions and work will
              also be pursued in this application to maintain some focus on universal
              features of disruptions in large, engineered networks of societal importance.
              The expected outcomes are the ability to understand, statistically analyze and
              to some extent mitigate major cascading disruptions in power transmission and
              communication networks.  The scientific outcomes are an improved understanding
              and new application of complex system dynamics to the engineering and analysis
              of stressed networks. Educational outcomes include the training of
              undergraduate and graduate students in a multidisciplinary team.
