Title       : Random and Dynamic Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0214050

Award Number: 0214050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faruk Gul fgul@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal contains two related research projects on dynamic choice. Both of
              these projects will be undertaken jointly with Wolfgang Pesendorfer of
              Princeton University.
Often, observed choice behavior will not be consistent
              with a single, deterministic choice criterion (i.e., utility function). That
              is, the decision-maker will make different choices in virtually identical
              situations. Such behavior is best modeled as random choice. The first project
              entitled "Random Utility, Uncertain Moods and Bounded Rationality," addresses
              the following question: when can a random choice be interpreted as the
              consequence of maximizing a randomly chosen criterion for ranking the
              alternatives.  Hence, we investigate the consequences of behavior that is
              derived from a fixed, probabilistic rule for selecting a utility function.
              After the utility function is selected, the agent chooses the alternative that
              maximizes it among the available options. This way of interpreting behavior is
              important for the analysis of aggregate data, boundedly rational behavior and
              situations with asymmetric information. In our work, we study choice over risk
              prospects and randomly selected expected utility functions.

The second
              project entitled "The Revealed Preference Theory of Changing Tastes" studies
              dynamic inconsistency. Dynamic inconsistency refers to the tendency of agents
              to make different choices from the same set of alternatives depending on when
              they are asked to choose. For example, an individual who prefers a larger later
              reward to a smaller earlier reward may reverse his preference as the date of
              the smaller earlier reward gets closer. Many decision problems require the
              agent to make choices at various moments in time. In such problems, the key is
              how the decision-maker forms expectations about his own future behavior. This
              research takes the position that the agent's beliefs regarding his future
              behavior can best be analyzed through his current behavior and seeks to
              identify these beliefs through choice experiments. That is, we wish to identify
              methods for determining the agent's expectations about his future behavior from
              actual choices made in the current period. The advantage of the revealed
              preference approach is that preferences over choice problems are - at least in
              principal - observable.
 

