Title       : Collaborative Research: Behavioral Causes of Information Distortion in Supply
               Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0214217

Award Number: 0214217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30457              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel T. Croson crosonr@wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Managing a supply chain has been shown to be prone to systematic errors that
              often lead to spectacularly dysfunctional outcomes.  For example, the drilling
              for oil and gas fluctuates three times more than the actual petroleum
              production, the demand for machine tools is at least twice as variable as
              automobile sales (the auto industry being the main consumer of machine tools),
              and the production of semiconductors is much more variable than industrial
              production as a whole (reported in Sterman 2000, pp. 666-667).  

This
              pattern of "oscillation, amplification, and phase lag," known collectively as
              the bullwhip effect, has been also noted in individual firms' supply chains
              (see Lee et al. 2000), as well as in the laboratory Sterman (1989).  Sterman's
              results demonstrated that individuals do not act optimally even in the
              relatively simple laboratory setting, but significantly underweight inventory
              they already ordered that has not yet arrived (called the supply line).  He
              concluded, "the key to improved performance lies within the policy individuals
              use to manage the system and not in the external environment.  Even a perfect
              forecast will not prevent a manager who ignores the supply line from over
              ordering." (Sterman 1989, p. 336).

The bullwhip effect is costly because it
              causes excessive inventories, poor customer service, and unnecessary capital
              investment.  We separate explanations of the causes of the bullwhip effect into
              those that rely on participants' own cognitive limitations, their inability to
              determine the optimal way to adjust their inventory position, and those that
              rely on coordination, participants' beliefs about others' abilities or actions.
               The experiments we propose to conduct will be using both traditional supply
              chains with four participants and supply chains where a human participant plays
              one of the roles, and the other three roles are played by computerized agents
              programmed (and known) to act optimally.  If deviations from optimal behavior
              are caused by an individual's cognitions, behavior should be the same in the
              treatments with all human subjects as with one human subject.  If instead,
              behavior is being caused by an individual's beliefs about the decisions his
              supply chain partners make, behavior should be worse in treatments with all
              human subjects.

The results from our study can have potentially broad
              implications on the type of decision support tools that should be included in
              Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software.  If behavioral causes of the
              bullwhip effect are important than the recent focus on reducing operational
              causes provides at best an incomplete solution.  The question of what
              information or tools can be effective in mitigating behavioral causes of the
              bullwhip effect has not been addressed in the literature, and it is our hope
              that this study will open the door to this new research agenda. 

