Title       : SBIR Phase I: Hybrid Coatings for Dental Biofilm Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0214074

Award Number: 0214074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don B. Elrod don.elrod@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    979/693-0017

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
              synthesize and test  lubricious/antimicrobial coatings to prevent biofilm
              formation in dental water lines. Microbial contamination of water delivered by
              dental-unit water systems continues to be a significant problem. The most
              common cause of dental-unit contamination is believed to be the formation and
              subsequent sloughing off of microbial biofilm from the surfaces of tubing
              within dental-unit water systems. Persons who are immunocompromised may be at
              risk due to some opportunistic microorganisms present in most biofilm.
              Contaminated water may be ingested by the patient or be aerosolized and inhaled
              by the patient or dental worker. During the Phase I research, antimicrobial
              monomers will be incorporated into copolymers with additional monomers, that
              upon wetting, cause the coating to become quite lubricious. The coatings will
              be tested in order to evaluate their effectiveness in preventing biofilm
              formation. The lubricious component will help prevent microbial attachment
              while the antimicrobial constituent will eradicate microorganisms on contact.
              The antimicrobial and lubricious parts of the coating are expected to perform
              synergistically when used in combination in order to significantly inhibit
              biofilm formation.

The commercial applications of this project will be in a
              number of areas, including medical, industrial, marine and consumer products.
              Specific examples include the following: medical coatings for catheters,
              stents, endoscopes, implants and endotracheal tubes; various industrial
              coatings; food/beverage packaging; coatings for ship hulls; and coatings for
              various consumer products.
