Title       : The Economic Impact of the New Deal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0214395

Award Number: 0214395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shawn E. Kantor skantor@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Price V. Fishback  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Horrace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Faced with an economy in recession, policy-makers today have proposed a variety
              of federal programs and projects that they believe will stimulate the sluggish
              economy.  An underlying premise of the recent stimulus proposals is that the
              federal government can successfully use fiscal policy to grow the economy.  The
              objective of this research is to better understand the economic impact of such
              fiscal stimulus.  Perhaps the greatest example of federal peace-time fiscal
              intervention was the New Deal in which President Franklin D. Roosevelt
              introduced a myriad of programs designed to aid in the "relief, recovery, and
              reform" of the depressed economy.  Despite the great importance of this
              remarkable episode of U.S. economic history, there has been very little attempt
              to quantitatively analyze the economic effects of the New Deal.  To help fill
              this gap this project will provide a series of studies on the impact of the New
              Deal on a variety of measures of economic activity, including real estate
              wealth, housing values and construction, retail sales, manufacturing activity,
              agricultural development, criminal behavior, as well as demographic changes
              attributable to the New Deal.  Since most of the research focuses on the impact
              of the New Deal at the county level, it is important to control for spillover
              effects from New Deal spending in neighboring counties and economic activity in
              neighboring areas.  In addition, there may be unmeasurable economic shocks in
              one county that might spillover into neighboring counties.  
      Measuring
              the impact of the New Deal on local economies is complicated further because in
              most cases we probably cannot treat New Deal spending as purely exogenous.  New
              Deal expenditures might have been related to economic activity in conflicting
              ways.  Given the stated goals of the New Deal, we might anticipate that the New
              Dealers distributed more resources to areas with lower incomes or to areas with
              higher unemployment or slower growth.  On the other hand, many of the New Deal
              programs required that the state or local government have the resources to seek
              help for projects from the federal government or go even further by providing
              matching funds to help finance the projects.  Thus, New Deal spending might
              have been positively related to measures of economic activity.  To deal with
              the geographic spillover effects and simultaneity issues, we have adopted an
              econometric model that incorporates both the simultaneous relationship between
              New Deal spending and economic activity and the spatial correlation inherent in
              the deterministic and random components of the empirical model.  This research
              program takes advantage of the new developments in spatial econometric theory
              that enable researchers to better understand the impact of public policy, while
              controlling for the geographic spillovers and simultaneity problems that
              inevitably undermine precise measurement.   
       Providing a better
              understanding of the economic impact of the New Deal is highly valuable on at
              least two general levels.  First, despite the significance of the Great
              Depression and the New Deal to U.S. economic history, very little is known
              about the economic consequences of President Roosevelt's experiment. 
              Therefore, this research will add significantly to the history of the Great
              Depression.  Second, the usefulness of government spending to stimulate a
              stagnant economy remains a deeply controversial modern public policy debate. 
              Thus, one of the central goals of this research project is to shed light on
              this question by looking to a time when government intervention was likely to
              have the greatest impact - the Great Depression.

