Title       : A Regulated Plant Virus Expression System for Efficient Production of Human
               Therapeutics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0214527

Award Number: 0214527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $755013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. McDonald kamcdonald@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bryce W. Falk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan P. Jackman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abhaya M. Dandekar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to produce a plant virus based expression
              system combined with plant cell culture as a means for producing human
              therapeutic proteins.  In particular, this project will genetically engineer
              host plant cells so that recombinant plant virus amplicons (self-replicating
              viral RNA containing a foreign gene) can be produced intracellularly, under the
              control of a chemically or metabolically-inducible promoter. The major goals of
              this project include: (1) the design of the recombinant viral gene constructs
              which contain all of the necessary components for high level production of
              viral mRNA, efficient viral replication, efficient foreign gene expression and
              extracellular targeting, 2) the design and creation of transgenic plant cell
              lines utilizing tightly regulated, chemically and/or metabolically inducible
              promoters which restrict viral production under non-induced conditions and
              allow high level transcription of the recombinant viral RNA under induction
              conditions, and 3) optimization of plant cell bioreactor conditions and
              operating strategies during growth and induction to maximize volumetric
              productivity of the product and minimize recovery/purification costs.  This
              project will focus on the production of two model proteins (green fluorescent
              protein (GFP) and human a1-antitrypsin (AAT)) in tobacco cell cultures
              utilizing a cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) amplicon under the control of specific
              chemical and metabolically regulated promoters in a membrane bioreactor.
              

This project involves a multidisciplinary approach combining molecular
              biology and virology strategies with quantitative process engineering.  In
              addition, an integrated training program consisting of a collaborative,
              multidisciplinary team approach to research, combined with coursework, a
              focused study group, seminars, retreats and an industrial internship to provide
              breadth in biotechnology, is part of this project.  Graduate students,
              postdoctoral researchers and undergraduates will participate in this training
              program.

