Title       : Religious Radicals and Fertility: An Economic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0214701

Award Number: 0214701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eli Berman eli@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project studies the economics and demographics of religious radicalism,
              particularly in Islam. Radical Islam is an ascendant geopolitical force. Like
              the Christian Anabaptist sects and the Jewish Ultra-Orthodox, Radical Islam is
              a relatively recent religious innovation. It arose in the mid 20th century in
              what historians describe as a reaction to the incursion of secular, market
              driven, Western culture into traditional society. Like those Christian and
              Jewish sects its growth represents a paradox to economists. As markets increase
              the shadow value of time price theory predicts the evolution of time-efficient
              forms of religious practice. Yet a religious sect evolves which insists on an
              increasingly time-intensive version of practice, and paradoxically it
              flourishes. Like radical Christian and Jewish sects, radical Islam owes part of
              its remarkable growth to high fertility, especially in contrast to the
              fertility decline of the mainstream Muslim majority.
      This research makes
               and explores the consequences of four arguments: First, the formation of
              radical religious groups has an economic explanation derived from the theory of
              clubs, which rationalizse both the increased stringency of practice and high
              (or even rising) fertility. Second, there is strong evidence that radical
              religious groups can raise fertility rates. At least three groups have
              experienced protracted episodes of fertility increases over the past 20 years:
              Iranians, Palestinians and Ultra-Orthodox Jews. High fertility among the
              radical religious, against a background of fertility transition among
              traditional and secularizing groups could undermine political stability and
              economic development in the Muslim world. Third, I propose estimating the size
              of differential fertility rates of radical religious groups by linking
              indicators of religious affiliation to micro data from household surveys which
              report on economic variables and fertility. This allows a test of the
              hypothesis that subsidies to radical religious groups are strongly pronatalist.
              The feasibility of these procedures is illustrated in four cases, Israeli
              Ultra-Orthodox Jews, the Muslim Brothers in Israel, Muslim religious community
              schools in Indonesia and the Muslim Brothers in Palestine. In the first case
              results from completed work are reported and in the next two preliminary
              results are given. Finally, fertility is an easily quantified way that radical
              religious groups affect behavior, but not the only way. I also examine the
              advantage of religious sects such as the Taliban and Hamas in operating
              militias and in dispatching suicide bombers. This advantage can explain why
              radical religious sects so often turn to violent action.

