Title       : Acquisition of Gas Chromatography Equipment for Research in Microbiology and
               River Ecology at Three Undergraduate Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0214978

Award Number: 0214978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101808             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Glick dlglick@kings.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Mangan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Pidcock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Sulzinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : King's College
	      133 North River Street
	      Wilkes-Barre, PA  187110851    570/208-5900

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
A National Science Foundation grant has been awarded to King's College for
              microbiology laboratory equipment that will be used in undergraduate research
              at three local colleges.   David Glick, Ph.D. and Brian Mangan, Ph.D. of King's
              College will share a new gas chromatography system installed at King's with
              Michael Sulzinski, Ph.D. of the University of Scranton and Kenneth Pidcock,
              Ph.D. of Wilkes University.  

The grant will demonstrate that shared use of
              equipment can foster the integration of research and education among
              undergraduate microbiology students and four highly skilled faculty
              investigators at three institutions of higher education.

Two gas
              chromatographs configured with a computer and special software will facilitate
              new research in two areas.  Separate, but related, research will identify and
              analyze lipids (fats) in bacteria, fungi, and fish through laboratory studies
              at the three institutions.  Additional research will focus on Susquehanna River
              ecology, analyzing the effect of the environmental contaminant, polychlorinated
              biphenyl (PCB), on fish, and the effect of acid mine drainage on the abundance
              and diversity of river bacteria and fungi.     One of the gas chromatographs
              will be dedicated to analyzing lipids (fats) extracted from bacteria and fungi.
              Once the lipid analysis has been done, the computer software supplied will
              allow the identification of the particular bacteria or fungus.  The other gas
              chromatograph will be dedicated to the analysis of an important environmental
              contaminant known as PCB (Polychlorinated Biphenyl). This second instrument
              will also be used to examine which chemicals, in a mix, bacteria
              degrade.

Prior to this NSF grant award, no institution of higher education
              in northeastern Pennsylvania possessed a gas chromatography system configured
              for research to identify and analyze microbes by their fatty acid profile. The
              research also has basic scientific importance. It will provide new insights
              into the ecology of soil and river bacteria and fungi as well as increasing our
              knowledge of the impact of PCB contamination on the life cycles of fish.     

                 
The acquisition of this important equipment will strengthen the
              integration of undergraduate education, research and research training at all
              three institutions of higher education.    



