Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Fresh Perspective: Isotopic Evidence
               for Diet in Mississippi River Valley of W-C Illinois, and Comparison with
               Illinois River Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0214239

Award Number: 0214239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $812                (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Cachel cachel@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study will extend a survey of prehistoric diet in the Mississippi Valley of
              west-central Illinois using stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen.
              West-central Illinois has been the subject of much research into prehistoric
              biology, the result of sizeable skeletal collections and well-described
              archaeology. Most of this research, however, has focused on the lower Illinois
              River valley while the prehistory of the neighboring Mississippi River valley
              is much less well known. This project has already successfully produced new
              dietary data for the archaeological sites of Joe Gay, Lawrence Gay, Yokem, and
              Shild, spanning a period of over 1200 years from the Middle Woodland to
              Mississippian cultural eras, and provided interesting and unexpected findings.
              This study will further investigate these initial results, and also extend the
              geographical coverage of the survey to include a new site, Knight, further
              south in the Mississippi Valley. 
	
The innovative bone chemistry techniques
              used provide a new type of information to archaeologists. Previously
              researchers could only study the ephemeral remains of meals or tools used to
              produce food, and from these try to infer what prehistoric people were eating.
              Since food remains are poorly preserved, archaeologist's conclusions were only
              'educated guesses'. Bone chemistry allows us to directly study individuals who
              lived in the past, and state whether they were eating native plants or the new
              corn introduced from tropical regions to the south, and also compare the amount
              of protein in people's diets. This ability to look at individuals also allows
              us for the first time to look at variation within communities - for example
              discrimination in who had access to precious meat or fish - rather than the
              general statements about group diet to which archaeologists were previously
              confined.
	
The new data from the Mississippi Valley show that the pattern of
              corn introduction seems to have been similar to the Illinois Valley, but
              apparently with considerable variability in maize consumption when it became
              popular during the Late Woodland period. This variability in bone isotope
              values is such that they encompass a dietary corn component varying from near
              zero, to a very high percentage, within the same population. These
              intra-population differences are an enigma. Neither sex nor age explains them.
              This study will establish relative dates for the burials using fluoride dating,
              to establish if this is true contemporary variation in corn consumption within
              the population, or instead the result of minor temporal variation, indicating
              that corn was introduced very quickly. Either conclusion would be of great
              relevance to our knowledge of how maize was introduced and established in
              prehistoric populations.
	
This study will also further investigate
              geographical variation, both within the Mississippi Valley itself, and between
              the two valleys. Initial results show that protein consumption was in the
              Mississippi Valley at almost every period higher than in the Illinois Valley,
              possibly the result of different access to protein in diverse riverside
              environments. The Mississippi Valley sites already analyzed are, however, close
              together, and this study will extend the geographical coverage of the survey to
              include the Knight site, further south, and closer to the Illinois Valley.

