Title       : Bayesian Analysis of Chronometric Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0214574

Award Number: 0214574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trisha Van Zandt trish@maigret.psy.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario Peruggia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will develop accurate and powerful Bayesian modeling and
              computational methods for the problem of response time (RT) analysis.  Although
              Bayesian techniques are well established in other fields, social scientists
              very rarely use them because they require a considerable investment in
              computational resources as well as additional statistical training.  The
              project will develop a number of strategies that will improve the analysis of
              RT data, including analyses that consider theories about how RTs are produced
              and new procedures that can help untrained practitioners use Bayesian methods
              without too much inconvenience.  The study also undertakes a program of
              education and dissemination to improve the overall quality of statistical
              analyses of RT data.  Thus, this research will result in new and better
              statistical procedures specific for RT (and similar chronometric) data.

The
              importance of this project is considerable.  How well a person performs a task
              is often evaluated by way of how quickly he or she can respond during the task.
               Measurements of RTs are important for both theoretical and pragmatic reasons. 
              Theoretically, RTs are used to test hypotheses about cognitive structure, the
              ways in which people use and process information, and how changes in the
              environment influence human behavior.  Pragmatically, RTs are important for
              evaluating human performance in many areas.  They assist machine interface
              design decisions, such as the optimal way to present information to a pilot or
              the best place where to put a turn signal lever.  They are also used in
              medicine; diagnoses of some organic brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease
              or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder can be informed by a patient's RTs
              on certain kinds of tests.  Many of the statistical procedures used to test
              hypotheses based on RTs are suboptimal.  They depend on oversimplifying
              assumptions about RT data that are usually incorrect, and consequently the
              inferences that are made about RTs collected in different environments can be
              faulty.  This project will result in more accurate characterization of RT data
              and therefore improved decision making about human capabilities and disease.
