Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Recasts, Learner Perceptions, and L2 Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0214188

Award Number: 0214188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11545              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison Mackey mackeya@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Alison Mackey, Ms. Takako Egi will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation on second language learning. She will study recasts,
              a type of feedback where teachers or native speakers reformulate learners'
              problematic utterances without changing the original meanings (e.g., Learner:
              "I have a three key"; Teacher: "three keys"). Ms. Egi will focus on the
              question of whether learners perceive recasts as responses to the content or to
              both the content and grammatical form of their utterances. Her experimental
              research will involve 70 learners of Japanese whose knowledge of the language
              will be tested before and after communicating with a native speaker of
              Japanese. The native speaker will provide recasts following learners'
              problematic utterances in those conversations. The learners will also be
              interviewed about their perceptions of the feedback that they receive. Their
              perceptions of recasts will be analyzed in relationship to their improvement in
              Japanese as measured by comparing pre-test and post-test results.

This
              research is significant both for theories of language learning and for the
              practice of second language teaching. It will advance theory of second language
              acquisition by providing a finely-grained analysis of the developmental
              benefits of recasts. The project will also provide classroom teachers with
              guidelines about effective feedback in the second language classroom. 


