Title       : Collaborative Research on Behavioral Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0214147

Award Number: 0214147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Rabin rabin@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although the rational-choice model used by economists has yielded an array of
              insights across a broad range of human activities, research from psychology
              suggests that it is inaccurate in some systematic and important ways. This
              project will continue an agenda of integrating psychologically more realistic
              assumptions about human behavior into formal economic models. Much of the
              research will focus on intertemporal choice, and in particular on two specific
              more realistic assumptions. First, whereas the rational-choice model assumes
              that people do not change their willingness to delay gratification over time,
              evidence suggests that, from a prior perspective, people would like to behave
              patiently, while at the moment of action, people behave impatiently. Second,
              whereas the rational-choice model assumes that people correctly predict future
              tastes, evidence suggests people tend to exaggerate the degree to which their
              future tastes will resemble their current tastes. This project will investigate
              the implications of these errors in three distinct environments. First, the
              project will study procrastination, both patterns of procrastinatory behavior
              and policies designed to combat procrastination. Second, the project will study
              distortions in consumption behavior when the pleasure generated by consumption
              depends on one's accustomed or habitual consumption level. Third, the project
              will study the consumption of harmful addictive substances, and in particular
              whether and how these errors can cause people to hurt themselves by developing
              harmful addictions (the rational-choice model can attribute harmful addictions
              only to bad luck).  The project will also investigate additional more realistic
              assumptions.

This research, and the broader agenda of which it is a part,
              will dramatically improve economic analysis, and promote a more realistic
              analysis of policies designed to address savings behavior, addiction,
              procrastination, obesity, and similar phenomena. For many questions, the
              standard rational-choice model provides a satisfactory apparatus.  But for
              other questions, such as why do people procrastinate, develop harmful
              addictions, or are overweight, the rational-choice model is importantly flawed,
              requiring implausible explanations for observed behavior and leading to harmful
              policy recommendations.  The research demonstrates how economists can derive
              alternative more realistic assumptions from research in psychology, and how
              these alternative assumptions can provide better explanations for behavior, and
              yield more sensible policy recommendations.

