Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Dynamics of Dominance:
               Party Government Duration and Change in Parliamentary Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0214315

Award Number: 0214315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7732               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kaare Strom kstrom@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This Doctoral Dissertation addresses the issue of party longevity (in
              government) in parliamentary democracies.  Some political parties come into
              power and control government for less than a month, while others maintain power
              for decades. This project conducts cross-national quantitative analyses of
              party government duration and change in eighteen parliamentary democracies over
              fifty years. It examines party government in Japan, Norway, and Sweden more
              closely to better understand factors that may be imperfectly captured in the
              cross-national quantitative data. NSF support will be used to go to Japan,
              collect and code the necessary data and conduct elite interviews and archival
              work for further evidence on party government duration and change in Japan.
              

The duration of party government has significant implications for
              policymaking and governance, for the very nature of democracy, yet it has not
              been rigorously studied -only cabinet duration has been carefully examined.
              This project uses a theoretic framework based on understanding party government
              as an equilibrium outcome of the strategic interaction among political actors.
              Party government duration is a function of the stability of the equilibrium and
              changes in the preferences and beliefs of parties, parliamentarians and voters.
              Hypotheses derived from a model of party government and the existing literature
              on parliamentary democracies, electoral systems, and voting behavior are tested
              using cross-national quantitative analyses and more in- depth case studies of
              three countries. Both existing data and newly collected and operationalized
              variables will be included in the analyses. 

The dissertation research made
              possible by this grant allows the co-Principal Investigator to collect and code
              data on party government in Japan in a manner that is standardized with other
              large cross-national databases of parliamentary democracies. The data collected
              will be made publicly available and will be useful for scholarship of Japanese
              politics that seeks to compare Japan to other parliamentary democracies as well
              as for cross-national quantitative scholarship on parliamentary and coalition
              government. The research helps promote the study of Japanese politics in the
              context of broader comparative study of parliamentary democracies and helps
              develop a better understanding the nature of democracy in parliamentary
              democracies and the dynamics of party government and political party systems.
              

