Title       : Corporate Turnarounds: An Experimental Examination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0214310

Award Number: 0214310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236321             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Cooper djc13@guinness.som.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For decades, organizational change has been a topic of interest for scholars in
              economics and management.  A particularly difficult and important sort of
              change occurs when under performing firms attempt to reinvent themselves.  For
              such firms, executing a successful turnaround can determine whether the firm
              survives with both shareholder profits and employee security riding on the
              outcome.  Understanding how to most efficiently turn around failing companies
              is therefore a topic of great economic import.  Complicating such turnarounds,
              a need for coordinated changes in behavior and expectations often exists across
              widely diverse groups of managers and employees.  Intuitively, this is like
              revamping a football team's passing game - signing the greatest wide receivers
              in the history of the NFL won't help if the quarterback keeps throwing the ball
              ten yards over their heads.   To quote one well-known case study of a corporate
              turnaround, efforts to change the firm need to be 'right-away and all at once'
              (Knez and Simester, in press).  In this study we examine how such coordinated
              changes across a firm can be made most effectively, and how the resulting
              improvements can be made permanent.

To examine these questions, we plan to
              use controlled laboratory experiments to study corporate turnarounds.  Such
              experiments serve as a valuable complement to field studies of corporate
              turnarounds because they allow us to look at a tightly controlled environment
              where we can easily observe all the possible causes of change.  Our experiments
              look at the performance of a small simulated firm.  Using a simple environment,
              we first push the experimental firm into a situation where it is performing
              poorly.  Firm employees are coordinated on low effort levels, causing low
              productivity and producing low payoffs for both the firm and the employees. 
              Critically, there exist alternative situations in which employees coordinate on
              higher effort levels, productivity is dramatically increased, and both firm and
              employees earn higher payoffs.  Our study then focuses on two issues.  First,
              how can the firm most efficiently be extricated from its bad situation and
              moved to a good situation?  Possible tools we plan to examine include changes
              in the firm's incentive system for employees, improved communication within the
              firm, and the provision of high performing external examples.  Second, does
              behavior by agents within the firm display sufficiently strong history
              dependence that a shift to a better situation can be maintained even after the
              mechanisms used to affect the change are removed?    For example, suppose a
              good outcome is affected through a large increase in incentive pay.  Can the
              firm increase the incentive pay without employees sliding back to their old
              unproductive ways?  


