Title       : Trade Bargaining with Externalities, Imperfect Competition and Rules versus
               Power: Interpreting and Evaluating the Rules of the GATT/WTO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0214021

Award Number: 0214021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyle Bagwell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Staiger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding trade negotiations from an economic perspective  is not an easy
              task. Within a terms-of-trade driven Prisoner's dilemma framework, the
              fundamental international inefficiency that a trade agreement can solve relates
              to the cost-shifting that arises through terms-of-trade movements when
              governments protect import competing sectors unilaterally. By shifting some of
              the costs of this protection on to foreign exporters, each government
              over-protects its import competing sectors relative to what would be
              internationally efficient in light of its underlying preferences and the
              preferences of other governments.  The result is that there is too little
              market access in the world in the absence of a trade agreement.  From this
              perspective, the purpose of a trade agreement is to expand market access to
              efficient levels.

In our proposed research, we focus on three distinct
              aspects of GATT/WTO bargaining: bilateral tariff bargaining in the presence of
              multiparty externalities; bargaining over tariffs while maintaining unilateral
              control over national competition policies; and the broader choice of a
              rules-based versus power-based negotiating forum.This characterization of the
              role of trade agreements is quite simple, yet it is also quite general,
              applying to a wide variety of political-economy settings.  But even given this
              characterization, there is still the question of how trade negotiations might
              be structured most effectively.  As it happens, the World Trade Organization
              (WTO) - and GATT, its predecessor organization created in 1947 - is not simply
              an agreement to implement a particular point on the efficiency frontier. 
              Rather the GATT/WTO is a negotiating forum that is shaped by a set of rules,
              and subject to these rules member governments are then left to negotiate when,
              what and with whom they please. These rules may have important implications for
              the bargaining outcomes, and they may play important efficiency-enhancing
              roles. In our proposed research, we focus on three distinct aspects of GATT/WTO
              bargaining: bilateral tariff bargaining in the presence of multiparty
              externalities; bargaining over tariffs while maintaining unilateral control
              over national competition policies; and the broader choice of a rules-based
              versus power-based negotiating forum.

