Title       : A Simulation-Based Information-Theoretic Estimator of Economic Models with
               Unobserved Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0214068

Award Number: 0214068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne Schennach smschenn@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the most difficult aspects of the empirical testing of economic models is
              the presence of variables that influence the behavior of the economic system
              under study but that are not observed by researchers. A considerable number of
              innovations in applied and theoretical economics have consisted of uncovering
              specific sets of assumptions that permit the determination of the parameters of
              interest, despite the presence of these unobservable, or latent, variables. The
              proposed research project devises a general methodology to handle such
              situations by combining two areas of research that have received a considerable
              attention in the statistics and economics literature over the past decade,
              namely, simulation-based and generalized empirical likelihood approaches.
              Simulation-based approaches offer the advantage of replacing tedious algebraic
              manipulations by a large number of simple calculations that can easily be
              handled by today's computers. Unfortunately, these approaches typically require
              researchers to make assumptions regarding the distribution of the unobservable
              variables. The present project avoids this limitation by employing techniques
              related to generalized empirical likelihood estimators which have been
              specifically aimed at replacing assumptions regarding the distribution of a
              variable by less restrictive assumptions regarding the moments of a variable,
              such as its mean or its variance. The approach is general, in the sense that it
              applies to any model that can be expressed in terms of (potentially nonlinear)
              moments, conditional mean or independence assumptions, in both identified and
              set-identified settings. The asymptotic, or large sample, properties of this
              new estimator for latent variable models are investigated. Also, the
              construction of the estimator has implications even in the absence of
              unobservable variables, as it suggests the use of an estimator closely related
              to, but not a member of, the widely studied generalized empirical likelihood
              family. In particular, the estimator combines the two most popular generalized
              empirical likelihoods, namely Empirical Likelihood and Exponential Tilting. The
              research project compares this new estimator, called exponentially tilted
              empirical likelihood, to existing estimators.

      The goal of this project
              is to enable researchers to employ more realistic economic models   without
              being hindered by the complexity of the resulting equations, through the use of
              general-purpose numerical methods. It also furthers the ongoing search for
              statistical methods that make the best possible use of available data.

