Title       : GC-MS for Kinetics, Catalysis, and Reaction Engineering Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0214107

Award Number: 0214107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62794              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip E. Savage psavage@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph T. Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erdogan Gulari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Scott Fogler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to purchase a GC-MS system for use on research
              projects directed by Professors Phillip Savage and three co-PIs at the
              University of  Michigan. These investigators share common interests in kinetics
              and catalysis. A gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with a mass spectrometric (MS)
              detector is an extremely powerful analytical instrument. The GC can separate
              individual sample constituents in a complex mixture of reaction products, and
              the MS provides both universal and specific detection of the eluting compounds.
              The combination of separation by GC and detection by MS allows the complete
              resolution, qualitative identification, and quantitative analysis of even
              complex reaction product spectra. This feature renders GC-MS invaluable for
              experimental research in kinetics, catalysis, and reaction engineering.  The
              ongoing projects have broader impacts in industrial applications.  The research
              projects for which the GC-MS would be used include exploring the use of
              high-temperature water as an environmentally benign reaction medium for
              different industrial chemistries, reducing the formation of chlorinated
              dibenzo-p-dioxins during the production of pentachlorophenol, developing
              high-activity catalysts and novel strategies for selective catalytic reduction
              of NOx, elucidating the aging mechanism for petroleum asphaltenes, and
              preventing wax deposition in sub-sea oil pipelines. The proposed activities are
              expected to advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,
              training, and learning.
