Title       : LTREB: Long-term Consequences of Biochemical and Biogeochemical Changes in the
               Horseshoe Bend Agroecosystem, Athens, GA.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0214946

Award Number: 0214946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              D. A. Crossley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Hendrix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0214946
Coleman
Understanding many soil processes, including the accumulation
              of organic matter and
the formation of soil aggregates, requires research that
              is conducted over decadal time
periods. The dynamics of soil organic matter
              and soil fauna at the Horseshoe Bend
(HSB) agroecosystem site in Georgia have
              been studied in replicated experimental
plots since 1978. Analyses indicate
              that the experimental treatments (no-tillage and
conventional-tillage regimes)
              are continuing to diverge. It is essential to continue the
experiments for an
              additional six years, to enable prediction of what the long-term
consequences
              of our manipulations will be. Consequently, a continuation of ongoing
LTREB
              research on soil processes in no-till and conventional till plots at HSB is
              proposed, with
some significant changes. The new research focuses on two
              related areas:
1) long-term measurements of the gradually-increasing base of
              soil organic matter from
C3-pathway plants, in crop rotations that have been
              in effect since 1997.
2) following the production, accumulation, fate and
              ecological effects of the Bt proteins
from the summer planting of Bt (and
              non-Bt) cotton in subplots within our main plots.
The relationship between
              these focal areas is simple. The variation in the size of soil
aggregates may
              influence the sequestration of Bt toxins, and their breakdown products,
within
              soils. It has already been shown that no-tillage management systems at
              HSB
generate an increasing representation of soil macroaggregates in
              comparison to the
markedly reduced macroaggregates in our conventional tillage
              plots. Therefore, it is
hypothesized that no-tillage systems will sequester
              more Bt-related products than will
conventional-tillage plots.
Several
              short-term studies (see references in Project Description) have failed to
              detect
deleterious changes in non-target soil fauna as a result of Bt in crop
              residues. There
are three possible explanations for this: a) that no
              deleterious effects exist, b) that short-
term experiments do not adequately
              predict the long-term consequences of repeated
exposure to Bt residues, and c)
              that effects are contingent upon properties of the soil
such as aggregate
              size. It would seem prudent to be able to distinguish among
              these
possibilities and the long-term plantings at HSB will allow that to
              occur.
