Title       : SBIR Phase I: Membrane-Electrolyte Assemblies (MEAs) for Small Fuel Cell Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0214598

Award Number: 0214598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiang (Ethan) Wei qwei@chemat.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chemat Tech Inc
	      9036 Winnetka Avenue
	      Northridge, CA  913243235    818/727-9786

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
              highly proton conductive, water insoluble and thermally stable electrolytes for
              proton exchange membrane fuel cells, based on a hybrid membrane of a
              functionalized polyoxometalate (POM) cluster in a sol-gel matrix. Phase I will
              focus on developing the technology of fabrication of cathode/electrolyte and
              anode/electrolyte membranes. The procured cathode/electrolyte and
              anode/electrolyte membranes can then be pressed together and thermally cured to
              form a cathode/electrolyte/anode membrane assembly.

The development of small
              fuel cell systems for residential may provide the
householder with electricity
              and heat at a significant saving over conventional services. 
Fuel cells make
              distributed cogeneration a competitive alternative as they provide a
unique
              combination of advantages. Being small, clean and quiet, they can be sited
              wherever
electricity is needed, even in the most congested urban location.
              Fuel cell generators can
be used in hospitals and computer centers where there
              is a need for uninterruptible, high
quality power. Micro fuel cells as
              portable generators and to replace batteries since they
are quick and easy to
              refuel, have longer operating times and lower operating costs.
Systems are
              suitable for a number of applications, including portable computers
              and
telephones, video cameras and generators for camping, boating and
              emergency power.

