Title       : SBIR Phase I: Photonic Band Gap Optical Waveguide Structures in Electro-optic
               Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0214718

Award Number: 0214718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99989              (Estimated)
Investigator: S Sriram sri@srico.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRICO Incorporated
	      2724 Sawbury Boulevard
	      Columbus, OH  43235    614/799-0664

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I proposal is directed at
              the fabrication of photonic band gap structures in lithium niobate optical
              waveguide substrate. Lithium niobate, with well-understood material properties,
              is currently the preferred material for electro-optic modulators and switches.
              The addition of photonic band gap structures in and around channel waveguides
              endows this material with further functionality. The enabling technology
              developed in this proposed development effort can be further extended to other
              electro-optic and ferroelectric materials. This proposal addresses the
              development of novel Photonic Band Gap technology that will benefit next
              generation photonic waveguide devices. Applying Photonic Band Gap technology to
              electro-optic materials such as lithium niobate crystals paves the way for a
              new class of innovative, compact, electro-optic devices with enhanced
              sensitivity, particularly for phase and intensity modulation, spatial and
              wavelength switching, second harmonic generation, frequency conversion and
              optical mixing. Electro-optic modulators using this design principle would be
              able to achieve switching voltage of less than 100 milliVolts. These passive
              optical devices could be used for the electrical to optical signal conversion
              from very sensitive Radio-Frequency antennas with a bandwidth of many
              gigahertz. In addition, Photonic Band Gap technology would allow for improved
              bandwidth in electro-optical devices. Photonic Band Gap technology would offer
              significant performance improvements in the next generation of photonic
              devices.


Applications in the Ultra low switching voltage for intensity and
              phase modulators, compact and highly sensitive sensors, low noise figure
              optical front-end for antennas is targeted. Compact integrated optics; all
              optical switching and efficient generation of light sources are needed in
              billion-dollar telecom industry.

