Title       : Reconstructing Law on the Street: The Influence of Citizen Characteristics on
               Traffic Law Enforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0214199

Award Number: 0214199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188376             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Epp chuckepp@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Haider-Markel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Maynard-Moody  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A growing body of scholarship suggests that policies adopted by legislatures,
              executives, and public bureaucracies are revised, even transformed, through the
              discretionary actions of front-line public officials such as social workers,
              tax auditors, and police officers.  The PIs will examine the transformation of
              the policy of the traffic stop and citation by front-line law enforcement
              officers.  Traffic stops and citations are widespread, and there is growing
              evidence that they disproportionately affect racial minorities.   Thus, traffic
              stops offer a direct and focused opportunity to assess the effects of citizens'
              personal characteristics on street-level law enforcement.   The PIs will test
              several hypotheses concerning how drivers' race, sex, socioeconomic status, and
              other characteristics influence the likelihood that police officers will stop
              and ticket them.   They will also examine whether oversight policies-namely,
              that police officers must record and report the race of drivers whom they
              stop-result in lower racial disparities in jurisdictions with such policies. 
              Lastly, the investigators will test several hypotheses that address whether
              discretionary actions of street-level bureaucrats are significantly influenced
              by the value of equal enforcement of the law.  .  The research had the
              potential to contribute to literatures on bureaucratic discretion, political
              oversight, policing, and urban politics and policy and to the policy debate
              over racial profiling and police practices.

The research team will conduct a
              telephone survey of a stratified random sample of African-American and white
              adult driers who are residents of the Kansas City metro area (in both Kansas
              and Missouri), with an over-sampling of African-Americans and of drivers who
              have been stooped in the last years. This sampling frame offers substantial
              variation to on key variables.  For example, residents of Kansas City vary on
              key personal characteristics and driving habits, and the level of
              personal-agent oversight varies in the two states.  That is, the state of
              Missouri and two Kansas metro municipalities require officers to record and
              report the race of the driver in all stopped vehicles; other Kansas City
              jurisdictions do not have this requirement.

