Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Open or Closed For
               Business? The Political Economy of Trade Protection in Developing Nations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0214097

Award Number: 0214097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9802               (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy L. Hansen wlhansen@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project moves beyond the existing
              literature on the politics of economic reform and specifically trade policy by
              focusing on the recent aggressive use of antidumping (AD) policy in the
              developing world.  Evidence suggests that governments have been simultaneously
              "reforming" trade on the level of macroeconomic policy by slashing tariffs
              while adopting "backdoor" mechanisms to reverse trade liberalization at the
              less visible level of regulatory policy.  There are not, however, adequate
              explanations for variation in nations' sudden use of these policies, nor have
              the determinants of the decision to provide protection been clearly
              identified.

The research combines an in-depth qualitative and quantitative
              comparison of AD policy in three major developing countries-Argentina, Mexico,
              and South Africa-with a large-n, cross-national statistical analysis of the
              political and economic determinants of trade protection across the developing
              world.  Focusing upon variation in the decision to create a national AD agency
              and agencies' subsequent general propensity to protect, the research sheds
              light upon the ways in which interest group pressure and institutional context
              shape policy adoption and implementation.  In particular, the study fleshes out
              how characteristics of the executive and the AD agency interact with other
              variables to affect the policy process.  The study draws upon a mixture of
              types of evidence, including interviews with agency commissioners, industry
              leaders, organized labor officials, and the lawyers who usually guide the AD
              petition and complaint process; examination of AD agency records and
              statistics; and measures of institutional factors including executive power,
              agency autonomy, and business strength.  Using these types of information, the
              study examines the variables that influence trade protection policy on the
              basis of a comparative analysis of national-level AD agencies across developing
              nations, and in-depth analyses of national and sub-national
              factors-particularly characteristics of industries and sectors.

The research
              is designed to contribute to the literature on the political economy of trade
              policy in developing nations by examining the trade protection policy process
              through the complex interactions of state and societal actors.  Moreover, the
              study enriches the endogenous protection theoretical framework, which focuses
              on domestic interest groups' demands for protection and governments' responses,
              by employing an integrated theoretical approach that links interest group
              pressures to the institutions that potentially modify the policy process.


