Title       : The Development of Syntactic and Semantic Patterns in Child African American
               English
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0214388

Award Number: 0214388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Green lgreen@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lisa Green will conduct three
              years of research on children's development of African American English (AAE).
              AAE differs from mainstream English in its syntax and semantics (e.g.,
              tense/aspect and negation). For instance, AAE can indicate habitual meaning
              with the aspectual marker BE (e.g., "These printers be printing ten pages per
              minute" meaning that the printers usually print ten pages per minute). This
              project aims to: (1) identify such patterns in 3-5 year-old AAE-speakers; (2)
              analyze the patterns; and (3) compare them to those characterizing the speech
              of adolescents and adults in the same geographical area. The project will rely
              on several types of data. Naturalistic speech, elicited utterances, and
              grammaticality judgments will be used to test children's development of AAE
              grammar, with particular focus on tense/aspect, negation, existential marking,
              and question systems. In addition, children will show their understanding of
              relevant constructions by acting out the meanings of sentences. 

This
              research is significant because it identifies developmental patterns and the
              stages at which child AAE speakers make the subtle meaning distinctions that
              are associated with the adult grammar. The project's findings may apply to both
              communication disorders and education. Researchers in communication disorders
              have realized the importance of accurate descriptions of AAE as they design
              tools to assess language development. The descriptions in this research will be
              accessible to them. This research may also help in developing curricula in
              programs such as Head Start. It might also affect methods of language and
              literacy instruction in grade school. The data description and analyses
              resulting from this research will also be useful in devising psycholinguistic
              tests relating the use of AAE patterns and reading achievement. 

