Title       : Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science:Thinking About Politics--A Functional
               Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0214465

Award Number: 0214465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Zaller zaller@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               



This Doctoral Dissertation takes advantage of innovations in brain
              imaging technology to investigate the neural substrates of political thinking.
              Studies of expertise in other fields have demonstrated that novices and
              sophisticates do not use the same mechanisms when thinking about problems (See
              Lieberman et al. 2001). Do political novices and sophisticates engage different
              parts of their brain in thinking about political issues? More generally, what
              is the nature of political thought? What are the regions of the brain that
              determine it? What differences in regional activation correspond to thinking
              about "hot button" issues (e.g. race and abortion) or humdrum issues (e.g. the
              size of national parks)? 

In this study, the principal investigator uses
              functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to study political cognition and
              affect during three experiments. The subject population consists of
              undergraduate political sophisticates and novices. In the first experiment, the
              principal investigator shows subjects the faces of white and black, famous and
              not famous, political and nonpolitical persons. In the second experiment,
              subjects view images of whites and blacks who are either value violators or
              value exemplars. The third experiment asks subjects to answer a series of
              questions that are either political or nonpolitical, and threatening,
              non-threatening, or racial. Using fMRI to measure cerebral blood flow will
              allow us to infer the variety of cognitive and affective processes that
              subjects use when they answer political questions 

The functional Magnetic
              Resonance Imaging (fMRI) method in this dissertation should allow us to
              discriminate neural roots of political behaviors that appear identical and
              connect 
distinct behaviors that share cognitive underpinnings. Doing so will
              shed light on the debate about the nature of political sophistication as well
              as increase our understanding of specific issues like race. 


