Title       : Adaptive Evolution in the Photoreceptor Phytochrome A and its Role in the
               Ecological Success of the First Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0214449

Award Number: 0214449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah Mathews mathewss@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                        The proper processing of light signals is crucial for the success of
              all plants.  Thus, photoreceptors play a critical role in plant development,
              serving as informational molecules that allow plants to determine where they
              are in space and time and to synchronize growth and development to a changing
              light regime.  The control of plant form by ambient light conditions, a process
              known as photomorphogenesis, is mediated by phytochromes, which absorb red
              light and far-red light, along with distinct blue and ultra-violet absorbing
              photoreceptors.  Phytochrome evolution in land plants is marked by a series of
              gene duplications that have led to independently evolving and functionally
              distinct lines.  Flowering plants have the highest number of phytochromes and
              also are the most successful group of land plants.  They total approximately
              250,000 species, outnumbering all other plant groups combined, and dominate all
              but two of the earth's terrestrial vegetation zones.  Their origin was followed
              by the decline of plant groups that had dominated since the Triassic, but their
              mode of origin and the factors that underlie their spectacular success remain
              unknown.  This project integrates DNA sequence analyses with physiological
              characterization of seedlings from early-diverging flowering plants to test the
              hypothesis that evolution in light-sensing mechanisms was important for the
              early success of flowering plants.  Specifically, it tests the hypothesis that
              the evolution of phytochrome A, a phytochrome unique to flowering plants,
              enhanced the ability of early angiosperms to survive in dense shade.  Sequence
              analyses will determine whether functional divergence of phytochrome A occurred
              by positive selection or by relaxation of selective constraints, and will
              identify sites of functional divergence that distinguish it from its sister
              gene, which encodes phytochrome C.  Physiological experiments will determine
              whether seedlings of early-diverging flowering plant species exhibit the
              responses to dense shade that have been characterized in more derived species
              such as Arabidopsis, and will determine whether any of these responses are
              found in seedlings of related seed plants.  Together these analyses will test
              the hypothesis that phytochrome A function was an adaptive innovation that
              helped flowering plants gain a foothold under the forest canopy once dominated
              by ferns and gymnosperms.
          Comparative molecular analyses are an
              efficient mechanism for evaluating functional diversification in nonmodel
              species.  Thus, the analyses undertaken in this project will further one goal
              of plant genomics, to move beyond model systems toward understanding the
              molecular basis of diversity.  The sequence database that will be generated
              will be useful for determining whether other seed plants might have
              independently attained complex but parallel physiological responses to multiple
              facets of the light environment.  This database also will be useful for
              identifying sites of functional specification in genes whose function has been
              difficult to characterize using traditional genetics approaches.  The function
              of sites identified this way can be further tested in mutagenesis experiments. 
              The physiological experiments in the field and greenhouse will characterize
              light optima for seedling regeneration of individual species.  Thus, they will
              provide insight into how the composition of plant communities might change in
              response to ecosystem-wide disturbance or change.

