Title       : Estimating the Settlement Process in Environmental Litigation: A Game-theoretic
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0214195

Award Number: 0214195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew N. Kleit ank1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric A. Helland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Enforcement of environmental regulations takes three forms: inspection,
              detection, and finally the accessing of penalties. While the first two aspects
              have been extensively studied, the final stage has received little attention.
              Accessing penalties for violations of environmental statutes and regulations is
              a crucial part of regulatory policy. Most penalty assessment at the federal
              level is done through litigation; most of that litigation results in a mutually
              agreed-upon settlement between the Department of Justice (acting at the behest
              of the Environmental Protection Agency) and the defendant in the case. This
              research explores a simple game-theoretic model of the process that leads to
              settlement in civil environmental litigation. The researchers then test an
              econometrically tractable model of the attributes of the settlement process.
              Understanding the settlement process in civil environmental litigation is
              particularly important. The litigation process has been extensively studied in
              civil matters between private parties, and in criminal litigation where one
              branch of the government acts as prosecutor and another as judge. In contrast,
              very little has been done on civil environmental actions, which share the
              charter of criminal prosecutions in that the government is the plaintiff, but
              where the possibility of incarceration is remote. There are important reasons
              to believe that the government behaves differently when it is a plaintiff in
              civil litigation. First, the government has different incentives than do
              private litigants. Because the government is a repeat player in the courts it
              is likely to be more concerned with its reputation than most private litigants.
              Second, the government is interested not only in the money received from the
              litigation but also in the political return. This research advances the
              relevant literature in three separate ways. First, it represents an
              investigation into an area of environmental policy that has not yet been
              previously studied. Second, the project fills the void relating to empirical
              work on bargaining problems. Finally, this project investigates the differences
              in how the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Justice view
              the enforcement of cases against violators of the environmental laws. 
