Title       : Dissertation Research: The Political Economy of Workers' Compensation Benefits:
               1940-2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0214483

Award Number: 0214483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Price V. Fishback pfishback@bpa.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Workers' compensation is one of the main forms of social insurance in the United
              States, establishing the extent of compensation received by the families of
              workers killed or injured in accidents arising from employment.  The programs
              were established and continue to be administered by state governments.  The
              central feature of all of the workers' compensation programs is the level of
              benefits legislated by each state for the various types of injuries.  The
              benefit levels are key components in the employment conditions for workers and
              play a central role in determining the incentives for preventing accidents for
              both workers and employers.  The benefit schedules are complex and at times
              difficult to compare across states and time; therefore, the first phase of the
              research is devoted to developing easily comparable measures of the benefit
              levels across states and over time.   The second phase of the research examines
              the impact of changes in benefit levels on wages and earnings of workers to
              assess the extent to which the well-being of workers is enhanced by increases
              in benefit levels.  In a variety of settings, it has been shown that the costs
              of improvements in employment benefits have often been passed on to workers in
              the form of lower wages.  Estimates of these wage offsets will offer a more
              accurate picture of the changes in the standard of living for American workers
              over the past 60 years.  The final phase of the research is devoted to
              analyzing the political and economic factors that influence the various state
              governments' choices concerning workers' compensation benefits.   The goal is
              to document the extent to which changes in benefits are driven by economic
              factors like long-term increases in wage rates and cyclical changes in the
              economy or political factors, like the relative power of political parties,
              interest groups, and reform groups.   The end result of the research will be a
              comprehensive examination of the historical path that has led to the array of
              workers' compensation programs that are in place in the various states today.  
               
      Workers' Compensation programs play a crucial role in the United
              States economy by establishing the levels of benefits for families of workers
              injured or killed in workplace accidents.    By the late 1990s, employers were
              spending 1.5 to 2.5 percent of their payrolls on workers' compensation
              insurance.  Although workers' compensation was a popular program with workers
              and employers when it was first introduced in the early 1900s, employers and
              workers have expressed increasing dissatisfaction with the operation of the
              program over the past 50 years.  Employers are troubled by the rising costs of
              insurance, insurers have faced increasing problems in underwriting workers'
              compensation risk, and workers have expressed dissatisfaction with the level of
              benefits they have been receiving.   The benefit levels chosen by the various
              state governments play a central role in determining the scale of the problems
              in the workers' compensation system.  The research program is designed to
              follow three phases:  first, develop easily comparable measures of benefits
              across states and time from the complex benefit schedules in the state laws;
              second, establish more accurate measures of the gains workers receive when
              benefits are raised by documenting the extent to which wages are reduced when
              benefit levels increased; and third, analyze the political and economic
              influences that determine the various states' choices of benefit levels.   This
              comprehensive analysis of workers' compensation benefits over the past 60 years
               illuminate the process that has led to workers' compensation programs that we
              see today.  An understanding of the process should help guide policy makers in
              improving the systems without returning to the same problems that led to
              changes in the systems in the first place.

