Title       : SBIR Phase I: Encapsulation Technology for Organic Light Emitting Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0214895

Award Number: 0214895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Sneh ofer@sundewtech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sundew Technologies
	      1619 Garnet St
	      Broomfield, CO  800206607    720/887-8166

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
              encapsulation layers for organic light emitting diode (OLED) displays.
              Cost-effective thin film encapsulation is widely recognized as a crucial key
              technology needed to capitalize on the full potential of OLED technology.
              Transparent thin film encapsulation layers deposited at low temperatures and
              moisture-free ambient are needed for lightweight and low cost OLED displays and
              microdisplays. This project is focused on novel atomic layer deposition (ALD)
              techniques that are especially designed for cost-effective encapsulation of
              OLED devices at process temperatures below 100 C. Traditional ALD techniques
              are impractically slow at this temperature range and make inefficient usage of
              chemicals. These problems are circumvented by a combination of efficient ALD
              process and equipment. Objectives include evaluation of encapsulated OLED
              device performance and reliability, with corresponding cost analysis. A
              successful project can mark a breakthrough in the market of portable display
              devices since adequate thin film encapsulation technologies for OLED devices
              have not been developed successfully so far. 

The OLED market is projected
              to grow to over $1.6 billion in revenues annually, attributed mostly to
              microdisplay applications, within the next five years. It is
expected that
              OLED will play a bigger role in the $50 billion Flat Panel Display (FPD) market
              in subsequent years. Currently the missing piece in OLED device processing
              equipment, vacuum-deposition encapsulation technology will provide a
              substantial competitive edge to process equipment vendors. It can thus signify
              an entry point for the U.S. to regain a substantial market share in the FPD
              market.

