Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Environmental Regulation in
               Latin America: Economic Internationalization and Political Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0214103

Award Number: 0214103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert O. Keohane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



This dissertation investigates whether environmental regulation entails
              different marginal costs for internationally-oriented firms than for
              domestically-oriented firms. Two explanatory models generate competing
              expectations about the relationship between globalization and environmental
              regulation.  One posits a positive relationship between the two, and the other
              offers a negative prediction of a "race to the bottom." Hypotheses from these
              models are tested using an across-industry, cross-national research design to
              determine the relation of an industry's international economic ties to the
              degree of regulatory stringency for that industry. 

This project also
              explores the role of comparative institutional factors, including divided
              government and party discipline, in shaping incentives for politicians to
              either pursue the public good of environmental protection or shelter particular
              interest groups from the burden of environmental regulation 

Data will be
              collected from nine industries in four Latin American countries, as well as on
              the environmental policymaking institutions of those states. This research will
              contribute to the debate about globalization and domestic regulation by
              providing empirical data on environmental regulatory stringency across
              industries and by systematically testing the relationship between economic
              internationalization and regulatory strength. More broadly, this project may
              inform the study not only of environmental standards in developing countries,
              but of other social regulation and economic policies as well. 

