Title       : Doctoral Disseration Research in Political Science: A Theory and a Model of
               State-Dissident Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0214287

Award Number: 0214287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7976               (Estimated)
Investigator: Will H. Moore whmoore@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



This dissertation investigates whether repression encourages or deters
              dissent.  The current literature lacks one single, coherent, theoretical, and
              empirically corroborated model of the interactive relationship between dissent
              and repression. The Principal Investigator posits a theory that accounts for
              the escalatory and deterrent effects of repression on dissent and dissent on
              repression. The Principal Investigator argues that political survival motives
              drive state and dissident leaders to retain power and control over their
              respective supporters. This motive leads them to examine one another's actions,
              their own previous actions, and the outcome of previous interactions, estimate
              the costs of those interactions, and react in ways that ensure their tenure.
              


Assuming that leaders choose from a strategy set that contains both
              cooperative and hostile means, the Principal Investigator proposes the
              conditions under which state and dissident leaders choose to act violently and
              to act cooperatively. Controlling for the state of the domestic economy,
              international economic forces, third party intervention, and the effects of
              regime change, the Principal Investigator specifies a system of equations that
              models state and dissident leaders' choices in response to one another, while
              engaged in a sequential series of interactions. Using event data and time
              series econometric techniques, empirical tests of the theoretical model are
              performed in the countries of Chile, Brazil, Mexico, Nigeria, Afghanistan, and
              South Korea. The design allows for both within-region comparison and across
              region comparisons. 

