Title       : Tunable THz Oscillators Based on Synchronously-Pumped Optical Parametric
               Oscillation in GaSe and GaAs Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0214118

Award Number: 0214118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yujie J. Ding yud2@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to investigate a new type of tunable THz oscillators based on a bulk
              GaSe crystal, a bulk GaAs crystal, and bonded multiple GaAs plates, each of
              which is synchronously pumped by subpicosecond laser pulses. The mechanism for
              this type of the THz oscillators lies in phase-matched or quasi-phase-matched
              optical parametric oscillation in these structures. By using ultrashort laser
              pulses, we can take advantage of high peak laser intensities. Besides the
              conventional OPO in which the idler is resonant in a cavity, we will also use a
              configuration in which both pump and idler waves resonant the cavity. Such a
              configuration is very stable, unlike a doubly-resonant OPO. To accomplish our
              objectives, we propose to investigate THz parametric processes including
              phase-matched optical rectification, difference-frequency generation,
              parametric oscillation and amplification. For GaSe crystals, we can achieve
              phase-matching based on birefringence of the crystals. On the other hand, for a
              bulk GaAs material in order to achieve phase matching, the pump wavelength
              should be less than that corresponding to the onset of two-photon absorption.
              Therefore, two-photon absorption (TPA) can be an important issue. Our estimate
              shows that TPA may increase the threshold intensity for the oscillation.
              However, it would not cause the optical damage or sizeable thermal effect. We
              plan to investigate how TPA affects the proposed THz oscillator. We also plan
              to theoretically explore performance of OPOs in the presence of TPA in addition
              to our proposed experimental activities. This theoretical component will be
              used to predict how TPA affects OPOs and to support our experimental findings.
              We will also implement all these parametric devices in alternatively-rotated
              diffusion-bonded GaAs plates. In this case, however, by properly choosing the
              thicknesses of the GaAs plates, we can use the pump photon energy below the
              half of the bandgap to completely avoid TPA. Following our recent success in
              efficient THz generation in GaSe, we will attempt to implement our new idea on
              an integrated, efficient, and compact pulsed THz system based on intracavity
              difference-frequency generation inside a near-degenerate optical parametric
              oscillator, pumped by a frequency-doubled Nd:YAG or Nd:YVO4 laser. Our tunable
              THz oscillator can be used for remote sensing, chemical identification,
              biomedical imaging, target recognition, and security screening. It has temporal
              and spatial coherence far more superior than the THz sources from THz antennas
              and other similar techniques.


