Title       : Strategic Coordination Among American Voters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0214965

Award Number: 0214965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99171              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Mebane wrm1@macht.arts.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


Recent analysis of National Election Studies (NES) data has produced
              surprisingly strong evidence of the existence of a large-scale noncooperative
              equilibrium among eligible voters (i.e., electors) in American presidential and
              House elections, with the equilibrium being supported by all electors having
              rational expectations about the election outcome (Mebane 2000a; Mebane and
              Sekhon 2002). Mebane and Sekhon refer to such a noncooperative equilibrium that
              is supported by all electors having rational expectations as "coordination."
              The analysis using survey data extends and refines the evidence in favor of
              such strategic coordination previously produced using aggregate district-level
              and time series data in connection with models of the American political
              economy (Alesina and Rosenthal 1989; 1995; Alesina, Londregan and Rosenthal
              1993). The models of coordination purport to explain important political
              phenomena such as policy moderation, divided government and midterm loss.
The
              emphasis on rational expectations and noncooperative equilibrium represents a
              substantial departure from the large related literature on ticket splitting.
              Mebane (2000a) and Mebane and Sekhon (2002) demonstrate that models of
              strategic coordination fit presidential year and midterm individual-level
              survey data significantly better than do nonstrategic models.
Notwithstanding
              the results that strongly suggest the existence of strategic coordination,
              important questions remain concerning the validity of the models of
              coordination that have been tested so far. Mebane and Sekhon propose to extend
              the research they have already completed to explore and hopefully resolve some
              of these concerns.
The theoretical and empirical models use common knowledge
              assumptions about individual voters that are unrealistic and unbelievable. In
              reality a coordinating voting equilibrium must depend on in- stitutions such as
              public opinion polls to aggregate and broadcast information. Mebane and Sekhon
              propose to weaken the information assumptions of the current models, especially
              by bringing in adaptive learning.
Regarding the treatment of policy positions
              in current empirical models of coordination, questions arise regarding the
              models' assumption that all candidates of the same political party have the
              same positions and regarding the way the models treat the dimensionality of the
              policy space. Mebane and Sekhon propose to estimate models that use more
              flexible assumptions about policy positions. 
The policymaking institution
              assumed in Mebane (2000a) and Mebane and Sekhon (2002) ignores many features of
              the presidency and Congress that might affect electors' beliefs, strategies and
              behavior. Mebane and Sekhon propose to investigate the consequences of shifting
              from the current emphasis on the national share of the legislative votes (in
              particular House votes) each party receives to the share of seats, and in
              particular to the threshold of having a majority of seats. 
Another set of
              concerns center on the question: "are the effects of coordination large enough
              to be important?" Mebane and Sekhon (2002) supply an answer for the effect
              coordination may have on midterm cycles. They propose more generally to
              investigate the consequences of voters having equilibrium as opposed to
              unstructured beliefs about expected election outcomes. 
Mebane and Sekhon
              propose to address these concerns by completing two kinds of tasks: (a)
              develop- ing a suite of new coordinating model specifications that will be, as
              in Mebane (2000a) and Mebane and Sekhon (2002), at once equilibrium theoretical
              models and structural econometric models to be estimated using NES data; and
              (b) constructing simulation models that use NES data to let the simulations as
              closely as possible match the distributions of choices, preferences and
              information that exist in recent American electorates.
Mebane and Sekhon
              propose to write software that will be freely available and easy to use, so
              that other researchers will be able to use the estimation technology of Mebane
              (2000a) and Mebane and Sekhon (2002). They also plan to make freely available
              the proposed simulation software. 




