Title       : Group Proposal: Rational Protein Bioprocessing with Hydrophobic Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0214183

Award Number: 0214183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1454239            (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd M. Przybycien   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Cramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erik J. Fernandez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. O'Connell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis M. Breneman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is the development of a quantitative tool that can
              be used to predict chromatographic performance as a function of adsorbed
              protein structure for given protein mixture/media/mobile phase combinations and
              to select/design hydrophobic media and mobile phase conditions.  This tool will
              promote the process-scale use of hydrophobic media, resulting in simpler, more
              robust processes that reduce cost-of-goods and time-to-market for new and
              off-patent protein drugs.  This project will advance the state of the art of
              hydrophobic chromatographic systems by addressing the following specific aims:
              (1) validate generic mechanisms for protein unfolding on adsorption to
              hydrophobic chromatographic media, (2) correlate linear and nonlinear
              protein-media interaction behavior using quantitative structure retention
              relationships (QSRRs) to connect protein retention to descriptors of native
              protein, perturbed protein, surface and solution physical properties, (3)
              develop a fundamental theory for protein-media interactions using a Langevin
              dipole approach to calculate protein-surface preferential interaction
              coefficients (PICs), and (4) predict chromatographic performance for complex
              mixtures by coupling QSRR correlations and/or PIC theory for protein-media
              interactions with a macroscopic/engineering description of chromatographic
              operation.

This project is a collaborative effort among researchers at
              Carnegie Mellon University, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and the University
              of Virginia with expertise in biochemical engineering, applied biophysics,
              chromatographic separations, and thermodynamic modeling and computational
              chemistry. This collaboration, with the proposed regular program of team
              colloquia, laboratory rotations and industrial internships, is expected to
              provide a rich research and educational environment for the students and
              faculty alike.


