Title       : Acquisition of a Non Destructive Inspection System for Delamination and Damage
               Characterization of Composite Structures and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0214916

Award Number: 0214916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heshmat A. Aglan aglanh@tusk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Legand L. Burge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Delamination fracture is a major design concern for load bearing structural
              components manufactured from composite materials.  Current standard test
              methods describe procedures for the determination of inter-laminar fracture
              toughness or the number of fatigue cycles for the onset of delamination growth
              using Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) theories.  These methods carry
              severe limitations resulting in an inadequate characterization of the
              fundamental design parameters of the materials.  A fundamental approach, which
              has so far been ignored, is the correlation of these material design properties
              with Non Destructive Inspection (NDI) parameters such as those detected by
              Thermal Wave Imaging (TWI) or other methods.  If such relationships exist, the
              prediction capability of the standard test methods in evaluating design and
              durability related parameters of materials and structures, should be
              considerably enhanced. The Thermal Wave Imaging System to be used in
              conjunction with the existing state of the art mechanical properties
              characterization equipment will enable the researchers to conduct fundamental
              research on the delamination fracture behavior of composite materials as well
              as damage tolerance studies on other metallic and nonmetallic structures. The
              aim is to develop guidelines to establish delamination behavior of composite
              structures and damage tolerance of materials and relate them to structural
              performance, as determined by standard test methods.  This will enhance the
              prediction capability of the current standard test methods and reduce the
              premature failure of structures in service.

Thermal Wave Imaging system will
              not only enhance the quality of many research projects at TU, but strongly help
              in training graduate and undergraduate students at a historically black
              institution.  At least two graduate and two undergraduate students will be
              trained in this area of research every year.  The PI and two of his research
              associates, with a strong background in materials characterization, will guide
              and advise the students' research, which will be in the form of graduate M.Sc.
              thesis and senior research projects.  Some of the PI's and the research
              associates' time will be devoted to maintaining the equipment.  

