Title       : Collaborative Research: Pilot Study in Tropical Isotope Dendroclimatology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0214328

Award Number: 0214328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94146              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Schrag schrag@eps.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The scientific strategy for this research exploits recent breakthroughs in
              stable isotope dendro-ecology, mass spectrometry, and analytical chemistry to
              develop chronological and climate proxy data in tropical trees that lack rings.
              Tree-ring records have shown great potential for long term observations (>500
              years before present or longer) but are limited in extent because many tropical
              tree species form rings intermittently or not at all.

The ultimate goal of
              this research is to develop annually resolved proxy estimates of rainfall
              variability from Indonesia for the past several centuries. These data are
              expected to directly contribute to observations of past changes in frequency
              and strength of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) by complementing the
              existing proxy data network composed of tropical reef corals and extratropical
              trees.  

The tropics are an important component of the global climate
              system, possessing the dynamics and energetics to organize global-scale
              climatic anomalies on seasonal to interannual time scales. Evidence from models
              suggests the tropics may be a persistent influence of global climate
              variability on long time scales.  Long-term variability in the tropical climate
              has the potential to affect the lives of fully a quarter of the world's
              population primarily through the interruption of seasonally normal
              precipitation and agricultural patterns. 

To date the most important
              archives for seasonal to annual resolution proxy records in the tropics have
              been derived from measurements from coral reefs and ice cores. They have their
              limitations, however, as few coral records predate the existing 100-150 year
              long historical observational record and ice core records, while older, are
              limited to a few rapidly disappearing tropical ice fields.  Prospects for
              obtaining replicated 300-500 year long records remain challenging but isotope
              dendroclimatology offers great promise in closing the data gap and, in this
              manner, offers the potential for broad impact to many scientific fields. 
