Title       : Interest Rates and Monetary Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0214242

Award Number: 0214242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390872             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Cochrane   (Principal Investigator current)
              Monika Piazzesi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the economics of the term structure of interest rates, and
              how it relates to monetary policy. The questions addressed include: Can the
              Federal Reserve affect long-term interest rates? Why does Fed tightening not
              lower long-term interest rates? Does the Fed respond to interest rates, or do
              interest rates simply forecast Fed moves?   How are Fed actions related to
              changes in interest rate risk premia? What are the macroeconomic risks that
              drive risk premia in the term structure? Are risks in the term structure
              primarily real or inflation? Has this changed over time?   In their previous
              work, the investigators document even stronger predictability of bond expected
              excess returns than previously thought.   They show strong, recession-related
              time-variation in bond risk premia.  The investigators examine which kinds of
              interest rate shocks explain this fact, and find that covariance with a "level"
              shock to interest rates drives the risk premium. Inflation shocks and shocks to
              expected returns fail. The "level" shock can be interpreted as a monetary
              policy shock.   The investigators also look at very high frequency data to
              isolate Fed policy shocks and find surprising output and price responses, and a
              surprisingly strong ability of the Fed to influence long-term interest rates.  
              This work is extended in a number of ways.   Short-term bonds as well as
              long-term bonds are included.   The investigators have developed an underlying
              exactly identified affine term structure model, incidentally resolving the long
              standing puzzle whether such models exist that can capture term premia.   This
              model is used to investigate a variety of reduced state variable
              representations. It is clear that bond data have measurement error, so the
              investigators develop a model that takes measurement error seriously.   Over
              the longer term, the investigators plan to incorporate macroeconomic variables
              into the analysis and tie what they are learning about Fed policy from the high
              frequency identification to these term structure results.
