Title       : Economics of Air Travel: Network Effects, Congestion, and Scheduling Delays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0214410

Award Number: 0214410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Mayer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd M. Sinai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, air traffic delays have become prevalent and are expected to
              increase in frequency and magnitude.  This research will examine three
              principal issues: 1) What are the economic underpinnings of air traffic
              congestion? 2) Why do airlines choose not to adapt their schedules to fully
              account for predictable congestion? 3) What is the impact of expected travel
              time and scheduled travel time on fares?  Since air traffic congestion is the
              proximate cause of longer travel times, the research begins by investigating
              its determinants.  Two factors are possibly involved.  One is the hub and spoke
              system used by most major carriers.  Hubs enable passengers to connect to many
              destinations, creating network benefits that increase in the number of markets
              served from the hub.  Congestion occurs when hub airlines bunch flights
              together in a short time period at hub airports, accepting longer average
              travel times in order to serve more cities and have shorter scheduled
              connections.  The second factor in congestion is that airlines may not fully
              account for the fact that adding their own flights will lead to increased
              delays for other air carriers.  Thus all airlines will have "too many" flights
              relative to what is socially optimal.  Next, the project examines four reasons
              as to why airlines do not fully adjust their schedules for predictable
              increases in travel time, especially at hub airports, where hub airlines have
              especially poor on-time performance: i) competition with other carriers to
              report the shortest scheduled travel time may encourage obfuscation about
              accurate arrival times; ii) the uncertain nature of aircraft arrival times,
              combined with the constraint that an airline cannot schedule a departure until
              after the aircraft has been scheduled to arrive, makes it costly for an airline
              to add a large layover on the ground to buffer against delays; iii) hub
              airlines face additional incentives to have departure delays given that the hub
              carrier wants to retain the option to have flights that arrive earlier also
              depart earlier; iv) required minimum connection times at hubs encourage
              airlines to choose unrealistic schedules.  The last stage of the research will
              examine how public policy could best address air traffic delays.  This analysis
              will involve using fare data to determine how consumers value avoiding delays
              and the extent to which airlines are correctly taking the cost to consumers of
              delays into account when setting their schedules.
	This research will help
              design improved government policies with regard to air travel.  The US
              Government can choose to tax additional flights and/or improve the
              transportation infrastructure. The results will help develop a tax that reduces
              inefficient congestion caused by airlines over-scheduling airports with fixed
              runway capacity while not discouraging the network benefits from operating a
              hub.  At many airports, an ideal congestion tax might have a small impact on
              air traffic congestion since hub carriers may already internalize most of the
              costs of hubbing through a high local market share.  Also, a careful
              examination of airline pricing and scheduling patterns allows for a more
              complete understanding of how competition affects the quality of private
              information and the economic value of consumer time. Such estimates provide a
              crucial, but often crudely estimated input in determining the optimal public
              investment in costly technology and infrastructure.

