Title       : Market Monitoring and Organizational Form
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0214555

Award Number: 0214555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64773              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Tadelis stadelis@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modern economies exhibit a broad diversity of organizational forms: from small
              owner-operated firms to employee-owned partnerships, cooperatives, non-profits,
              and finally investor-owned corporations. A fundamental problem in economics is
              to understand the forces that lead to these different forms of organization and
              thus determine the structure of productive enterprise in the economy. This
              project proposes an economic framework for studying the economics of
              partnerships and their role in the professional services.  The approach
              highlights three ingredients that favor the formation of partnerships: (1) the
              importance of human capital in production; (2) a lack of information on the
              part of clients that leads them potentially to be concerned about the quality
              of the service they will obtain; and (3) the differing incentives of
              partnerships and corporations in the hiring and selection of senior employees.
              The theoretical model developed will explain why partnerships are typical in
              the professional services, where human capital is primary input to production
              and the nature of the service provided may be quite difficult for consumers to
              accurately assess, but rarely observed in manufacturing, technology, or
              lower-skill service industries.

Associated with this project is a rich set
              of broad impact policy questions concerning which forms of organization the law
              and regulatory policy should accommodate. One of the most striking empirical
              regularities in this area is that throughout manufacturing, technology, and
              many service industries, the great majority of enterprises are either small
              owner-operated firms or larger investor-owned corporations. However, in the
              professional services -- law, medicine, consulting, accounting, architecture,
              advertising-the traditional form of organization has been the professional
              partnership.  There is no single coherent framework for understanding the
              differences between partnerships and corporations, or for understanding the
              specific economics of professional services that have led to this particular
              form of organization. This project will offer a starting point for a broader
              investigation of market structure in the professional services, for examining
              legal and regulatory issues in these industries, and for interpreting empirical
              evidence about the structure of professional organizations.


