Title       : Heterolocalism, Social Networks, and Migration: Refugee Nodes and Networks in
               the Pacific Northwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0214467

Award Number: 0214467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan W. Hardwick susanh@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project will test the impact of scale on the spatial theory of
              heterolocalism in a metropolitan area in the Pacific Northwest. This new theory
              suggests that, to a degree unknown in the past, new migrants in U.S. cities may
              choose to settle in widely dispersed places rather than in more concentrated
              ethnic enclaves while still maintaining their ethnic identities. The research
              will test this theory by comparing the settlement patterns and maintenance of
              identity of the two largest groups of recent refugees now residing in the
              central city, suburbs, and small towns located within the metropolitan region
              centered on the city of Portland, Oregon.  The two groups are migrants from
              Vietnam and from the former Soviet Union.  Vietnamese began settling in the
              region in the mid-1970s and are now well established while the majority of
              migrants born in the former USSR have arrived only within the past decade. The
              selection of these two comparative groups, therefore, is based on differences
              in the dates of their settlement, as well as on their internal diversity and
              comparative racial, religious, and linguistic characteristics. Methodologies to
              be employed in this research include cartographic analysis, survey
              questionnaires, structured and unstructured interviews, and participant
              observation. Outcomes will include improved knowledge of immigration and
              refugee settlement in the U.S., and a set of comparative geographic data
              showing the settlement patterns of the two largest refugee groups in the study
              area for the years 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2002. This analysis will be based on
              census data, demographic information listed in Immigration and Naturalization
              Service reports, school district enrollment data, and information provided by
              the close collaboration of the project team with the Director and staff of the
              Immigrant and Refugee Community Organization headquartered in
              Portland.

Globally, the study of refugee resettlement is critically
              important with more than 23 million displaced people on earth as a result of
              recent political, environmental, and economic crises. At least 2.3 million of
              these migrants have relocated to the U.S. in the past quarter century to seek
              new lives. Many choose to settle in traditional nodes of immigrant
              concentrations in East Coast cities, Chicago, or urban California. However,
              ever increasing numbers of refugee newcomers to the U.S. during the past decade
              have relocated to smaller cities.  In northern New England, the upper Great
              Lakes, and the Pacific Northwest, for example (places long dominated by
              homogeneous Euro-American populations) unexpected increases in the number of
              foreign-born residents were recently documented in census reports. This
              research project will focus on one of these newly emerging nodes of diversity
              to investigate the geographic and social patterns of settlement of recent
              migrants.

