Title       : Storable Votes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0214013

Award Number: 0214013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alessandra Casella ac186@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The inability of majority voting to account for the intensity of voters'
              preferences leads to many practical problems.  Where majority voting is the
              rule, minorities may be inadequately protected.  In addition, the obvious
              opportunity for mutual gain existing whenever two voters have strong
              preferences over different issues inevitably results in vote trading,
              compromising transparency and penalizing less experienced outsiders.  In
              international organizations, in particular, the recognition that sovereign
              countries should not be forced to accept decisions to which they strongly
              object, typically leads to national vetoes, risking paralysis and increasing
              bargaining.  Ideally these vetoes should be costly, allowing member countries
              to express the intensity of their preferences but only at some cost.  This
              project studies a simple scheme that appears potentially able to reconcile the
              advantages of majority voting with the protection of more intensely felt
              interests.

Consider a committee meeting regularly over time to take
              decisions that affect all of its members.  Decisions are taken by majority
              vote.  However, each committee member is given a stock of votes at the
              beginning of the year, with the proviso that these are all the votes at his
              disposal for the year, but he is free to cast any number of them at any one
              meeting.  Committee members can then choose to increase their weight over more
              strongly felt decisions, at the cost of reducing their influence over other
              choices.  The idea of using more resources, here more votes, when a decision is
              valued more is very natural, but storable votes have no precedent in the
              literature.  Initial results suggest that votes that can be stored over time
              have better welfare properties than non-storable votes; perform well even if
              voters are not fully rational, are fairer to minorities, and are both more
              transparent and welfare superior to tradable votes.  In addition, the mechanism
              is very simple, does not violate any ethical prior and could realistically be
              implemented.  The theoretical results have been confirmed in initial
              experiments.  The research project will analyze the theoretical properties of
              storable votes, moving from simple if plausible examples to more general
              situations, and using experiments as check on the accuracy and practical
              relevance of the theoretical analysis.   


