Title       : SBIR Phase I: Improved Magneto-Optical Imaging Films Employing Surface Plasmon
               Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0214668

Award Number: 0214668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff Lindemuth jlindemuth@lakeshore.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Shore Cryotronics Inc
	      575 McCorkle Boulevard
	      Westerville, OH  430828888    614/891-2243

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
              demonstrate the feasibility of utilizing surface plasma resonance phenomena to
              obtain significant improvements in magneto-optical imaging. Improved sensors
              and systems are needed for non-destructive, non-contact testing and evaluation
              (NDE) in many areas, including security, structural, medical, research and
              industrial manufacturing and quality control applications. Magnetic detectors
              and imagers play a major and growing role in these applications. In Phase I,
              the research objectives include improvements in spatial and magnetic field
              resolutions and imaging bandwidth over existing methods. Magneto-optical
              materials quality and sensor design will be improved. Prototype sensors
              measuring 1cm2 will be fabricated by combining surface plasma structures with
              materials exhibiting high Verdet constants. The compositional, magnetic and
              optical properties of the starting sensor materials will be measured, and the
              magnetic imaging capabilities of the prototype sensor structures will be
              evaluated in terms of magnetic field and spatial resolution. Imaging tests will
              be made on electrical current patterns, magnetic inks, magnetostrictive
              structural composites and magnetic medical cell-tagging particles, among
              others. 

Commercial applications include magnetic character reading,
              magnetic code reading for security, superconductor research, spin valve and
              magnetic RAM research and manufacturing, integrated circuit electrical current
              imaging, structural composite stress imaging using magnetic and
              magnetostrictive materials, flaw detection in metals, biomedical tagging and
              identification of cancer and other cells, and research and testing of MEMs
              actuators and devices.

