Title       : The Ecologies of Children's Computing: Investigating the use of Technology
               across Multiple Settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0214334

Award Number: 0214334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine McMillan kmcmillan@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harouna Ba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Tally  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the role that the quality and depth of in-school
              technology access plays in shaping disadvantaged children's broader
              understanding of and engagement with technology, as expressed in their
              technology use at home and in other out-of-school settings.  In particular, the
              research will examine how school choices about educational computing affect
              disadvantaged children's use of technology at home, in their peer groups, and
              in community settings.  This research begins from a premise that how young
              people are invited to make use of technology shapes their conceptions of
              themselves as users of technology.  This work will follow 36 young people from
              two middle schools during their seventh- and eighth-grade years of school. 
              Surveys, interviews and structured observations will track participants' use
              of, engagement with, and knowledge about technology as it develops and changes
              over the course of the two years of the project.  This project will explore
              concerns raised by researchers who have demonstrated that children from
              different family backgrounds are using computers for very different activities
              in school, with children from disadvantaged families facing greater barriers to
              meaningful use of the technology.  Drill-and-practice software is used more
              widely in schools serving large numbers of impoverished students than in other
              schools, and teachers in these schools are more likely than others to report
              that they use computers to "reinforce basic skills" for their students than to
              encourage creativity, self-expression, or communication.  Even in schools
              serving a diverse student population, poor students and students of color are
              likely to be using computers for drill-and-practice work or to learn office
              skills, while Caucasian students and students with high socioeconomic status
              are likely to use computers to conduct original research, create original work
              products, and communicate with others.  This prior research demonstrates that
              effectively addressing the digital divide will mean doing more than providing
              more points of access to technology.  Ensuring that all children have
              opportunities to make full use of the range of technological tools available
              for communication, information-gathering, and self-expression, will require
              attending to the interplay of multiple social settings on children's learning
              and development.  Little is yet known about how they are using these
              technologies outside of school, and even less about when and how those uses
              intersect with school or family goals for young people's learning and
              development.  This project will describe how a range of social settings
              influence young people's understandings of and uses of digital technologies.
              This study will also describe how young people's use of technology in multiple
              settings develops over time, and how experiences in various settings shape
              expectations and interests brought into other settings.  Finally, findings from
              this study will demonstrate specifically whether and how different kinds of
              in-school technology use shape young people's perceptions of themselves as
              users of technology across multiple settings.
