Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Political Economy of
               Privatization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0214176

Award Number: 0214176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy L. Hansen wlhansen@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



The political economy of economic reform has been a fertile topic for
              comparative research, emphasizing the difficulties of reform given immediate,
              concentrated costs and long-term, diffuse benefits (Haggard and Kaufman 1992;
              Nelson, 1993; Williamson 1998). Entrenched interests are expected to pressure
              politicians and impede reforms, particularly in states with weak institutions,
              poorly insulated policy makers, and a diffuse concentration of power (Nelson
              1990; Przeworski 1991; Waterbury 1992). However, the empirical evidence
              suggests that previous research has been theoretically misspecified; countries
              have introduced and sustained economic reforms despite expected opposition.
              What accounts for the variation in the introduction and implementation of
              reforms? The proposed research examine this question by exploring the variation
              in one element of the neoliberal reform package: privatization. To understand
              why countries have such varied experiences, individual elements of reform
              packages (e.g., tax reform, trade policy, fiscal policy) must be examined as
              distinct policies, and then reassembled to gain a complete understanding of the
              political economy of reform. 

The proposed research project builds on the
              theoretical work in the field of economic reform to develop a multi-causal
              theoretical model to be tested empirically. The objectives of the project are
              threefold: first, to determine how international factors are interacting with
              domestic characteristics to affect the creation of privatization agencies;
              second, to analyze the domestic environment in which privatizations are sought
              and realized to identify those factors that most significantly impact the
              transfer of public enterprises; and third, to examine the domestic environment
              in-depth to unearth the causal processes identified in the statistical
              analyses. To complete these objectives, data are gathered on the creation of
              privatization agencies from 1975-1995 in the 183 IMF-member countries, on
              individual privatizations and on state-owned enterprises in Mexico and Brazil.
              Two statistical models are created and tested using survival analysis, a
              statistical technique appropriate for questions concerning the causes of events
              occurring through time. The first model examines how long countries take to
              create privatization agencies; the second examines when state-owned enterprises
              are sold to private interests. A qualitative analysis of the domestic
              environment surrounding privatization in Mexico and Brazil is nested within the
              study to provide greater insight into the privatization event. 

The broader
              uses of this project include the collected data.  It could be used to examine
              how international pressures and norms are interacting with domestic
              characteristics to affect the occurrence of privatization agencies in any
              country, N, and then what factors affect the transfer of interests from the
              public to the private sector. Together, these components of the proposed
              research provide a clearer understanding of why privatization is sought by
              states and what factors affect its implementation, further elucidating our
              understanding of the political economy of economic reform. 

