Title       : Homeobox Gene Regulation During Lateral Organ Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0214705

Award Number: 0214705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marja Timmermans timmerma@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1118,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0214705
Timmermans

Organogenesis in higher plants is primarily
              post-embryonic in that lateral organs of the shoot, such as leaves and flowers,
              develop progressively from the shoot apical meristem (SAM). The mechanism that
              distinguishes organ founder cells from stem cells or their derivatives in the
              SAM is largely unknown, but the regulation of knotted1-like homeobox (KNOX)
              genes appears to be a key determinant. The rough sheath2 (rs2), ASYMMETRIC
              LEAVES1 (AS1), and PHANTASTICA (PHAN) genes from maize, Arabidopsis, and
              Antirrhinum, respectively, encode highly conserved MYB domain proteins that are
              required to repress KNOX genes during leaf development. Furthermore, the
              Arabidopsis KNOX gene SHOOT MERISTEMLESS (STM) negatively regulates AS1. The
              regulatory hierarchy between the KNOX and PHAN-related genes may thus provide a
              simple mechanism for distinguishing founder cells from stem cells and their
              derivatives in the SAM, simply by regulating the expression domain of the
              PHAN-related genes.

The mechanism by which the PHAN proteins regulate KNOX
              genes is not currently understood. The variegated knox expression pattern in
              rs2 null-mutant leaves suggests that other factors in the meristematic cells of
              the SAM are required to control knox gene expression. Several RS2 interacting
              proteins have previously been identified using the yeast two-hybrid system.
              Based on their homology with known proteins from yeast and mammals, these
              interacting proteins can be reconciled with a model in which rs2 is required
              for the assembly of a transcriptional repressor complex that maintains knox
              genes silenced during leaf development.

In order to dissect the mechanisms
              that control knox gene expression, the RS2 and AS1 complex as well as the
              origin of the variegated KNOX phenotype in rs2 mutants will be analyzed. The
              specific aims are:

1)	To analyze the basis underlying the variegated knox
              expression pattern in rs2 mutants.

2)	To characterize the RS2 complex from
              maize.

3)	To begin analysis of the AS1 complex from Arabidopsis.

The
              proposed research will broaden our understanding of the process that
              distinguishes founder cells from stem cells and their derivatives in the SAM.
              It will also contribute to our understanding of the role of gene silencing
              mechanisms in development. The preliminary data indicates that an as of yet
              unknown silencing mechanism in plants that involves the transcriptional
              co-repressor HIRA may play a central role.

