Title       : The Functionally Illiterate Consumer in the Global Marketplace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0214615

Award Number: 0214615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66653              (Estimated)
Investigator: Madhubalan Viswanathan mviswana@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This research focuses on how functionally illiterate consumers make decisions
              and cope in the information age.  Estimates suggest a high rate of functional
              illiteracy, about a fifth of the US population or higher. Estimates of
              functional illiteracy in most other countries, particularly developing
              countries, are much higher. Surprisingly, very little research has been done
              examining functionally illiterate consumers in the global marketplace.  

The
              first phase of the study will provide an in-depth view of functionally
              illiterate consumers.  The functionally literate poor will be studied, along
              with non-native speakers with very limited experience with English and the US
              marketplace, as well as functionally illiterate consumers in India. Issues of
              interest include (i) use of health-related information and consumption of
              unhealthy products; (ii) use of credit and money management; (iii) responses to
              advertising, selling and promotional appeals; (iv) use of product-related
              instructions; and (v) the use of computer-related media including the internet.
              

Results from the first phase of the research program will serve as the
              basis for the second phase in which a large-scale survey will be developed and
              administered. The second phase will be designed to identify and assess possible
              solutions to help functionally illiterate consumers negotiate the marketing
              environment. The proposed research has important practical implications for
              adult education, business and government.







