Title       : Collaborative Research: Using Measurements from the Columbia Plateau Eolian
               System to Improve Global-Scale Models of Mineral-Dust Aerosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0214508

Award Number: 0214508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Busacca busacca@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Gaylord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award is to study a paired sand-silt eolian system on the Columbia Plateau,
              in order to better understand the sensitivity of mineral-dust aerosol emissions
              to changes in vegetation, soil moisture and topography.  This information will
              be used to improve global dust model routines in general circulation models
              (GCM).

Field work will be undertaken to characterize the history and
              variability of mineral-aerosol sources and chronology of dune and loess
              formation for the Columbia Plateau since the last glacial maximum (LGM). 
              Information will be obtained on vegetation area and type, soil texture, soil
              moisture and topographic features that resulted in the observed downwind
              accumulations.  Modeling  will be used to improve the sensitivity of  a global
              transport model used in general circulation models (GCM) of the Earth climate
              system.

Atmospheric mineral aerosols are increasingly recognized as playing
              an important role in radiative and biogeochemical forcing of climate. The
              broader impacts of this proposed research center on documenting the evolution
              of an important eolian sequence within a well-constrained chronologic framework
              to better understand the processes responsible for and factors that effect
              mineral-aerosol emissions.  

