Title       : On the Economics of Eco-Labeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0214160

Award Number: 0214160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54334              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Mason bambuzlr@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While there is evidence that consumers would be willing to pay a premium for
              items produced using "environmentally friendly" techniques, they are often
              unable to express these tastes because an asymmetric information problem. 
              Consumers cannot typically tell the type of production process the firm has
              used, so they can't determine when it is environmentally friendly.  Since the
              environmentally friendly technique is generally more costly, firms would be
              disinclined to choose such a technique, with larger pollution flows resulting. 
              In response to this problem of asymmetric information, eco-labeling programs
              have emerged in a wide range of countries over the last decade or so.  The
              research in this project models eco-labeling as an imperfect and costly test of
              product quality, where quality is interpreted as "environmental friendliness." 
              The study determines the set of possible equilibria, the welfare implications
              of the introduction of an eco-labeling option, and the potential for
              eco-labeling to provide a regulatory alternative to more traditional methods.

                  This project has important implications for public policy towards
              environmental regulation.  When firms are privately informed about production
              and abatement costs, as in the context of this project, environmental
              regulation is notoriously difficult.  Whether society opts for a traditional
              regulatory approach, using pollution taxes or abatement standards, or a
              market-based approach, for example using tradable permits, there will be costs
              to society associated with the informational advantage that firms have over
              regulatory agencies.  Appealing to outside interests, as with eco-labeling, can
              allow environmental regulators to overcome their informational disadvantage at
              relatively low cost.  On the other hand, the certification process is costly to
              firms, costs that must ultimately be paid by consumers.  This project outlines
              conditions under which eco-labeling is preferable to a more traditional
              regulatory approach.

