Title       : Partial Insurance and Consumption Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0214491

Award Number: 0214491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luigi Pistaferri pista@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this research proposal is to study the changes in the
              distribution of household consumption in the US over the 1980-1995 period. This
              is an interesting period to study due to the dramatic increase in income
              inequality widely analyzed in the labor economics literature.   There is an
              open debate on the welfare implications of increasing income inequality. One
              view is that the increase in income inequality is worrying because it implies
              declining living standards. Another view is that one should rather focus on
              consumption inequality because consumption is a better measure of welfare than
              income. The theory suggests that household consumption depends on permanent,
              not current income, which differs from the former due to temporary
              fluctuations.  The theory's main insight is that absent formal markets for
              insuring against income losses, individuals use personal savings to
              "self-insure" against temporary shocks. Thus, if the increase in income
              inequality is mostly due to temporary factors, the welfare effects of
              increasing income inequality are less serious than originally thought.   The
              extensive research on the evolution of income inequality in recent years has
              not been paralleled by comparable research on consumption inequality. The
              existing research has reached contrasting conclusions (some papers find an
              increase in consumption inequality, while others find little or no change), or
              made little attempt to interpret the empirical findings using theory. 

The
              project consists of three parts.  First, it uses a variety of microeconomic
              data sets to analyze trends in consumption inequality and contrast them with
              trends in income inequality in order to explain why different papers reach
              different conclusions about the main facts of the consumption distribution,
              focusing on definitional issues and sample selection.   Second, it provides
              evidence (already available in preliminary work) that consumption inequality
              increases at a slower pace than income inequality over the period of study. One
              possible interpretation is that most of the increase in income inequality is
              indeed of temporary nature (income instability). However, labor economics
              studies have reached the conclusion that income instability and permanent
              income inequality have increased at similar rates over the period of interest.
              If anything, permanent inequality outpaces transitory uncertainty.   Third, it
              investigates the empirical validity of an alternative interpretation, that the
              increase in income inequality is (at least partly) due to permanent factors but
              there exists "partial insurance" against income shocks over and above personal
              savings. This form of insurance is provided informally through a variety of
              channels: social and financial institutions, family network, and rational use
              of other family choice variables. The investigator provides estimates of the
              extent of partial insurance against income shocks and assesses how the
              availability of insurance opportunities changes over time and across skill
              groups. The empirical analysis will be conducted on two data sets, the Consumer
              Expenditure Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. 

