Title       : SBIR/STTR Phase I: Model-Guided Development of Spin-Dependent-Tunnel Junctions
               for Magnetoelectronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0214719

Award Number: 0214719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dexin Wang dexinw@nve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NVE Corporation
	      11409 Valley View Road
	      Eden Prairie, MN  553443617    /   -

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I Program will demonstrate the
              feasibility of model-guided approach for developing spin dependent tunnel
              junctions in magnetoelectronic devices. Spin dependent tunnel junctions are at
              the forefront of nanotechnology that is under intensive research and
              development worldwide. Spin dependent tunnel devices are expected to be
              commercialized in about two years in sensor, isolator, and memory. Due to the
              unique requirements of the tunnel barrier with a nominal thickness of ~1nm and
              its interfaces with two ferromagnetic layers, an experimental approach by
              itself is inefficient in developing new junctions. There is a critical need for
              guidance from a realistic modeling in the fabrication processing, and this
              project is specifically designed to fulfill this need. Realistic atomistic
              modeling will be established and experiments will be judicially chosen to
              demonstrate the feasibility of this integrated approach. 

Magneto-random
              access memories are used in reprogrammable logic, read heads, generic magnetic
              field sensors, and galvanic isolators and are important components for the
              electronic storage industry. They have the potential to be applied in other
              microelectronic devices where thin layers and interfaces are critical.


