Title       : Essays on Behavioral Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0214445

Award Number: 0214445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Markus Brunnermeier markus@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research contributes to the two central tenets of behavioral finance:
              limits to arbitrage by professional traders, and cognitive biases of individual
              investors. It consists of three projects. The first project provides an
              innovative explanation for the persistence of mispricing by highlighting the
              difficulty professional traders face in synchronizing their corrective trading
              activity. Price correction is delayed because no individual trader wants to
              trade early if others decide to postpone their trade. In this setting,
              behavioral traders (whose trading is driven by psychological factors) will have
              an effect on the price process because their actions are not immediately undone
              by professional traders. The second project looks at a special form of
              mispricing: a growing bubble. It is an experimental study that tests the
              prediction that rational arbitrageurs would rather ride a bubble than trade
              against it. This project also attempts to analyze the extent to which market
              transparency of order flow and trading volume affects the persistence of
              mispricing. The novelty of this laboratory experiment is that, in contrast to
              the previous literature, we expect that bubbles will not die away even after
              subjects have become more familiar with the game. The third project explicitly
              models some behavioral biases. The study provides a new microfoundations based
              explanation for the "disposition effect" which states that individual investors
              are reluctant to realize losses. The study will show that this reluctance
              follows naturally for individuals with time-inconsistent preferences over
              capital gains and losses. The advantage of our approach is that it is more
              parsimonious and hence is easier to test.

This research has significant
              normative implications. Mispricing in general, and bubbles in particular, are
              not only responsible for the redistribution of billions of dollars, but their
              bursting causes market uncertainty and can even lead to recessions. The recent
              technology bubble on the NASDAQ market is a vivid reminder of these risks. The
              proposed projects will enhance the state of our knowledge by scrutinizing
              rational and psychological forces that drive financial markets and by
              highlighting the importance of transparency of trades.

