Title       : The Justice of Land in a Land of Injustice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0214451

Award Number: 0214451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333896             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Gibson jgibson@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dealing with consequences of historical land dispossessions associated with
              colonialism, racism, and capitalist expansion dogs a variety of countries
              throughout the world. Nowhere is the issue of land reconciliation more
              important than in South Africa. That country today confronts a variety of land
              issues flowing from the country's history of land dispossessions, ranging from
              "land grabs" by the urban landless, to efforts by farm workers to achieve
              rights of ownership to their land, to claims by "surplus people" to land from
              which they were removed by government actions under apartheid. Land
              reconciliation raises and illustrates many significant theoretical issues
              related to the emerging interdisciplinary fields of transitional justice and
              justice psychology. Generally speaking, justice research argues that people
              judge law and politics by whether they comport with their standards of
              fairness. Such judgments are important since legal and political institutions
              perceived to be unjust are unlikely to be accorded legitimacy, and without
              legitimacy, compliance becomes problematical (i.e., it may become more closely
              related to calculations of costs and benefits) -- perhaps thereby exacerbating
              behaviors such as illegal land invasions.  At the level of the political
              system, this project will examine land reconciliation, which is hypothesized to
              be most effective when law and elite and mass preferences coincide. At the
              micro-level (the level of this research), this study examines preferences on
              land reconciliation policies. These preferences are hypothesized to flow from
              (1) how issues land get framed in terms of the four sub-dimensions of justice
              (distributive, procedural, retributive, and restorative); (2) instrumental
              interests, especially as reflected in experiences with various forms of land
              dispossession; and (3) basic cultural values, in particular individualism
              (expected to be most common among those of European ancestry) versus
              collectivism (which may predominate among Africans). In addition, the principal
              investigator will investigate (4) whether South Africans approve of land
              invasions and are likely to join such movements in the future. The principal
              component of the research design is a survey of samples of both South African
              elites and members of the mass public. The survey incorporate a variety of
              innovative techniques, including persuasibility experiments, the use of
              experimental vignettes designed to assess the role of competing dimensions of
              justice on preferences for land reconciliation, and follow-up in-depth
              interviews with especially knowledgeable respondents.
