Title       : The Globalization of Corporate Insolvency Regimes: Law, International
               Institutions, Professions, and Nation-States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0214301

Award Number: 0214301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence C. Halliday halliday@abfn.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce G. Carruthers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6513

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project provides an empirically-based theoretical interpretation of ways
              that powerful global institutions, whose internal and cooperative actions are
              usually invisible, set the global norms for business insolvencies. The
              researchers seek to understand how the rules of the game are set by financial
              and professional institutions in global centers and subsequently are negotiated
              in law-making by players in the peripheral national economies. This project
              extends prior work in several new directions: the social and network
              structuration of national markets to regional and global levels, the interplay
              among professionals, the state and financial institutions in struggles over
              property and jurisdictional rights in law-making, and lawyers and
              globalization. These themes are unified around developing a socio-legal theory
              of law-making that extends a theory of the recursivity of law to focus closely
              on the shift from law-in-action to law-on-the books. The researchers employ a
              research design with three elements: (1) they will contextualize present
              developments with a cross-sectional time-series data on political, social and
              economic change and bankruptcy reforms world-wide from 1973-1999; (2) they will
              continue interviews and observations of the key participants in global
              institutions; and (3) they will undertake six case studies which combine
              primary documentary sources, consultations with country specialists, sources
              from international financial institutions, secondary analysis, and interviews
              in each country. Through this approach, the researchers seek to stimulate the
              nascent literature on the globalization of law and to inject law into
              cross-disciplinary debates and research on globalization of markets. 
