Title       : Conference on Representations of Algebras and Related Topics, July 15 - August
               10, 2002, Toronto, Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0214788

Award Number: 0214788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Birge Huisgen-Zimmermann birge@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
International Conference on Representations of Algebras and Related
Topics,
              July 15 -- August 10, 2002, Toronto, Canada

The PI and the organizing
              committee plan to provide support for the
participation of as many junior US
              mathematicians as possible in the
biennial international meeting in Toronto
              this summer. Next to the
presentation of cutting-edge research, several series
              of overview
lectures by leading experts and an extensive workshop program
              aim
at introducing start-up researchers to the field. Central subjects
are
              the geometry of module varieties, invariants and deformations,
homological
              developments -- specifically, derived categories,
representation type,
              including the in-depth exploration of pivotal
classes of tame or wild
              algebras. Among the applications -- their
thorough documentation is one of the
              highest priorities -- are the
theories of complex semisimple Lie algebras and
              algebraic groups,
singularities and categories of perverse sheaves, new
              insights into
the structure of the Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand category, as
              well
as the homological treatment of finite group schemes.

The
              representation theory of algebras has its origin in the study
of 'groups',
              originally certain collections of motions of space
which allow for
              concatenation and inversion. The next idea was to
represent more abstract
              algebraic objects, arising in theoretical
physics and chemistry for instance,
              in terms of linear motions of
suitable spaces, to render their structure more
              transparent. In the
meantime, the scope of objects studied along this line has
              been
dramatically enlarged, and a big arsenal of methods to analyze
              such
representations has been assembled. Tools which have proved
particularly
              effective include geometrical and combinatorial
setups, and variations of a
              general theme which can be outlined as
follows: One starts by establishing
              optimal situations, which can
be completely analyzed, and then measures the
              deviation of a more
challenging situation from the optimal ones to make
              headway in
steps dealing with progressive increases in
              complexity.
Applications extend to almost all parts of mathematics and
              provide
the theoretical frames for models in theoretical physics.
In fact,
              some of the recent initiatives were prompted by physicists
and feed back into
              quantum physics.
