Title       : SBIR Phase I: Electrostatic Based Adhesion Test for Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0214442

Award Number: 0214442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry N. Lucas blucas@ffdevices.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : FFD
	      
	      Knoxville, TN  37931    865/927-3000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
              develop a novel, electrostatic based metrology solution that has the potential
              of being developed into a rapid and quantitative test of interfacial adhesion
              for the semiconductor industry. The portion of a semiconductor device that
              carries logic signals between the transistors on a chip is commonly known as
              the Back-End-of-the-Line (BEOL). The BEOL typically consists of, among other
              components, current carrying metal lines surrounded by an insulating or
              low-dielectric constant (low-k) material. To keep increasing chip performance
              at the current pace, it will be necessary to replace the current dense
              insulators with a porous low-k material. Interface adhesion between porous
              low-k and the various other layers in the BEOL is known to be poor and
              extremely problematic during integration. The semiconductor industry faces a
              significant barrier to further progress, because a rapid and quantifiable test
              to assess interfacial adhesion does not currently exist. The principle of the
              technique is to use a normal tensile force created by an electrostatic field to
              delaminate thin films from their underlying layers. This is a unique
              undertaking with regards to adhesion testing and reflects a revolutionary shift
              in how adhesion tests will be conducted if successful. 

The economic benefit
              to the industry will be achieved by reducing the time to market and improving
              yield. If interfacial adhesion can be monitored rapidly and quantifiably, the
              effects of varying process parameters (deposition, etch, pre-treatments) on
              film-adhesion can be quantified in a greatly shortened time reducing the length
              of the process development and R&D phase. This would lead to shorter times to
              market, increased productivity, and may increase market share for early
              adopters of the technology in the US.
