Title       : Electronic Properties of Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0214149

Award Number: 0214149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantin A. Matveev matveev@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a theoretical project in the area of mesoscopic physics.  The electronic
              properties of nanoscale structures will be investigated
              including:

Superconductivity in thin wires.  When the cross-section of a
              wire is as small as a few square nanometers, the wire is expected to lose its
              superconducting properties.  The critical Josephson current in such wires will
              be studied, as well as the dependence of the current on the applied phase
              difference.  The research will then be extended to study other properties of
              superconducting nanowires, including their current-voltage characteristics. 
              Comparisons will be made to experiments.

Propagation of interacting
              one-dimensional electrons in quantum point contacts.  Unlike conventional
              Luttinger liquid theories, this work will involve scattering off a smooth
              potential barrier.  Both conventional perturbation theory and bosonization
              techniques will be used.  This work is expected to advance our understanding of
              electron transport in mesoscopic systems, especially semiconductor
              heterostructures, and provide theoretical understanding of recent experimental
              results.

 Decay of metastable states in double barrier resonant tunneling
              structures and superlattices.  The understanding of the decay time is important
              for potential applications of the bistability features of these devices.  This
              work will involve conventional kinetic theory techniques, such as Fokker-Planck
              equations, as well as modern approaches developed for quantum field theory
              problems.
%%%
This is a theoretical project in the area of mesoscopic
              physics.  The electronic properties of nanoscale structures will be
              investigated.  This is very important from a fundamental perspective in order
              to understand th ebehavior of electrons in very small structures.  It is also
              at the very foundation of applications of nanoelectronics to devices affecting
              our everyday life.
***

