Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ultra High Resolution Head Mounted Display
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0214621

Award Number: 0214621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse B. Eichenlaub jbe@dti3d.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dimension Technologies Inc
	      315 Mount Read Boulevard
	      Rochester, NY  146111911    716/436-3530

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
              three key components necessary to incorporate Dimension Technologies Inc's
              (DTI's) proprietary ultra high resolution display technology into head mounted
              systems for virtual reality applications. To be commercially viable, the
              technology must provide additional resolution without tradeoffs in key areas
              such as visual performance, size, weight and field of view. The objective of
              this Phase I will be to assess the feasibility of applying DTI s increased
              resolution technique to leading edge HMD products. Three main areas will be
              investigated. The first is the design of an array of compact, bright, rapidly
              flashing colored light sources. The second is the optical design to efficiently
              direct light from the light sources to a light valve and then to the user's eye
              with maximum brightness and even light distribution. The third area will be
              means of configuring and fabricating flat, precisely formed microlens arrays. .
              If successful, virtual reality displays will be capable of generating images
              with near eye limited resolution across a wide, immersive field of view.
              Products resulting from this research will expand markets for virtual reality
              systems in many markets.

This technology could find initial use in small
              scale, moderate budget, or tight quarters simulation or public exhibit
              applications where high end VR systems are now used. In the longer term, as the
              capabilities of PCs increase, consumer products for games and other
              recreational activities will incorporate the technology.
