Title       : SBIR Phase I: Lobster-Eye X-Ray Imaging Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0214817

Award Number: 0214817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Shnitser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Physical Optics Corp.
	      20600 Gramercy Place, Bldg 100
	      Torrance, CA  905011821    310/320-3088

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will meet the need for
              advanced optical instrumentation to support scientific research in the area of
              X-ray radiation in the upper atmosphere.   It is proposed to develop a
              Lobster-eye  X-ray Imaging Sensor as a low-cost, all-plastic, X-ray focusing
              optical device for real-time, remote sensing of X-rays in auroras in the polar
              regions.    Lobster-eye  X-ray Imaging Sensor will be light enough to be
              carried by stratospheric balloons for use in remote observation and mapping of
              the precipitation of energetic electrons from solar eruptions.    It is
              designed to collect spatial, temporal, and spectral information both by day and
              by night.  Its low-cost, plastic, potentially disposable X-ray
              focusing/collimating optics, which are lobster-eye-like fiber elements with
              specially treated cladding to reflect X-rays, will be based on the company's
              advanced precision replication of plastic, single-fiber, optical components. 
              Conditions in near space and the upper layers of the atmosphere affect
              telecommunications, weather monitoring, and sea transportation in the Polar
              Regions.  Current state-of-the-art visible aurora studies are limited to the
              dark hemisphere, and X-ray mapping now uses single-detector sensors that are
              expensive, heavy, and complex. 
 

Commercial applications are in astronomy,
              meteorology, nuclear power stations, crystallography, and related areas.   An
              even broader spectrum of applications exists for the LEXIS systems plastic,
              X-ray focusing optics, which can easily and completely replaces the capillary
              Kumakov optics and metal anti-scattering grids used in medical radiology,
              security, X-ray lithography, and many other X-ray applications.  


