Title       : Extensions of Flow-Capturing Models for Refueling Alternative Fuel Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0214630

Award Number: 0214630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Kuby mikekuby@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The environmental, economic and political costs of our reliance on oil are
              becoming increasingly clear to many people.  One of the main obstacles to
              widespread use of alternative fuels in cars and trucks is the limited range of
              these vehicles and the scarcity of refueling facilities in convenient
              locations.  

Traditional approaches to the question of where gas stations
              should sited define the problem in terms of minimizing some measure of the
              distance users need to travel to get to the fueling site.  Beginning with
              Hodgson (1990), several researchers have been developing a new approach to the
              siting of fuel stations that attempts to maximize the flow of traffic past a
              site.  This project extend flow-capturing models to apply to the location of
              refueling facilities for alternative-fuel vehicles, such as hydrogen fuel
              cells.  

The range of alternatively-fueled vehicles is typically much
              smaller than the range conventional vehicles. Thus, the difficult and expensive
              task of developing an adequate infrastructure is even more challenging than
              usual.  A model for optimally locating refueling stations to capture as much
              traffic as possible with a fixed number of stations could help overcome the
              barriers to alternative fuel.  Thus, this project has significance both to the
              location-modeling field and to national energy policy. 

