Title       : Multi-dimensional analysis of register variation in Spanish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0214438

Award Number: 0214438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Biber douglas.biber@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Davies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Douglas Biber and Mark Davies
              will conduct two years of research on the linguistic characteristics of spoken
              and written registers in Spanish (like conversation, lectures, essays, fiction,
              and academic writing). The research will use corpus-based methods that depend
              on computer programs to analyze the language characteristics of a large text
              collection. Corpus analyses describe how speakers and writers actually use
              language. While previous research has focused on building Spanish corpora, this
              project is the first large-scale investigation of registers in Spanish corpora.
              Researchers will use computer programs to analyze linguistic features in a
              multi-million word corpus and statistical analyses to determine how linguistic
              features are distributed across the texts in the corpus. The project's main
              goal is to describe and compare the language characteristics of registers in
              Spanish. The first step is to describe the characteristics of contemporary
              registers, and then the project will describe linguistic change in Spanish
              registers over the past 400 years. Finally, the project will compare the
              patterns of register variation in Spanish to patterns found in other
              languages.

This research is important for several reasons. One immediate
              application is to language teaching. At present, most language instruction does
              not take into account the specific goals of the student (e.g., for conversation
              vs. for academic study). But because registers differ in their linguistic
              characteristics, language instruction can be more effective if targeted to
              focus on the most salient features in a register. The linguistic descriptions
              resulting from this research will provide information that is relevant for
              teaching applications of this type. The project will also result in computer
              programs and a grammatically coded (or 'tagged') corpus of Spanish. The
              computer program and tagged corpus will be made available for on-site research
              projects at the NAU Corpus Linguistic Research Program. The tagged corpus will
              also be available as part of an existing NEH-sponsored web site. This corpus
              will be the first large tagged corpus of Spanish (or any of the Romance
              languages) that is freely available online for use by other researchers. 

