Title       : How External Representations Propel Development and Future Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0214548

Award Number: 0214548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Schwartz daniel.schwartz@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mathematics, diagrams, and other formal representations help scientists discover
              and organize complex relations.  This research will test whether this is also
              true for the developing child.  The studies will examine how explicit,
              culturally developed symbol systems propel the development of higher-order
              cognition in pre-adolescent and adolescent children in the domains of
              proportions, fractions, hypothesis testing, and game playing.  The studies will
              alter the characteristics of symbolic tools and children's interactions with
              them to uncover specific properties of symbol systems and their social
              environments that support development and transfer.  The research will evaluate
              conceptual maturity not only by the problems children can solve but also by the
              problems they are prepared to learn to solve in a transfer setting, a
              potentially much more sensitive measure of development.  For example, some
              children will be encouraged to "invent" mathematics to explain how weight and
              distance compensate on a balance scale, whereas others will simply use words to
              explain.  Afterwards, to assess the immediate effects of explanations using
              mathematics versus words, children in both groups will solve new balance scale
              problems.  Most importantly, they will also attempt to learn to solve new
              compensation problems, for example, involving gears of different sizes.  The
              leading hypothesis is that children who have opportunities to work with
              symbolic tools to learn to solve benchmark developmental tasks will be more
              prepared to learn to solve analogous transfer tasks compared to students who do
              not receive opportunities to use symbolic tools.  The findings and
              methodologies of this research will integrate work in cultural, cognitive, and
              developmental psychology and will have a direct bearing on instructional
              theory.  The use of symbols is something that instruction can control, and
              preparation for future learning is what instructors care about.  The work will
              set the stage for specific methods and classroom technologies designed to
              propel development and prepare children to learn in science and mathematics.
