Title       : SBIR Phase I: Optical Detection and Sizing of Aerosol Nanoparticles (diameter
               detection limit below 2 nanometers)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0214894

Award Number: 0214894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Gamero mgamero@busek.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Busek Company Inc
	      11 Tech Circle
	      Natick, MA  017601023    508/655-5565

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project intends to
              fabricate, and test a condensation nucleus counter (CNC) of the
              turbulent-mixing type, with a detection limit below 2 nm particle diameter, and
              able to measure the size distribution of aerosol nanoparticles. A novelty of
              this apparatus is that its super-saturation level can be adjusted quickly and
              accurately along a wide range. This ability, along with the dependence between
              critical super-saturation and embryo diameter, will make it possible to measure
              in real time the size distribution of the nanometric fraction of the aerosol.
              It will be shown that the design of this CNC effectively delays the onset of
              homogeneous nucleation; uncharged particles smaller than 3 nm in diameter are
              readily activated; a detection limit below 2 nm for uncharged particles can be
              achieved by using the appropriate condensing vapor; and charged nanoparticles
              of arbitrary small size are detected. Note that this demonstrated detection
              limit is substantially smaller than that of the best CNC commercially available
              (TSI model 3025A, 3 nm detection limit). Three tasks have been identified to
              materialize the goals of this proposal: design and fabrication of a CNC
              prototype; experimental demonstration of the performance of the CNC; and
              execution of fundamental research on heterogeneous nucleation.
     The
              overall work will eventually lead to the commercialization of an improved CNC. 
              The main fields of application include: bio-aerosol detection, air quality
              testing, environmental studies, particle emission testing, and materials,
              pharmaceutical and basic aerosol research. This turbulent-mixing CNC will
              enable the analysis of macromolecules via liquid chromatography with a very
              significant gain of sensitivity with respect to more common schemes. This
              analytical application has considerable commercial potential.

