Title       : Collaborative Research: Individual Differences in Decision-Making Competence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0214170

Award Number: 0214170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74792              (Estimated)
Investigator: Baruch Fischhoff bf0r@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Every day, people face decisions in domains as diverse as the choice of 
              shampoos, stocks, medical treatments, and friends.  When people have not
              learned what to do through trial and error, they need a general ability to make
              effective decisions.  The attendant skills include extracting relevant
              information from the world, applying general values in specific settings, and
              integrating these pieces with a coherent decision rule.  Research has often
              found deficiencies in such skills.  While interest in general cognitive
              processes has diverted attention from individual differences, people do differ
              substantially in these skills.

Parker and Fischhoff (2002) used this
              performance variability to develop a measure of decision-making competence
              (DMC).  Seven tasks, tapping into the above skills, were administered to
              respondents from an ongoing longitudinal study.  Performance correlated
              positively across the seven DMC tasks, suggesting a common central competency. 
              A single DMC score correlated strongly with measures of intelligence, cognitive
              style, risk behavior, and social/family influences.  Although the CEDAR study
              demonstrates the potential of DMC, it is limited by problems with some of the
              instruments and special properties of the sample used.  The current research
              includes four studies that will further refine the seven DMC tasks.  Each study
              addresses individual decision-making skills in light of recent theoretical
              developments and improving overall scale properties.  In addition, these
              studies provide opportunities for addressing scientific questions within the
              individual task domains.

This connection of laboratory results with "real
              world" behavior is an exercise itself that has not been widely pursued.  It
              provides the opportunity to clarify the validity of decision-making research
              findings, as well as shed light on the underlying theory.  This work has
              applications to the training of individuals to make better decisions,
              competence in making legal and medical decisions, as well as relative
              performance in competitive environments.









