Title       : Does Tthyrotropin (TSH) Play a Direct Role in Fish Gametogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0214569

Award Number: 0214569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Trant trant@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R Sampath Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thyrotropin (TSH) is a pituitary-secreted glycoprotein hormone that is related
              to the gonadotropins (follicle-stimulating hormone, FSH and luteinizing
              hormone, LH). TSH interacts with its thyroidal receptors to induce the
              synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones (T3 and T4).  TSH receptors were
              originally thought to be solely expressed in the thyroid, however recently, TSH
              receptors have been found in extra-thyroidal tissues (e.g., adipose tissue
              (lipolysis), lymphocytes (immunoregulation), brain and pituitary) and
              convincing functional significance has been ascribed to their activation.  The
              principal investigators recently cloned the first non-mammalian TSH receptor
              from the striped bass, a marine bony fish. This cDNA was isolated from the
              gonads of the fish (as opposed to the thyroid where they are expected to be
              expressed).  Although this was the first report of the expression of TSH
              receptors in the gonads of any vertebrate, these findings have since been
              confirmed in other species of fish. Visualization of the striped bass TSH
              receptor mRNA in the cytoplasm of both developing oocytes and spermatocytes
              suggest that TSH may play a direct role in the development of sperm and egg
              rather than merely being "maternal" mRNA stored for use during embryo
              development.  This results of this research will determine if TSH plays a
              direct role in gametogenesis or embryogenesis, or both. Although it has been
              established that thyroid hormones (as regulated by TSH) regulate gonadal
              physiology both in mammals and fish, this study could provide the first
              evidence of a direct role of TSH at the level of the gonad. 
An essential
              requirement for the action of a hormone is the timely expression of its
              receptor in the target tissue. Even though the expression of the TSH receptor
              gene in fish gametes has been confirmed, a test of the hypothesis that TSH
              plays a direct role in gametogenesis will be conducted by correlating gamete
              development with seasonal changes in gene expression, production of receptor
              protein, and localization of the protein within the gametes.  In addition, TSH
              receptor transcripts will be detected and quantified, and receptor protein will
              be localized in embryos and larvae in order to test the alternate hypothesis
              that the TSH-receptor transcripts are stored maternal mRNA required for
              embryogenesis. Proof of active TSH receptor in gametes will strongly suggest i)
              a direct role of TSH in gamete development, ii) a putative role of TSH receptor
              in the disruption of gametogenesis as a causative factor of failure of fish
              spawning, and iii) a basis for the re-evaluation of gonadal expression of TSH
              receptor in higher vertebrates.  Although studies of ligand-induced activation
              of the TSH receptor on the processes of gamete development and maturation would
              be invaluable to conclusively demonstrate the direct role of TSH in
              gametogenesis, sufficient quantities of homologous striped bass TSH are not
              available at this time. 


