Title       : GC-MS for Catalysis, Combustion and Nanotechnology Research and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0214211

Award Number: 0214211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59120              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa D. Pfefferle pfefferle@biomed.med.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A gas chromatograph coupled to a mass spectrometer (GC-MS) will be used in most
              of the research as well as for a module in a new chemical engineering
              laboratory course supporting improvement of the curriculum.  In research, the
              system provides a substantial enhancement to the existing studies into chemical
              mechanisms in high-temperature hydrocarbon reaction systems and the development
              of novel diagnostics and reaction processes for these systems. Current projects
              that will use this equipment include catalytic combustion of methane and large
              hydrocarbons, higher hydrocarbon and soot production in flames, mechanisms for
              oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons, fuel processing reactions,
              structure-reactivity relationships for nanoporous materials and more recently
              growth of carbon nanotubes in flames and using catalytic template reactors. In
              all of these systems the complex product mix with multiple species at each mass
              requires a multidimensional analysis technique-a task for which the requested
              GC-MS system is well suited. Enhanced capabilities will include high scan rate
              for transient coupling studies, faster throughput, larger mass range and the
              ability to export data for analysis, plus dual MS detectors including both
              electron impact and chemical ionization. With the majority of students going on
              to graduate and professional schools, a large portion of the mission is
              exposing undergraduates to research. As part of the departmental development a
              new research laboratory course that will include modules in the laboratories of
              individual PIs is planned. The experiments using the proposed GC-MS would be
              appropriate for this course providing training in separation techniques,
              chemical kinetic analysis, quantitative methods and data analysis. The GC-MS
              would facilitate the incorporation of undergraduates into our research projects
              due to the ease of operation of the requested system and reasonably
              straightforward analysis.
