Title       : Workshop: Floristics, Phenology, and Frugivore Communities: A Pan-Tropical
               Comparison (Panama City, Panama; July 29 - August 2, 2002)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0214507

Award Number: 0214507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine Milton kmilton@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              and maintained.  In the most diverse habitats on Earth, the tropical
              rainforests, primates and other frugivores (fruit-eaters) play important roles
              by dispersing the seeds of many trees.  In this symposium we will make a global
              comparison of tropical frugivores and plant communities.  We will bring
              together for the first time researchers studying birds, bats, primates,
              elephants, and other animals with plant ecologists to identify and compare the
              "keystone" plant species that sustain a diversity of animals in different
              regions.  By bringing together some of the world's finest tropical biologists
              to compare their knowledge, this symposium will try to create a tool for
              rapidly identifying the most important species for maintaining biodiversity. 
              We will also study the ways that the loss of such species can affect
              ecosystems.
There are three aims of the symposium: first, to identify and
              compare the key plants which sustain rainforest animal diversity; second, to
              identify those animals which are of greatest significance to these plant
              communities; and third, to study the importance of these interactions to
              conservation. The information collected in this forum will advance the field of
              ecology and aid the scientific management of endangered species and habitats. 
              It will also bring students together with renowned scholars in the field, and
              build international collaboration on conservation strategies.


