Title       : Economic Foundations of Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2002    
File        : a0214164

Award Number: 0214164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Anderson anderson@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Virtually all of the work in continuous-time finance assumes that the prices of
              securities follow an exogenously specified process. However, the prices of
              securities are in fact determined day-by-day and minute-by-minute by the
              balancing of supply and demand.  A complete economic model of continuous-time
              trading requires the derivation of the pricing process as an equilibrium
              determined by more primitive data of the economy, in particular the agents'
              information, utility functions, and endowments.  The known results on existence
              of equilibrium in multi-agent continuous-time financial markets are limited to
              the case in which markets are dynamically complete, i.e. the available
              securities either include a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims, or
              it is possible to construct a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims
              from the available securities. The assumption that the available securities
              include a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims is highly implausible;
              the assumption that one can construct a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent
              claims from the available securities is highly endogenous, since dynamic
              completeness is a property of the prices of the securities, not the underlying
              data of the economy. Without equilibrium underpinnings, the economic
              foundations of finance models are seriously in question. The main goal of the
              project is to prove the existence of equilibrium prices in continuous-time
              finance models with dynamically incomplete markets.  The second goal is to
              explore the implications of equilibrium for the nature of securities price
              processes.

This research is intended to provide solid economic foundations
              for continuous-time finance. In particular, it will provide alternative pricing
              processes to those which are currently studied in continuous-time finance;
              these alternative pricing processes may provide a better fit to actual stock
              market data than those currently in use. This research has the potential to
              benefit society by improving the accuracy of pricing in securities markets. 
              First, because the research leads to specific predictions about the interaction
              of prices for different types of assets, it should lead to more accurate
              pricing across markets, such as housing, mortgages, stocks and bonds, which
              currently function largely independently. Second, it should lead to more
              accurate pricing of options in the situation where the exercise price of the
              option differs significantly the current price of the underlying stock.


