Title       : Bayesian Analysis, Computation and Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2002      
File        : a0214303

Award Number: 0214303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183206             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Geweke john-geweke@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bayesian statistical methods are applied in situations of decision making with
              limited information in diverse fields including economics, law, medicine,
              psychology, and meteorology.  The objective of the Bayesian Analysis,
              Computation and Communication (BACC) project is to provide the wider social
              science community with rapid, convenient access to state-of-the-art simulation
              methods for Bayesian analysis, computation and communication.  To meet its
              objectives, the project will develop software incorporating recent innovations
              in mathematical statistics and computer science.  A unique and important
              feature of the BACC software is that it implements its tools as extensions to
              the popular mathematical applications programs Matlab, Gauss, S-plus, and R. 
              The architecture that makes this feature possible is unique within the domain
              of Bayesian software, combining core code, model-specific code, application
              code, and a specialized mathematical routine library.

This project will
              expand the suite of models provided to users, provide a set of high-level
              commands for users developing new models, and incorporate structured procedures
              to cross-check the validity of algorithms.  It also will emphasize outreach and
              dissemination of the software to the social science research community and its
              incorporation in graduate and postdoctoral education.

