Title       : Bioactive Polymer Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0214363

Award Number: 0214363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey T. Koberstein jk1191@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposed program of research centers on the molecular design and fabrication
              of exciting new bioactive polymeric coatings that actively promote a desired
              biological response.  The fundamental approach adopted for creating boinductive
              surface coatings is the delivery of precise doses of cell adhesion ligands,
              growth factors and other  cell signaling motifs onto the surface of a polymeric
              biomaterial that is resistant to protein adsorption.  Two novel polymer systems
              are proposed for fabricating bioinductive polymer surfaces: surface-active
              beta-functional block copolymers and functional hydrogels prepared by
              end-linking end-functional macromonomers.  The synthesis of both complex
              materials systems takes advantage of the exceptional capability of the recently
              developed technique of atom transfer radical polymerization to prepare
              functional materials with high precision and efficiency.  In addition to
              providing for precise control of surface composition, the proposed materials
              have been selected to allow for photo-patterning of bioactive functionality, an
              exciting tool that will be applied to create materials that can direct the
              spatial growth of cells into two- and three-dimensional patterns.  Finally, a
              new method for applying these bioactive coatings to polymer surfaces is
              described that is based upon environmentally friendly supercritical fluids. 
              The focus on supercritical coating technologies illustrates illustrates how
              considerations of the commercial applicability of the methods and materials
              selected have been factored into the overall research program.  

The success
              of this research program would have a positive influence on a broad range of
              biomaterial technologies relating to tissue regeneration and repair, medical
              implants and devices, and consumer products.

