Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Computer Displays on
               Comprehension, Memory and Decision-Making in Court
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0214228

Award Number: 0214228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11027              (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Richardson jtr@unr.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research presents a systematic, theoretical, and applied examination of
              factors that should be considered when determining whether a computer-generated
              animation is more prejudicial or probative than other traditional forms of
              presentation media (e.g., oral testimony and diagrams). Although some
              experimenters have specifically examined the effects of computer displays on
              subjects' decision-making, only a few have used theory to inform their
              research, and no scientist to date has examined differences between all three
              channels of communication (computer display, still visual graphics, and an oral
              presentation without visual aids) in a single study. The main purpose of this
              research is to determine the theoretical rigor of Elaboration Likelihood Model
              (ELM).  Two key hypotheses underlying this model are the
              elaboration-enhancement hypothesis and the elaboration-disruption hypothesis.
              Specifically, the elaboration-enhancement hypothesis would provide information
              regarding the possible probative effects of a computer display while support
              for the elaboration-disruption hypothesis would provide information regarding
              the possible prejudicial effects of such a presentation mode. The proposed
              experimental design will serve as a critical test of both these hypotheses in
              that it will test whether or not a slip-and-fall computer display enhances or
              disrupts elaboration of the message's arguments. Additionally, the effects of
              mode of presentation on one's memory, comprehension, and decision-making will
              be assessed. Thus, this project appeals not only to social science,
              communication, and education scholars, but also has broader implications for
              the applied communities of law, science, and technology. 
