Title       : Quasi-Bayesian Alternative to M-Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0214317

Award Number: 0214317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37493              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Chernozhukov vchern@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Han Hong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research develops a class of econometric estimation procedures, called
              quasi-bayesian estimators, which are computationally and practically
              attractive. The estimator is simply defined as  the mean or median (or other
              quantity alike) of the quasi-posterior distribution of economic parameter
              interest. Unlike in the conventional bayesian approach, the quasi-posterior
              distribution is generated by transforming a criterion or objective function
              (such as that in GMM) which may not have any likelihood interpretation.  The
              approach is useful and new for a class of ``semi-parametric" problems that do
              not impose rigid parametric structure on the economic model of interest.
     
              The main application of this estimation consists of nonlinear generalized
              method-of-moments and various other structural econometric models, such as
              instrumental median regression, in which the conventional estimates are very
              hard or practically infeasible to compute . All of these models allow, in
              principle, to answer very interesting economic questions in the context of
              microeconomic models and economic policy evaluation. However, the practical
              estimation and use of such models faces very severe implementation challenges.
              Quasi-bayesian estimation overcomes this problem by relying on the markov chain
              monte carlo methods. This allows us to form a class of estimators that are
              practical, easy to use, and that have excellent statistical properties.
     
              The project develops the formal statistical and computational properties of
              quasi-bayesian estimators for a class of semi-parametric models that fall
              outside the conventional bayesian inference. Asymptotic normality and
              consistency of the estimates are proven, and it is shown that the
              quasi-posterior quantiles can be used for making inferential statements about
              parameters of interest.  The project also implements computer programs  and
              demonstrates the usefulness of the entire approach through simulations.  An
              empirical application is also presented. It deals with estimation of dynamic
              market risk forecasts using the recursive nonlinear quantile (value-at-risk)
              models. This application is of great interest to the financial firms and banks
              who are required by law to asses value-at-risk on a daily and a weekly basis.

