Title       : Multinational Corporation Research and Development Investment in China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0214042

Award Number: 0214042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yifei Sun   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5251,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The globalization of innovation is an issue of central importance to economic
              geography and to the economic and social sciences in general.  Numerous
              theoretic and empirical studies have been conducted to investigate the
              globalization of research and development (R&D) activities in developed
              countries, but studies on foreign R&D activities in developing countries are
              relatively rare.  Multi-national corporations (MNCs) recently have established
              a number of R&D facilities in developing countries.  The primary objectives of
              this scientific research project are to examine the nature and scope of
              foreign-affiliated R&D investment and the major factors affecting their
              locations in China, which is undergoing a transition from a planned economy to
              market economy.  Based on mail surveys of foreign R&D facilities in China,
              personal interviews of appropriate scientific and managerial personnel in a
              selected group of firms and their R&D facilities in China, and web-based
              research, this study will investigate the following questions:  (1) What is the
              extent of foreign R&D investment in China?  Because no directory of foreign R&D
              facilities exists, the project will create such a list to include information
              about their locations, parent company, and industrial sector, among others. 
              (2) What are the motivations for MNCs to establish R&D facilities in China?  It
              is hypothesized that such R&D investment is largely demand-driven or
              policy-driven instead of supply-push, given China's growing market potential
              and relative backwardness in science and technology development.  (3) What is
              the nature of foreign activities in such R&D facilities?  It is expected that
              such R&D facilities are primarily engaged in transferring technologies, or
              providing service to the local markets, instead of conducting original research
              or development for the global market.  (4) Where are the foreign R&D facilities
              located in China?  (5) Why are they located where they are?  Both quantitative
              and qualitative methods will be used to analyze the data.  The study is
              expected to show the increasing importance of China in the global innovation
              networks of MNCs.  The study also will shed light on the importance of  both
              supply- and demand-side factors in locational considerations; and it will
              examine the challenges and opportunities that foreign R&D offer for parent and
              host countries.

This project will provide a better understanding of how
              developing countries are integrated into global innovation networks through the
              R&D investment of MNCs.  It will lead to a more comprehensive theoretical and
              empirical framework for studies on the globalization of innovation and R&D
              organization in MNCs.  The study of economic geography of foreign R&D
              activities in China will advance understanding of how global and local forces
              interact with each other and shape local, national, and global innovation
              landscapes.  The studyalso  will shed new light on the ongoing discussion
              regarding the roles of global, national, and local forces in the new stage of
              world development, particularly in the cross-scale production of
              technologies.

