Title       : Normative Studies of Portfolio Choice and Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0214061

Award Number: 0214061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245583             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Y. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Macroeconomists in business and government operate in a data-rich environment.
              For example, in the United States data on thousands of economic time series are
              available monthly. Recently, there has been theoretical and applied interest in
              developing forecasting methods that exploit this wealth of information in a way
              that is systematic, replicable, and subject to scientific analysis. The results
              have been encouraging: the first few estimated factors from large dynamic
              factor models (hundreds of predictors) appear to have predictive content for
              the main economic aggregates -real activity and inflation - that is unavailable
              in smaller systems. Within the past year, two Central Banks (the Federal
              Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Bank of Italy/CEPR) have started releasing
              real-time many-variable activity indexes.  Research to date on many-predictor
              macroeconomic forecasts has centered on approximate factor structures that,
              while useful as data reduction methods, constitute only one way to approach
              large data sets; moreover, the models investigated so far are essentially
              time-invariant. The objective of the research outlined in this proposal is to
              move beyond the first few estimated factors from time-invariant systems and
              thereby to investigate many-predictor time series forecasts in potentially
              time-varying systems.  This proposal contains four specific projects within
              this broader research agenda. The objective of the first project is to develop
              empirical Bayes methods for linear time- invariant models that exploit
              information in the many predictors, beyond what is contained in their first few
              estimated dynamic factors. The purpose of the second project is to estimate
              linear prediction bounds, that is, upper bounds on the population of forecasts
              made using linear time-invariant equations with many predictors. There is
              substantial evidence that low-dimensional macroeconomic forecasting relations
              are unstable over time. The next two projects extend the work on many-predictor
              forecasting to models with time variation. The objective of the third project
              is to develop tests for time variation in models with many predictors and to
              develop and to implement estimators that exploit this time variation. The
              objective of the fourth project is to provide a coherent resolution of the
              "forecasting combining puzzle" (the result that simple means or trimmed means
              of panels of macroeconomic forecasts outperform individual forecasts and
              typically are stable even when the individual forecasts are not); it is hoped
              that this will lead to many-predictor forecasting methods that are robust to
              time variation. Finally, it is proposed to apply some of the methods developed
              in this research to a different problem, instrumental variables regression with
              many weak instruments, and to continue other ongoing work in the area of weak
              instruments. It is hoped that the proposed research will have broader impacts
              on practical forecasting. For example, the ongoing real-time projects at U.S.
              and European central banks builds on previous work by the Principal
              Investigators and others on high-dimensional systems, and it is hoped that the
              tools developed in the proposed research will be useful in those and related
              projects. 

