Title       : Auction Design with Resale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0214471

Award Number: 0214471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Z. Zheng czheng@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Auctions are widely used mechanisms for the allocation of resources, and resale
              after auctions is a practical possibility.  However, this possibility is
              usually not considered in auction theory.  This project is to re-examine
              auction theory when resale among bidders is possible.  The project is based on
              two preliminary results obtained by the investigator:  (a) with the possibility
              of resale, the optimal auction in the literature may fail to be optimal;  (b)
              the investigator has designed a new mechanism that achieves optimality despite
              resale.  The project consists of three parts.  First, develop a general method
              to characterize incentive-feasible mechanisms when resale is possible.  Second,
              analyze the impact of resale on multiple-object auctions, with the FCC radio
              frequencies spectrum auctions constituting the motivating example.  Third,
              examine the relationship between the formation of middlemen and the pricing
              scheme in multiunit auctions, with the Treasury-bill auctions constituting the
              motivating example.

The project will help to provide a better understanding
              about auctions, especially on their relation with resale and other
              re-contracting activities.  Such better understanding has the potential of
              providing policy implications for major privatization auctions.  Theoretically,
              the project will help to extend the framework of mechanism design beyond static
              isolated environments.  Such extension will make the framework more applicable
              to industrial organization, market design, and political economy.  More broadly
              speaking, auction theory has produced explicit predictions on how commodities
              change hands and hence the theory is a building block for a future precise
              science of markets.  Extending the theory to the more realistic resale
              settings, this project will enhance the knowledge of how competitive markets
              actually operate.


