Title       : Collaborative Research: A Strategic Approach to Local Economic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0214174

Award Number: 0214174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97119              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Feiock rfeiock@coss.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The existing urban politics literature has classified development policies into
              three types:  location incentives that subsidize development; progressive
              development policies that provide incentives but with strings attached; and
              growth management restrictions.   Unlike most of this extant work which has
              examined one or at most two of the policy types in isolation,  the researchers
              treat growth policy as a continuum across these types, based on the
              distribution of the costs and benefits of development among pubic and private
              actors.   The specific deals that cities negotiated with private actors can
              fall at any point on this continuum, based on the combination of policy
              instruments used, the concessions and extractions negotiated.  Use of the
              bargaining perspective allows them to unite these separate approaches to city
              growth issues by focusing on the factors that increase a city's relative
              bargaining power -- enabling it to make extract benefits from firms or forcing
              it to provide concessions to attract growth.
 Applying the Nash bargaining
              model to development deals also can incorporate insights from previous
              development research within a more rigorous theoretical framework that leads to
              a very specific empirical specification.  City competition for development is
              captured by the relative values of the city's and the firm's outside options --
              the alternatives each would get if the negotiated deal fell through.   City
              bargaining power will depend on its inherent attractiveness to different
              businesses, which determines the minimum value it should accept in a deal; its
              need to reduce economic or fiscal problems, which determines its time
              preference, and the risk aversion of the political actors negotiating the deal.
               Identifying the sources of the city's bargaining power will also lead to
              policy recommendations on how government institutions and general development
              policies can be structured to improve the city's ability to pursue both short
              term and long term development goals.   The investigators also extend this
              approach to address repeated play of the bargaining game with different firms
              over time.  This extension permits evaluation of the possibility that cities
              can develop a reputation as a 'tough' or 'soft' agent, equivalent in
              development policy to slow- or pro-growth areas.  	
This bargaining approach
              is investigated through empirical analysis and theoretical modeling.   
              Predictions of the model are tested with data collected from a national survey
              of development officials in all incorporated places over 10,000 within 12
              selected metropolitan areas.   The survey gathers information on the two most
              recent negotiated location incentives deals.   This facilitates the measurement
              of the outcome of the bargaining model-the value of the negotiated agreements. 
               Information on specific firms is collected from archival sources, and matched
              to bargaining outcomes in the data set.  Additional information on city
              political, fiscal and economic characteristics are merged into the final data
              set.  Fieldwork in the 12 metropolitan areas  add details about the negotiation
              process in practice and data from city records.   In addition, interviews with
              officials involved in formulating development policy and carrying out
              development negotiations provides the basis for case analyses of development
              negotiation.
The anticipated products of this research represent significant
              theoretical and methodological advances in the urban politics field, as well as
              an applied framework for city officials to improve pursuit of their development
              goals.    Given that formal modeling approaches to questions in the urban
              politics and public policy fields have been limited, the work resulting from
              this research has the potential to be groundbreaking in its extension of new
              methodological approaches to these fields.



