Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Elite Opinion, The Public Interest, and
               Inter-Branch Policy Differences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0214552

Award Number: 0214552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8240               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Zaller zaller@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project explains persistent policy
              differences between presidents and congresses, independent of party.  The
              prevalent view is that the President represents "the public interest" and the
              Congress the "special interests."  The investigator asserts that presidents are
              likelier than Members of Congress (MC's) to act upon their convictions, which
              will reflect any dominant view among elites, unless a dissenting lobby is bound
              to their party by the issue in question.  Presidents are only constrained by
              lobbies linked to their parties by an issue, while MC's are sensitive to both
              the secondary demands of party-linked groups and those of no-party lobbies. 
              The President is more apt to act on principle than is an MC (and hence Congress
              generally) since his actions are more influential and he is less vulnerable
              than the atomostic Congress to lobbies' tactics of "Divide and conquer" and
              targeting recalcitrants.  Persistent interbranch differences emerge when
              unified elite opinion influences presidents of both parties but lobbies
              constrain Congress. Unlike extant work the student's theory explains how the
              same issue can be partisan in one era and marked by inter-branch conflict in
              another.  It is also free from normative assumptions.

The student will
              undertake two two-week trips to the Library of Congress (LOC) and these allow
              him to fully operationalize a key variable in his theory, elite opinion.  By
              coding and tabulating the editorial positions of a sample of papers stratified
              by region and partisan tendency on three issues, trade, gun control and
              veterans programs from 1910-2000 he will be able to show the degree to which an
              issue is contested or consensual among elite opinion.  This enables him to test
              his theory in a timely manner.

The database assembled should prove useful to
              scholars pursuing other questions in this area of inquiry.

