Title       : A Sociolinguistic Investigation of an Ethnolinguistic Boundary: Tense-Aspect on
               the Island of Bequia, St. Vincent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0214216

Award Number: 0214216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen B. Schwartzman hsjsls@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Sidnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Jack Sidnell and James Walker
              will conduct three years of sociolinguistic research on an ethnolinguistic
              boundary on Bequia, a Caribbean island in the territory of St. Vincent and the
              Grenadines. Over 90% of Bequia's approximately 5000 residents are descended
              from Africans brought to the Caribbean during the 17th and 18th centuries. The
              rest of its population consists primarily of the descendants of Scottish,
              Irish, and English indentured laborers also brought to the Caribbean during
              that period and relocated to Bequia in the mid-19th century. Most
              Afro-Bequarians speak a variety of English-influenced creole similar in many
              respects to the creole varieties spoken elsewhere in the Eastern Caribbean (St.
              Kitts, Nevis, St. Vincent) and in Guyana. Anglo-Bequarians speak a variety of
              English that is structurally similar to varieties of English spoken in Ireland,
              Scotland, and the Southwest of England. This research emphasizes the
              tense-aspect system in these varieties of English and English-based creole.
              This area of grammar is prominent in descriptions of creoles and in theories of
              their origin and transmission. Researchers will also examine social factors
              that constrain variation in the creole- and English-speaking communities,
              especially the nature of contact between these communities and the extent to
              which ethnic boundaries maintain distinct varieties of speech. The analysis of
              social factors and linguistic variation will be used to address central issues
              of sociolinguistic theory.

This research will shed light on problems of
              language contact and change, especially on the way that such linguistic
              processes are shaped by their social and cultural context. It will also
              document two language varieties that remain almost completely undescribed.
              Researchers will produce a booklet for local circulation that will explain the
              project and its findings. This will include a description of the language
              varieties, an account of their social history, and a discussion of their place
              in the daily lives of Bequia's residents. These materials will be made
              available for use in schools in Bequia and in the English-speaking Caribbean
              more generally. This research and the publications derived from it will help to
              dispel groundless but widely held stereotypes about the inadequacy of creole
              languages. The research will thus contribute to the legitmization of these
              varieties and promote a better appreciation of their importance in the
              communities in which they are spoken. 



