Title       : Jury Nullification: When and How Juries Disobey the Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0214096

Award Number: 0214096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97101              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irwin A. Horowitz IHorowitz@ORST.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Juries have the implicit power to acquit defendants despite evidence and
              judicial instructions to the contrary. The jury's right to decide a criminal
              case by its own lights without fear of outside coercion and pressure has been a
              hallmark of Anglo-American jurisprudence. To some observers of criminal cases
              where juries nullified the evidence or instructions, jury acquittals in the
              face of ostensibly strong prosecution cases were tantamount to racially-based
              jury nullification. Others suggest that it is both possible and perhaps even
              probable that such acquittals were really not jury nullifications of the law,
              but simply instances of the prosecution failing to meet its burden of proof.
              This research tests a model of jury nullification and involves four experiments
              that examine the influence of judicial instructions and various fact and legal
              situations that may provoke juries to nullify. The mock jury experiments, as
              guided by the model, involve 1316 juror-participants using videotaped trials
              presented in a realistic setting. The first experiment is an exploration of the
              effects of jurors' emotional biases in reaching a nullification verdict. Jurors
              will view a trial that has elicited nullification verdicts or a trial that has
              not. Jurors will either be given standard (pattern) or nullification
              instructions by the trial judge. Emotional biases will be primed by varying the
              attributes of the victim who will be presented either in a neutral light or
              will be very unsympathetic. A second battery of experiments will delineate
              three nullification-relevant legal situations (i.e., unfair laws, unfair
              application of law to the defendant, and violation of due process). While
              commentators have argued that these situations tend to evoke the jury's
              nullification tendencies, there is no extant empirical evidence that this is
              so. The studies also investigate the impact of providing juries with
              nullification instructions as compared to standard (pattern) judicial
              instructions. The researchers examine the impact of these instructions on both
              the verdicts and dynamics of jury deliberations within the context of the three
              categories of nullification. The third proposed experiment explores the impact
              on a nullification decision of a juror who argues that the jury should focus on
              a just outcome rather than solely on an outcome that complies with the law (a
              trigger). The researchers experimentally manipulate the presence or absence of
              a trigger in two trials and analyze the effects on the jury's deliberations and
              verdicts. The research proposed will provide empirical evidence as to when,
              why, and how juries nullify and inform the debate as to whether juries should
              be informed of their power. 
