Title       : SBIR Phase I: Flux-Gated Spin-Dependent-Tunneling Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0214959

Award Number: 0214959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. Nordman cathyn@nve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NVE Corporation
	      11409 Valley View Road
	      Eden Prairie, MN  553443617    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops novel
              spin-dependent-tunneling (SDT) magnetic-field sensor devices based on
              innovative methods of flux modulation. The program identifies two modes of
              "flux gating" as a means of chopping or sweeping the magnetic field which is
              sensed by the SDT transducers. The flux gating methods are proposed as
              enhancements to the functionality of the already promising SDT magnetic sensor.
              The first method offers a low-power solution for increasing the SDT
              signal-to-noise ratio especially at low frequencies where 1/f noise is present.
              The second method enables the determination of absolute field magnitudes.
              Successful development of these novel ideas will lead to the advancement of
              small, solid-state, inexpensive, low-power, high resolution magnetic-field
              sensors. These sensors can be used discretely or in compact arrays for diverse
              applications including non-destructive evaluation of metallic structure
              flaws.

The commercial applications of the research include non-destructive
              evaluation of flaws in metallic structures; detection, surveillance and
              tracking of magnetic or metallic objects; security systems; and magnetic media
              sensing-which includes currency evaluation and discrimination, and magnetic
              card readers.
