Title       : SBIR Phase I: Innovative Integrated Optical Circuit Fabrication and Processing
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0214083

Award Number: 0214083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colleen M. Fitzpatrick Cfitzp@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rice Systems
	      5500 Bolsa Ave, Suite 140
	      Huntington Beach, CA  926491102    714/893-5407

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop a
              method of fabricating integrated optical circuits (IOCs) using alternate
              waveguide materials (AWMs). Currently, IOCs comprise silica glass waveguides,
              and are patterned using an expensive, multi-step photolithography process in
              conjunction with high temperature deposition techniques. However, AWMs are
              associated with lower glass transition temperatures, and have the potential of
              patterning optical circuits through alternate printing methods, bypassing the
              photolithography process. This will dramatically reduce the complexity and
              hence the cost of photonic device manufacture. Another important advantage of
              AWMs is lower minimum attenuation levels, possibly one to two orders of
              magnitude lower than that of silica glass. This is critical for long waveguide
              applications such as integrated optic delay lines for telecommunications,
              integrated optic gyroscopes, and more sensitive chemical sensors. In addition,
              because some alternate materials can host rare earth elements, the development
              of AWMs has further applications for improved optical switches, amplifiers, and
              solid-state blue lasers. This project will establish the feasibility of
              fabricating optical circuits comprising AWMs.
     Improved fabrication of
              optical waveguide circuits has the immediate potential for
integrated optic
              amplifiers, lossless splitters, and up conversion blue fiber lasers, essential
              to numerous commercial applications in optical storage, color printing, and
              projection, up converters, isolators and fluorescent coolers, as well as
              convenient, low-cost solid-state laser sources for the laboratory.

