Title       : Modeling of P-Channel Si1-xGex MOSFET Devices and Silicon-On-Insulator (SOI)
               Device Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0214867

Award Number: 0214867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragica Vasileska vasilesk@imap2.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this three-year research project include investigation of the
              operation of devices based on alternate device technologies, including
              p-channel strained SixGe1-x and narrow-width SOI device structures.  The
              simulation tools that will be developed for this purpose will begin at the
              semi-classical Boltzmann equation level in the hierarchy of approximations, and
              extend to direct simulation of quantum transport within various approximation
              schemes at the most fundamental level.  The main goals are to
develop tools
              based on direct solution of the semiclassical Boltzman equation using either
              full-band or non-parabolic energy band models.  These techniques will be
              combined with robust, multi-processor field solvers based on multi-grid and
              Bi-CGSTAB methods including non-uniform grids for arbitrary device geometries. 
              Discrete impurity effects will be included through a quantum molecular dynamics
              scheme to assess the fluctuation in device operating characteristics based on
              random impurity distributions.  Collaboration with industrial partners will be
              undertaken for comparison and calibration with state of the art device
              technologies. Due to the computational demands of both 3D semi-classical and
              quantum device modeling, the proposed research will be supported by
              high-performance computing environments based on distributed workstation
              clusters. In addition to research, there will be significant educational
              enhancements that will accompany this research project.  These include
              introduction of new classes in the area of Computational Electronics, Web-based
              activities and inclusion of minorities and undergraduates in research.  As
              such, they will help introduce our graduate students to the challenging world
              of Computational Electronics in both Industry and Academia.

