Title       : Thinking and Seeing: Visual Metacognition in the Legal Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0214969

Award Number: 0214969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Levin dlevin@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently, a number of researchers have emphasized the impact that beliefs about
              mental processes can have on the legal process. Research on metamemory (e.g.
              people's understanding of and control over memory) is therefore critical for
              understanding how jurors might incorrectly weigh evidence. Particularly
              important are situations where beliefs about mental functioning diverge from
              people's actual capabilities. Recent research has demonstrated that people are
              unaware of visual information that they do not attend to, and that they
              typically attend to a very small proportion of visual information in a given
              scene. One particularly striking manifestation of this failure occurs when
              subjects have difficulty detecting large between-view visual changes. This
              finding is referred to as "change blindness" (CB), and it occurs regardless of
              whether the subject is actively searching for changes, and even when the
              changing object is the current focus of the subject's attention. In part,
              interest in these findings is based on the degree to which they conflict with
              intuition - many people are incredulous when they discover that seemingly
              obvious changes are missed by subjects. Three sets of experiments in this
              proposal explore visual metacognition, documenting the scope of incorrect
              beliefs about visual information processing. A first set of experiments tests
              the degree to which beliefs about visual organization and intention underlie
              this metacognitive errors in vision. In these experiments, subjects will make
              estimates about changes to well organized natural scenes, jumbled scenes, and
              object arrays. A second set of experiments compares predictions about picture
              memory with predictions about on-line visual processes such as change detection
              to determine why subjects underestimate their performance in the former case,
              while they overestimate their performance in the latter case. The final
              experiments in this proposal explore the possibility that inaccurate visual
              metacognition can lead jurors to misevaluate evidence in criminal and civil
              cases. Just as incorrect beliefs about the confidence-accuracy correlation can
              lead jurors to misjudge eyewitness evidence, inaccurate beliefs about vision
              may lead them to misunderstand what someone "should have seen." 
