Title       : SBIR Phase I: Optimized Microvia Generation Technology for Low-Cost
               Manufacturing of Electronic Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0214695

Award Number: 0214695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Klosner mklosner@anvik.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Anvik Corporation
	      6 Skyline Drive
	      Hawthorne, NY  10532    914/345-2442

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
              requirement of high-density microvias, which are critical in a variety of
              microelectronic modules, such as Flat-Panel Displays (FPDs), Multi-Chip Modules
              (MCMs), and Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs). As these modules become ever faster,
              more compact, and more capable, their density of interconnects has been
              increasing dramatically and new packaging technologies such as Chip-Scale
              Packages (CSPs) and Ball-Grid Arrays (BGAs) have been developed to accommodate
              all the required input and output (I/Os) connections. Such dense interconnects
              are realized by the generation of hundreds of thousands of microvias in the
              substrate layers on which the electronic modules are built. These microvias are
              also both difficult and expensive to produce because of their small sizes and
              large numbers. Current technologies for microvia generation are not optimized
              for the varied cost considerations of different manufacturing requirements 
              direct-write tools address low-volume needs, whereas mask projection systems
              are designed for very high via-density products. The system technology
              described in this proposal offers several desirable features, including:
              high-speed microvia generation for different via densities, full microvia
              pattern programmability, capability to drill high-threshold photo-ablation
              substrates, and full and efficient utilization of available high-power excimer
              lasers.

A variety of microelectronic modules, such as flat panel displays,
              multi-chip modules, and printed circuit boards play an important role in
              numerous advanced technology applications in both commercial and military
              systems.  Results from this project could result in substantial cost reductions
              in a wide range of electronic modules.
