Title       : Preferences, Information and Incentives in Committee Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0214436

Award Number: 0214436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongbin Cai Cai@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Committees play critical roles in collective decision-making such as in Congress
              and in many other situations (e.g., board of directors, universities, jury,
              sports judging): they gather and report information, propose and choose
              policies. Severe incentive problems may arise in the committee decision-making
              process when committee members have different policy preferences and/or
              different information. In such circumstances, what are the important factors
              affecting effective committee decision-making and how should committees be
              structured to facilitate it?  This research project will develop several
              mathematical models of committee decisions to investigate various aspects of
              these questions.  The first model focuses on the informational role of
              committees, in an environment where committee members may shirk in gathering
              information and may distort reports of their findings to manipulate collective
              decisions.  Questions to study include how much information can be incorporated
              in the decisions and what is the optimal decision rule and optimal committee
              size. A second model is concerned with optimal voting rules for committees who
              vote on policy proposals developed by an agent, focusing on trade-offs among
              several effects: (1) information requirement for changing policies; (2)
              distortions by the agent; and (3) the agent's incentives to gather good
              information.  In a third model, the bargaining approach is used to formulate
              the idea that efficiency of the committee's decision-making deteriorates with
              heterogeneity of its members' interests, because heterogeneity makes
              compromises among members more difficult. The research project will also
              investigate why monetary transfers are rarely observed in real world committee
              decisions, while theoretically they can be quite useful because they can reduce
              distribution effects of committee decisions by having winners compensate
              losers, thus enabling the committee to focus solely on the efficiency aspects
              of its decisions.

Understanding committee decision-making is important for
              understanding real world institutions and policies, and may provide suggestions
              to make committee decision-making more effective. In recent years, research on
              committee decisions has broadened its scope to examine organizational features
              of committee decisions. This research project builds on the existing literature
              and tries to shed new light on several aspects of committee organizational
              structure. The results of the project may generate theoretical and practical
              implications on committee size, decision rules, voting rules, restrictions on
              transfers, etc.

