Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9696257

Award Number: 9696257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Goldstein gold@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9350227  Goldstein  As a Presidential Faculty Fellow award, this proposal
              consists of  two parts. 1) The teaching plan involves the development of 
              interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate courses in nonlinear  dynamics and
              chaos, in hydrodynamics and pattern formation and in  the physics of biological
              and colloidal systems. 2) The research  plan involves seemingly diverse classes
              of problems ranging from  pattern formation to topological transitions to
              protein folding  with particular emphasis on their dynamical aspects. The PI 
              proposes to look for unifying concepts such as the role of  variational
              principles and conservation laws and for an  understanding of how energetics,
              kinetics and topological and  geometrical constraints are linked, in describing
              the dynamics of  patterns and shapes.  %%%  The PI proposes to start several
              undergraduate and graduate classes  at Princeton in the general area of chaos
              and unstable dynamics, of  pattern formation in liquid systems and of the
              physics of  biological systems. His research plan is to look for general 
              unifying principles governing the dynamics of how things - be they  coils of
              DNA or vortices in superconductors or fingers of one  liquid displacing another
              - change shape. His interest lies at the  heart of the competition between the
              driving force (energetics and  kinetics) to change shape and the constraints
              that geometry puts  upon that change.  ***
