Title       : Collaborative Research on Responses to Fluvial, Estuarine, and Barrier-Island
               Systems to Climate and Sea-Level Change on the Central Texas Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9696115

Award Number: 9696115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas R. Leinbach                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 16,  1995    
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97489              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Blum mblum1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9423249  BLUM       Considerable attention has been devoted to understanding the
               contemporary dynamics of different facets of the Earth system.  Of particular
              concern have been the analysis of interconnections  among terrestrial,
              atmospheric, and ocean systems related to  climatic change and sea-level rise. 
              A growing number of  scientists are turning their attention to analyses of past
               changes in order to better understand present and future changes.  By
              enhancing the empirical record of conditions during the  Pleistocene and
              Holocene epochs, expanded knowledge of the  dynamics of change and of the
              consequences of those changes can  be used to validate models of contemporary
              processes and to  improve predictions of the impacts of future changes.  This 
              collaborative research project will examine the development of  fluvial,
              estuarine, and barrier-island systems along the central  Texas coast in
              response to late Pleistocene and Holocene climate  and sea-level changes.  The
              primary goals of this project are  (1) to develop a chronologically controlled
              general stratigraphic  framework for different environments over the last
              10,000 to  20,000 years; (2) to compare this framework with independently 
              defined records of climate and environmental change for central  Texas and the
              Gulf of Mexico; (3) to refine the record of  Holocene sea-level change as a
              potential analog for future  events; and (4) to evaluate the effects of
              sea-level change on  fluvial, estuarine, and barrier-island systems as possible
               analogs for future changes.  A diverse set of geomorphological, 
              sedimentological, geophysical, micropaleontological, and  archeological
              techniques will be used to gather data used in this  study.  The archeological
              work will focus on examining changes in  human use of estuarine resources in
              order to ascertain possible  future changes in productivity of fisheries
              resources when  natural systems undergo human-induced and natural change.      
              This project will provide new information about different   facets of
              Pleistocene and Holocene change in coastal  environments.  Analyses of these
              and other data will provide  valuable new insights into the timing and
              character of change in  fluvial, estuarine, and barrier-island systems.  This
              project  also will help determine the degree to which historically based 
              models can be used to predict future changes.
