Title       : RIA: Fast Simulation of Computer Architectures Using Field-Programmable Gate
               Arrays as Hardware Accelerators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1995   
File        : a9696010

Award Number: 9696010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Foster                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Conte conte@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research is on architectural-level simulation using field-  programmable
              gate arrays as hardware accelerators.  The goals of  this research include the
              development of a paradigm for  architectural specification that is both
              general-purpose and can be  used to produce fast and efficient simulators,
              development of a  graphical user interface-based entry tool, development of
              tools for  automatic translation of an architectural description to FPGA 
              programming information, and implementation of a trace-driven  execution
              environment to run the simulations.  The key idea behind  this work is to use
              FPGA's to simulate a system above the gate  level, at the level of events,
              dependencies, resources and delays.   FPGA's place a limit on the size of the
              hardware-implemented data  structures, which will be extended via a software
              monitor to allow  virtual, unlimited-length structures.  The simulation will be
               automatically translated from a high-level description by use of  methods
              adapted from high-level synthesis and the compilation of C  programs.  To aid
              in entering the architectural description, a  graphical user interface tool
              will be developed.  The paradigm for  system description will be based on a
              discrete-event architectural  model of system behavior.  This paradigm will be
              hierarchical and  provide a library that takes advantage of existing fast
              simulation  techniques for cache and processor simulation.
