Title       : British Petroleum (BP)/Rice University Postdoctoral Fellowship on Parallel
               Algorithms for Uncertainty Estimationin Permeable Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1995   
File        : a9696008

Award Number: 9696008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. Wheeler mfw@ticam.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton N. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9407028  Wheeler       The primary objective of the fellowhsip is to expose  the
              postdoctoral associate (PA) to important computational  engineering and
              mathematics problems arising in flow through  porous media.  We will focus on
              the areas of uncertainty  estimation and development of parallel algorithms for
               simulation of flow and transport processes.  During the  course of the
              fellowship, the PA will develop and apply flow  and transport parallel sofware
              (including rescaling  techniques) combines with software for reservoir 
              characterization, gridding, and  uncertainty estimation to  an actual  BP
              reservoir.  The software will be used in  analyzing production performance of
              the reservoir.       The participants in this fellowship include Rice 
              University, where the mentors will be Professors Clint  Dawson and Mary F.
              Wheeler, and British Petroleum, where the  mentor will be Dr. Michael Christie.
               The PA will be exposed  to several techniques which are part of BP's and
              Rice's  current activities.  In particular, Rice has expertise in  parallel
              computing and algorithm development, while BP has  expertise in rescaling
              techniques, reservoir  characterization, and well management.       The PA will
              be trained in the engineering and  mathematical aspects of the emerging areas
              of uncertainty  estimation and parallel computation.  This will equip the PA 
              to work as a specialist in reservoir simulation, hydrology,  or any other areas
              where estimating uncertainty and/or  parallel computation are low key.
