Title       : Algorithms and Tools for the Automatic Analysis of Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9696091

Award Number: 9696091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Henzinger tah@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 An adequate level of safety and reliability for embedded  systems can be
              guaranteed only through the use of computer  aided design and  analysis tools
              in the development process.  This research investigates several  key questions
              whose  solution is expected to increase the scope and decrease the  cost of
              symbolic analysis techniques for embedded systems.  Simultaneously, the 
              project is implementing the new  algorithms and strategies for the automatic 
              analysis of  embedded systems within the prototype tool HyTech that is  being 
              developed at Cornell.    Embedded systems are modeled as Hybrid Automata, which
               combine discrete system transitions and continuous  environment activities. 
              Symbolic model checking and abstract  interpretation are used to automatically 
              compute the  conditions under which a hybrid automaton satisfies a 
              temporal-logic requirement. The method has been implemented  in HyTech, which 
              allows the automatic analysis of hybrid  automata with piecewise-linear 
              behavior. The purpose of this  work is, first, to improve the applicability and
               the  efficiency of HyTech and, second, to investigate--through  theory, 
              implementation, and case studies--how far standard  program-analysis methods
              can  be generalized to permit the  direct analysis of continuous-time systems. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
