Title       : Avian Neuromuscular Diversity: The Evolution of Muscle Morphology, Function and
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9696029

Award Number: 9696029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Gatesy Stephen_Gatesy@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9407367  Gatesy    Species of animals can differ in the number, arrangement and 
              function of their muscles. This research seeks to understand  the relationship
              between muscle form and function and how  this can change with time. The PI
              will study a group of  muscles in the thigh of birds called the deep dorsal
              thigh  muscles. During embryonic development, a mass of cells  breaks up, or
              cleaves, to form the individual muscles  present in adults. Some birds, such as
              the chicken or  guineafowl, have four separate deep dorsal thigh muscles. 
              However, in other birds, the deep dorsal  muscle mass may  not cleave
              completely, yielding less than four adult  muscles. For example, the pigeon and
              the duck only have  three deep dorsals, while a roadrunner has only two. The PI
               is interested in knowing what effect this variation in  number and position
              has on the function of these muscles.  Using fine wires as electrodes, the PI
              will record  electrical changes that reveal when a muscle is contracting. 
              Previous studies have shown that as a guineafowl walks or  runs, deep dorsal
              thigh muscles are active at different  times in the stride. When will the deep
              dorsals be active in  birds with fewer than four muscles? Do new muscles evolve
              to  perform new functions or movements? How does the nervous  system change
              when muscle anatomy changes? Through questions  such as these, the PI hopes to
              gain a better understanding  of animal design and the evolution of vertebrate
              diversity.  ***
