Title       : RIA: Data Reduction and New Visualization Techniques for Three-Dimensional Data
               Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1997   
File        : a9696024

Award Number: 9696024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Van Rosendale                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernd Hamann hamann@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is concerned with data reduction and general                     
              visualization techniques for scalar-valued 3D data sets.  Many                 
              practical applications deal with 3D data sets where points in                  
              space, with associated function values, are given.  Such data                  
              sets occur in medicine (tomography), geosciences and physical                  
              sciences (temperature, pressure, radiation), and several other                 
              sciences and disciplines of engineering measurements or                        
              mathematical simulations.  Generally, such data sets are huge,                 
              aggravating the tasks of data storage, interactive data                        
              manipulation, and real-time data visualization.                                
                                                                                             
              Discrete scalar-valued data sets can be reduced by considering                 
              derivative information at the given data points.  Curvature                    
              information of graphs of functions locally approximating the data              
              can be used to define a measure of the significance of single                  
              data points can be weighted and removed iteratively form the 3D                
              point set.  The proposed methods for 3D points, and 3D                         
              retriangulation strategies.  The result of reduction algorithm is              
              a data set consisting of scattered 3D points and an associated                 
              triangulation (tetrahedra).                                                    
                                                                                             
              Common visualization techniques require structured data sets,                  
              points typically being organized in a rectilinear ("cuberille")                
              grid.  This research will introduce visualization methodologies                
              allowing discretized scalar fields, with arbitrarily located data              
              points, to be rendered.
