Title       : Expression of a Gene That Promotes Intestinal Development in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9696186

Award Number: 9696186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183593             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel H. Rothman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  9506089  Rothman    This proposal will investigate the molecular processes
              required for  establishment of a complete organ, the intestine, during 
              embryogenesis of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This organ is  clonally
              derived from a single, exclusive progenitor called the E  cell, in the seven
              cell embryo and constitutes the entire endoderm.  A genomic region required
              zygotically to produce the intestine has  been identified in a screen of
              genetic deficiencies (deletions).  The relevant locus, referred to as the end-1
              gene, was localized to  a DNA fragment that rescues the gut differentiation
              defect of the  deficiencies and of a putative point mutant. The end-1 gene will
              be  expressed ectopically to assess whether it is sufficient to promote 
              intestinal differentiation from non-intestinal precursor cells.  Gene fusion
              constructs and antibody to the end-1 product will be  made to characterize when
              and where the gene is expressed during  embryogenesis and where its product is
              localized within cells.  Interactions between end-1 and maternal genes required
              for normal  specification of the intestine will be examined by characterizing 
              double mutants and analyzing expression of end-1 in maternal  mutants. These
              studies will assist in understanding the molecular  function of the end-1 gene
              product in specifying an entire organ,  the intestine, thereby elucidating
              molecular processes that specify  the identity of a single organ and a single
              germ layer during  animal development.  ***
