Title       : An Imperative Mixed-Constructive Type Theory for Program Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9696065

Award Number: 9696065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 28,  1995    
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Sasaki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The primary objective of this project is to extend  logics  that combine
              constructive and classical reasoning in verifying  programs.  The long-term aim
              is to make type-theory-based systems  more  applicable to the kinds of
              programming used in large and  existing systems while  still maintaining the
              power and conceptual  unity of type theory.    The  proposed logic will combine
              a specification language with a  formal logic of  verified programs.  The logic
              will support a wide  spectrum of styles, including  higher-order functions,
              simple and  substructure assignment, and destructive  operations on 
              parameters.    To build the logic, previous work in  mixed-constructive 
              theories is extended, where an evidence-based (constructive) semantics  is 
              augmented by classical operations, as suppressed or oracle  computations.  The
              interactions of the constructive and classical  parts of a proof are limited 
              so that the constructive parts of  the proofs do not depend computationally on 
              the classical parts  of the proofs.  Our work in applicative and simple 
              imperative  versions of such logics show that such logics are natural and 
              robust.  The proposed project will advance the state of knowledge  in the field
               by helping to generate methods for verification that  are better-integrated
              with  the activity of programming.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
