Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9696268

Award Number: 9696268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand Pillay pillay@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9504788  Pillay       A substantial part of the project concerns the interaction
              between   logic and differential algebra.  On the one hand a new Galois theory
              for   differential fields is developed, using model-theoretic methods (and  
              generalising the Picard-Vessiot theory), and various inverse Galois   problems
              are posed.  On the other hand, it is asked whether a differential   field which
              supports a model-theoretic dimension theory must be   differentially closed
              (namely contain solutions to all algebraic   differential equations over the
              field).  Other components of the project   involve (1) more traditional
              questions in model theory such as determining   the number of models of
              complete theories, and (2) studying groups   definable in O-minimal theories,
              which amounts to trying to develop a   reasonable theory of Lie groups over
              arbitrary real closed fields.       The understanding of collections of
              symmetries (also called groups)  is an important part of mathematics and of its
              applications.  Pillay's   project concerns symmetries arising from various
              situations: differential   equations, algebraic equations, and more abstract
              contexts.  He will use   methods from logic (specifically model theory) to
              analyse, identify, and   make connections between such groups of symmetries.
              The expressive power of   logic thus applied will gain concrete mathematical
              information.  ***
