Title       : Biochemical Characterization of a Retroviral Transactivator Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9696149

Award Number: 9696149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255636             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Dynan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ga Res Inst
	      1120 Fifteenth Street
	      Augusta, GA  309124810    706/721-2592

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                9419311  Dynan  In eukaryotic cells, the synthesis of a gene-specific
              messenger RNA is accomplished by transcription of the corresponding DNA by the
              enzyme RNA Polymerase II. Additional proteins called transcription factors are
              required to initiate and regulate transcription. The human retrovirus protein
              Tax increases the rate at which RNA Polymerase II transcribes certain genes to
              make messenger RNAs. Tax works by an unusual mechanism in that it increases the
              ability of a variety of transcription factors to interact with DNA This
              research will explore in detail the mechanism by which Tax enhances the
              interaction of various transcription factors with DNA, and the mechanism by
              which Tax activates transcription of the human retrovirus HTLV-I. The results
              of this research should greatly increase our understanding of the functional
              and regulatory interactions of eukaryotic transcription factors.  ***  The
              transcriptional regulatory protein, Tax, which is encoded by a human retro
              virus, increases the rate retrovirus at which RNA polymerase II transcribes
              certain genes, and does so by an unusual mechanism. Purified Tax protein
              increases the ability of other transcription factors to bind to DNA. Tax
              enhances the binding of the cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB),
              related proteins in the CREB/ATF family, and a number of factors that belong to
              other, unrelated, structural classes. In some cases, Tax enters into stable
              ternary complexes with other transcription factors and DNA but in other cases,
              ternary complexes have not been detected.  In this research, the mechanism by
              which Tax enhances transcription factor binding will be explored in more
              detail. A new type of binding assay will be developed, which will allow direct,
              quantitative measurements of the association of Tax into ternary complexes with
              CREB and DNA. The assay will be used to study the effect of mutations in CREB
              and DNA on ternary complex formation. In separate experiments, a novel, highly
              specific UV crosslinking method w ill be used to characterize changes in
              CREB-DNA contacts in the presence of Tax. Experiments will also be performed to
              test a model where Tax preferentially interacts with the unfolded CREB DNA
              binding domain in order to guide the protein to DNA.  It is important to
              establish which aspects of the Tax-CREB interaction are specific to CREB and
              which are generah To address this, the interaction of Tax with alternative
              target proteins, outside the CREB/ATF family, will be studied. Quantitative
              studies will be performed to characterize the effect of Tax on the DNA binding
              activity of Fos and Jun, Spl, and Etsl, Protein-protein interactions between
              Tax and the alternative target proteins will be characterized, and the model
              that Tax preferentially associates with unfolded proteins will again be tested.
               Finally, the mechanism by which Tax activates HTLV-I transcription will be
              investigated. It will be determined whether Tax-CREB complexes recruit
              additional transcription factors to the template DNA. We will perform
              preliminary investigations of the mechanism by which a small-molecule inhibitor
              blocks HTLV-I transcription.  %%%
