Title       : CAREER: Computer - Aided Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9696122

Award Number: 9696122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Henzinger tah@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The discipline of Computer-aided Verification attempts to  provide 
              software and hardware engineers with (semi) automatic formal  methods  for
              improving the reliability of concurrent and real-time  systems.  Over the  last
              decade, Computer-aided verification has  matured into a well-defined but  loose
              collection of various  models, theorems, algorithms, techniques, and  tools. 
              Indeed, to  the outsider the discipline seems to provide a shopping list  of 
              different formalisms and methods, with little or no assistance as  to which 
              model, technique, or tool may be particularly (un)  suited for a given task. 
              This CAREER research seeks to aid the  further advancement of the discipline
              and  the technology  transition by a systematic organization of the core
              results in a  single standardized framework that can be taught on the 
              undergraduate level, the reactive-system  model.  To  achieve both simplicity
              and generality, a system is  identified with its  reaction function, which,
              given a system  state and an environment move, yields  a set of possible new 
              system states.  Based on the reactive-system model, this  research  pursues
              three objectives:    (1)  Development of a uniform, clean, and  comprehensive
              theory of  Computer-aided Verification.  While most results were  formulated, 
              originally, for specific formalisms with various idiosyncrasies,  it is
              expected that the translation of theorems and algorithms  into a common 
              framework will lead to a deeper understanding of  dependencies, connections,
              and  applications.    (2)  Preparation of a standard textbook on Computer-aided
               Verification, targeted at the advanced-undergraduate level and  the 
              beginning-graduate level.  It is hoped that the text will  move formal methods 
              into the mainstream of the Computer Science  curriculum.    (3) Development of
              a  course on the practice and applications of  Computer-aided Verification, a 
              project-oriented course is  offered to advanced undergraduates and beginning
              graduate  students in engineering.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
