Title       : Neural Basis of Visual Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9696208

Award Number: 9696208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 12,  1996       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248932             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Barlow barlowr@hscsyr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick A. Dodge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY, Upstate Med Univ
	      155 Elizabeth Blackwell
	      Syracuse, NY  132102334    315/473-4570

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  Visual behavior is performed by an animal in its environment using its eyes,
              its brain, and locomotion.  The horseshoe crab, Limulus, provides a powerfully
              simple system for investigating vision.  Although there is a classic
              quantitative model for how the lateral compound eye of Limulus works, the
              neural coding that mediates visual behavior remains unknown.  This project
              investigates the role of identifiable single nerve cells in processing visual
              information that lead to simple motor behavior, such as turning toward an
              interesting target.   Behavioral studies in the field allow estimates of visual
              acuity, contrast sensitivity and object recognition.  Novel methods for nerve
              cell recording in the natural underwater environment allow alalysis of optic
              nerve responses during behavior to see what information might be carried to the
              brain.  Intracellular recording of identifiable nerve cells in the brain during
              visual activity allows analysis of how the brain processes information coming
              from the eye.  Results from this remarkably integrative study will clarify how
              sensory signals relate to behavior.  Findings will have an impact not only on
              visual neuroscience and neuroethology, but also on computational neural
              modeling, evolutionary and comparative biology, and robotics.
