Title       : Mathematical Sciences: On a Class of Degenerate Systems Arising from the
               Electrical Heating of Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9696141

Award Number: 9696141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiangsheng Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9424448  Xu        Many industrial processes involve the electrical heating of a
              conductor.  A typical example is the electrical spot welding of metal sheets in
              the  manufacturing of such products as automobile bodies, tanks, and armored 
              vehicles. The mathematical modeling of such processes often leads to systems 
              of degenerate partial differential equations with diffusive and convective 
              couplings. The study of these systems leads to deep and intriguing questions 
              in nonlinear analysis. In these considerations, the presence of strong 
              nonlinearities and degeneracy gives rise to very rich structures of solutions. 
              Our recent research findings indicate that solutions of these systems display 
              new phenomena that cannot be incorporated into the classical variational 
              formulation, and a new notion of a capacity solution is, therefore, introduced 
              to study these systems. In this proposal, we propose to study the finer 
              properties of capacity solutions, such as regularity, partial regularity, 
              large time behavior, and other related questions.  The proposed research is 
              important from the point of view of industrial applications. The mathematical 
              results we wish to obtain can lead to a more efficient production line, a new 
              or better product. For example, in the welding of metal sheets, one of our 
              objectives is to find out how the welding time is related to the material 
              properties and the current applied. This information is critical to the 
              automation of the welding procedure.
