Title       : Impact of Toxic Dinoflagellates on Digestive Physiology and Metabolism of
               Copepods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9696016

Award Number: 9696016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95214              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Patrick Hassett hassett@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9402186  HASSETT    Due to the dramatic and sometimes catastrophic consequences 
              of red  tides, toxic dinoflagellates have been intensively studied  over the 
              years. However, relatively few of these studies have dealt  with  effects of
              dinoflagellates on zooplankton. The main  objective of  this project is to
              determine how the dinoflagellates,  Alexandrium  tamarensis and Scrippsiella
              trochoidea act upon the copepod  digestive system and metabolism. These studies
              will examine  if  different copepod species have different susceptibilities 
              and how  these relate to feeding history and nutritional status, and  will 
              determine if other dinoflagellate species have similar  impacts on  copepods.
              This project will use visual description and  morphometric  analyses of the gut
              cells of several copepods feeding upon  the 2  species of dinoflagelattes in
              laboratory experiments.  Analyses of  gut morphology will be conducted at both
              the light and  electron-  microscope level , and also will include observations
              of the  digestive system of live copepods under light microscope.  Changes  in
              physiological rates (digestive enzyme activities,  metabolic  enzyme
              activities, excretion rate, and respiration rate) and  feeding rate also will
              be determined to assess the  consequences of  ingesting a toxic dinoflagellate
              or of being exposed to  dinoflagellate toxins. After establishing the
              interactions  between  copepods and the two dinoflagellates, this project will
              use  the  knowledge gained as a basis for a survey of impacts of other 
              dinoflagellate species on copepods.
