Title       : Agile Manufacturing Enterprise Forum (AMEF)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9696175

Award Number: 9696175
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9626790            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Patterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agility Forum
	      125 Goodman Drive
	      Bethlehem, PA  18015    610/758-6649

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9320951  Schmoyer       The purpose of this forum is to develop further a vision
              of   agile manufacturing, to assess the current state of implementation,   to
              identify and prioritize needed changes in practices and related   technology,
              and to influence the research agenda on agile   manufacturing.  The forum will
              carry out strategic analyses of the   technical and business issues affecting
              agile manufacturing.  It   will serve as an industry voice in defining and
              prioritizing   research needs in support of agile manufacturing.  The forum
              will   provide recommendations as requested on the entire Agile   Manufacturing
              Initiative (AMI) including the Agile Manufacturing   Research Institutes and
              related demonstration projects.  The forum   will evaluate industry training
              needs in agile manufacturing   against available courses and materials.        
                  This forum plays a central role in the success of the AMI   which provides
              an industry-led institute.  The forum will work as   a catalyst to assist in
              the dissemination and adoption of the agile   manufacturing research results. 
              Rapid deployment of this research   is seen as an important manufacturing
              strategy for the country.    Enterprises which adopt agile manufacturing
              concepts are expected   to change a broad range of operating characteristics
              quickly.  This   will enable them to take advantage of new manufacturing  
              technologies, and to facilitate timely response to unanticipated   market
              opportunities.
