Title       : Archaeological Investigations at La Quemada, Zacatecas, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9696103

Award Number: 9696103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2856               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben A. Nelson bnelson@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Ben Nelson will                   
              continue his archaeological research at the site of La Quemada                 
              which is located in Northern Mexico. He will also expand his                   
              investigation to the neighboring smaller satellite community of                
              Pilarillos. Work to date has indicated that La Quemada served as a             
              major prehistoric center and was occupied at approximately 600-750             
              AD. It includes ceremonial ball courts, a temple and other major               
              structures. Over the course of two field seasons Dr. Nelson and his            
              collaborators will conduct a series of excavations. They will                  
              continue to expose the ceremonial structure. In addition they will             
              sink a number of test units in middens which are rich in ceramic               
              and other cultural remains. Finally test units will also be opened             
              in areas between terraces where no evidence of structures is                   
              visible on the surface. The purpose of these is to test the                    
              proposition that "low status" structures built of perishable                   
              materials were interspersed among the more elaborate buildings. At             
              the site of Pilarillos surface materials will be collected and a               
              map made. On this basis areas will then be selected for excavation.            
              With these data several questions will be addressed: What is the               
              macroregional and regional chronology? What was the social                     
              organization and what role was played by La Quemada which is the               
              largest site? What was the subsistence basis for this prehistoric              
              group and how did they adapt to and in turn affect their                       
              environment?                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Years of research have given archaeologists considerable knowledge             
              about prehistoric Central Mexican cultures and of Mayan regions                
              further to the South. Likewise much work has been done in the                  
              American Southwest where large sites such as those at Chaco Canyon             
              have been extensively excavated. However relatively little is known            
              about the intervening northern Mexico area. Without this data it is            
              difficult to examine the intriguing question of interaction and the            
              extent to which Southwestern cultures were influenced by or served             
              as outliers of their southern contemporaries. Dr. Nelson's work                
              will provide a framework for the northern Mexico region and show               
              whether it acted as barrier or conduit.                                        
                                                                                             
              The research is important for several reasons. It will provide data            
              of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our                       
              understanding of how complex societies and inter regional networks             
              develop and the extent to which Southwestern U.S. prehistoric                  
              societies developed autonomously.
