Title       : Collaborative Research on Contracting with Costly State Falsification: Theory
               and Empirical Results from Automobile Insurance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9696260

Award Number: 9696260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78217              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith J. Crocker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to undertake theoretical and  empirical research
              into the problem of fraudulent claims filed in  insurance markets.  A growing
              body of empirical work aims to  document the existence of fraudulent or
              exaggerated claims in  selected insurance markets, and to aid insurers in
              identifying  particular claims which may be fraudulent.  Theoretical analyses 
              have focused on designing optimal schemes for the auditing of  claims which are
              filed to detect and deter fraudulent claims.   This project fills and an
              important gap in both the theoretical  and empirical literature on insurance
              fraud by considering  contractual mechanisms by which insures might manage the
              problem  of fraud.  Rather than simply designing and implementing ex-post 
              situations such as claims audits, the project examines how the  initial
              insurance contract might be designed in order to provide  incentives of
              claimants not to cheat.  Since efficient policy  approaches to the problem of
              fraud are likely to entail ex-ante  incentives as well as ex-post sanctions,
              this research promises  to provide important insights into a heretofore ignored
              aspect of  effective fraud management.  The theoretical contracting model  will
              be tested using a large and detailed dataset on automobile  settlements.
