Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Topology of Quotients in Algebraic and
               Symplectic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9696104

Award Number: 9696104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi Hu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9401695  Hu       This proposal concerns geometric and topological questions  on
              symplectic reductions, moduli spaces of vector bundles over  algebraic
              surfaces, and arithmetic quotients.  The investigator  plans to study the
              behavior of a symplectic reduction when  varying its defining datum (i.e. a
              symplectic form) and compare  its Gromov invariants with the equivariant Gromov
              invariants of  the original space.  He also plans to study the behavior of the 
              Gieseker and Uhlenbeck compactifications of the moduli space of  stable vector
              bundles on an algebraic surface when varying their  defining data (i.e. ample
              divisors).  Finally, he intends to  compare the cohomology of a toroidal
              compactification of an  arithmetic quotient with the intersection cohomology of
              the  Baily-Borel-Satake compactification.       Algebraic Geometry studies the
              geometry of the set of  solutions of a polynomial.  Symplectic Geometry is
              motivated by  Theoretical Physics, which studies the geometry of some 
              mathematical models originally coming from Physics.  The current  proposal
              deals with some questions on the structures of certain  important models in
              Symplectic and Algebraic Geometry.  These  models depend on a choice of
              parameters (such as numerical data).   It is natural and important to find out
              how the structure of a  model changes when we change the parameters.  A deep
              result  toward this will clarify the mysterious relation among the  structures
              of these models, leading to new insight into some  other important problems in
              the two fields.  It will have  numerous interesting applications to Physics,
              because Symplectic  Geometry was developed out of physical models.  ***
