Title       : Performance Measurement and Modeling of Parallel Computer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9696023

Award Number: 9696023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy W. Apon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               The purpose of this Research Planning Grant is to perform  preliminary research
              and to develop a full proposal which  will be submitted to  NSF in the fall of
              1995.  The primary  objective of the research is a  measurement and modeling 
              study of parallel computer systems.  The platforms to  be  used include the
              Kendall Square KSR1 and the Intel Paragon  multiprocessor  systems located at
              Oak Ridge National  Laboratory, and a network of Sun Solaris  2.3 workstations 
              located at Fisk University, an HBCU/MI.    The method of  evaluation is to
              measure and evaluate various  system design alternatives using  alternative
              queueing  network models of parallel computer systems.  Queueing  network
              models are chosen because, unlike other methods such  as Markov models  and
              Petri net models, queueing network  models do not require the enumeration of 
              all possible states  that the system may enter, but rather, use computationally
               efficient techniques to determine mean performance metrics  of the system. 
              The use of parallel and distributed computer and  communications systems is 
              becoming commonplace.  However,  the computer systems which are the focus of 
              this research  have characteristics which are difficult to measure and  model. 
              The systems may have forking and joining in the task  graph, variations in the 
              multiprogramming level and use  various synchronization techniques.  System 
              issues such as  thread scheduling and placement are difficult to model 
              accurately.  Thus, the development and application of  computationally
              efficient  techniques for evaluating the  performance of these types of systems
              is an  important and  significant area of research.  The project includes a 
              component  for undergraduate research experiences at Fisk  University.  Given
              appropriate  guidance, undergraduate have  the opportunity to alter parameters,
              run  experiments, and  participate in the measuring and modeling process.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
