Title       : Anatomical Features Linked To Ventilation and Metabolic Rates Of Fossil Birds
               and Dinosaurs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9696254

Award Number: 9696254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58516              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem J. Hillenius hilleniusw@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Ruben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9420290  William J. Hillenius    Endmthermy,   or   "warm-bloodedness"  was   a 
               significant  innovation in animal evolution.   Because most physiological 
              adaptations associated with endothermy occur in soft  tissue  and  do  not 
              fossilize, the early evolution of  endothermy,  including  its  possible
              presence among  dinosaurs,  remains  largely  speculative.  New evidence
              suggests that  the  high  metabolic  rates and lung ventilation rates
              associated  with  endothermy  in  mammals require complex bony  structures  in 
              the  nose (respiratory turbinals) that humidify inhaled  air  and  decrease 
              respiratory water loss.  This  research  will  test  to  see whether the same
              association holds for  living  birds,  and  examine fossil birds and their 
              ancestors,  the  dinosaurs,  for  evidence  of the  presence  of  respiratory 
              turbinals.    It   will  use  non-invasive,  high-resolution  computed  X-ray 
              tomography  scans  to  examine  the   nasal  internal anatomy of fossils of 
              birds and representatives of  a  variety  of dinosaur groups.  The results will
              show  when  endothermy arose during the evolution of birds, and  whether  and
              when endothermy evolved in dinosaurs.  The research will  lead  to  a greater
              understanding of the physiology  of  the  dinosaurs, and possibly of the
              reasons for their extinction.
