Title       : Hydrologic, Geomorphic, & Chronologic Record of Paleofloods,Lake-Building Events
               & Climate Change During the Late Quat- ernary: Analysis of Integrated
               Fluvial/Pluvial Lake Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1996     
File        : a9696058

Award Number: 9696058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 16,  1995   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106036             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Wells sgwells@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9316443     Wells    Climate variations and hydrologic responses are recorded in
               numerous sedimentologic and geomorphic features, including  lacustrine
              sequences and fluvial landforms.  Pleistocene Lake Manly  in Death Valley was
              the end point for river discharges during the  Quaternary.  The supply of
              runoff was from three major sources:   The Owens River system draining the
              eastern slopes of the Sierra  Nevada in response to glacial meltwaters, the
              Mojave River draining  the San Bernardino Mountains in response to
              precipitation due to  orographic uplift over the Transverse Ranges, and the
              Amargosa  River which heads in the lower Black and Timber Mountains.  
              Presently, the Amargosa is the only river to flow into Death  Valley.  This
              project will address 1) how the Amargosa River  acquired its surface flow, from
              anamolous climatic conditions, or  from groundwater, and 2) the relative role
              the Amargosa River  discharge has in contributing to lake-building events in
              Death  Valley during the late Quaternary.  Understanding the geomorphic  and
              hydrologic evolution of the Amargosa River system is important  for the
              following reasons; (1) It contributions a significant  15,540 Km2 to the total
              potential drainage area of Death Valley in  the late Quarternary (Hunt et al.,
              1966)  (2) Amargosa River  surface runoff comes from a low-elevation drainage
              system that may  serve as a paleoclimatic indicator of late Quaternary climatic
               regimes unaffected by glaciation or high elevation orographic  precipitation.
              (3) The drainage basin of the Amargosa River lies on  the periphery of
              climatic/physiographic zones where it has the  potential to indicate
              large-scale climatic fluctuations preserved  in fluvial/lacustrine sediments. 
              (4) it drains the potential site  of the nations's proposed high-level
              radioactive waste repository  at Yucca Mountain, Nevada.  We propose to (a)
              reconstruct the late  quaternary flood history of the Amargosa River (b)
              determine the  modern  hydrologic and climatic conditions for floo ding  (c) 
              reconstruct late Quaternary lake-building events in Death Valley  and (d) the
              late Quaternary flood histories of the major drainages  and their relationship
              to paleoclimate dynamics.    ***
