Title       : Political Hegemony and the Archaeology of Early Cahokia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9696159

Award Number: 9696159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Pauketat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Timothy Pauketat and              
              his collaborators will conduct three seasons of archaeological                 
              excavation at the site of Cahokia and the surrounding region. This             
              large site located on the outskirts of St. Louis Missouri consists             
              of a series of large mounds and represents one of the most massive             
              prehistoric constructions in North America. Prior work indicates               
              that the Cahokia polity developed in the first millennium AD and               
              reached its height around 1000 AD. The site subsequently underwent             
              decline well before Europeans reached the New World. Building on               
              prior work in the region, Dr. Pauketat wishes to understand the                
              processes which led to the rise of Cahokia. With support for three             
              field seasons, he will collect a range of data. Because his focus              
              is on the rise of centralized power he will excavate and collect               
              cultural material from a portion of the site occupied by elites.               
              Secondly he will conduct a regional survey to locate all smaller               
              archaeological occurrences which date to the same period and this              
              will allow him to set Cahokia into a broader regional context.                 
              Finally he will excavate at four known subsidiary sites to                     
              determine their relationship to the central one.                               
                                                                                             
              While archaeologists have traced the rise complex centralized                  
              societies in many parts of the world they still do not understand              
              the underlying processes involved. At an early stage social                    
              inequality becomes evident and the egalitarianism which                        
              characterizes simpler antecedent groups gives way to social                    
              stratification. Several theories exist which may potentially                   
              explain the rise of "chiefs" or "big men." One emphasizes the                  
              possible role of dominance while another views chiefs as "managers"            
              who serve essentially to coordinate activities and redistribute                
              wealth. Because he adopts a regional approach in which elite and               
              non-elite portions of Cahokia can be directly compared and Cahokia             
              itself can be set into a broader regional context, Dr. Pauketat                
              hopes to address this issue.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new               
              light on a pinnacle of prehistoric Native American development. It             
              will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and increase              
              our understanding of the emergence of social complexity.
