Title       : Conservation of Carotenoid Pigments During Passage Through the Guts of Calanoid
               Copepods: Specificity and Physiological Induction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1996  
File        : a9696237

Award Number: 9696237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33775              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Kleppel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Carotenoid pigments are widely used as chemotaxonomic                          
              markers fordescribing the distributions and composition of                     
              primary producers in the sea.  Increasingly, carotenoids are                   
              being used as trophic dynamic and geochemical probes for                       
              studying processes such as zooplankton feeding activity,                       
              detritus formation, and vertical organic fluxes.  Most of                      
              these applications require the measurement of carotenoids in                   
              zooplankton guts or feces.  Quantification of these                            
              measurements requires a working knowledge of whether or not                    
              carotenoid pigments are conserved during passage through the                   
              gut.  At present, such information is scarce and existing                      
              data do not suggest a predictable pattern of carotenoid                        
              processing by copepods.  Part of the problem seems to be                       
              that studies to date have been neither extensive nor                           
              intensive.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project provides a systematic evaluation of the fate of                   
              commonly used carotenoid marker pigments, from major                           
              phytoplankton taxa, during passage through the copepod gut.                    
              The goal of the project is to ascertain the extent to which                    
              the fate of carotenoids uring gut passage is a function of                     
              the copepod species (e.g., Do some species destroy                             
              carotenoids while others do not?), or the copepod's                            
              physiology at the time of feeding.  Mass balance experiments                   
              will be used to estimate the quantities of ingested pigments                   
              that are conserved, derivatized and/or destroyed during                        
              passage through the gut.  At least four species of copepods,                   
              selected as representatives of a range of habitats,                            
              ecologies and physiologies, will be used in the experiments.                   
              The study will serve, first to screen copepods from a                          
              variety of environments (e.g.,, high and low latitudes,                        
              nearshore and open coastal waters) for carotenoid-processing                   
              characteristics.  Experiments will then clarify the                            
              influence of acclimation to food environment (i.e., recent                     
              feeding history), diel variability in digestive physiology                     
              and high frequency variability in food concentration                           
              (patchiness) on the processing of ingested algal                               
              carotenoids.  Ultimately, this intensive approach should                       
              provide a level of predictability about the fate of                            
              carotenoids in certain food webs, and lead to an                               
              understanding of how animals and environments affect the use                   
              of pigments as trophic dynamic or geochemical probes.
