Title       : Interactions in Adsorbed Layers Studied with Infrared Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9696233

Award Number: 9696233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger G. Tobin rtobin@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9510267  Tobin    Infrared  spectroscopy (350 - 3000 cm-1)  will  be  used  to 
              explore  the interactions of chemisorbed atoms and molecules  with  and  at
              metal surfaces. Broadband changes  in  surface  reflectance   provide   a 
              measure  of   conduction-electron  scattering from the adsorbates, and will be
              studied on  both  single  crystals  and  epitaxial thin films.  Issues  to  be 
              addressed    include    coverage-dependence,    temperature-  dependence,  and 
              the relation between  reflectance  and  dc  resistance.  Adsorption on metallic
              quantum  wells  will  be  studied  to  explore  the  effects of  substrate 
              electronic  structure  and  chemisorption behavior.  The broad  spectral  range
               accessible  will  allow the  study  of  low-frequency  adsorbate-substrate
              vibrations.  %%%  The  interaction of gases with solid surfaces is of critical 
              importance  to  such  technologies  as  pollution   control,  chemical 
              synthesis,  and  chemical  sensing,  as  well   as  presenting   rich  and 
              fascinating  scientific   questions.  Infrared  light  is  used  to  explore 
              the  vibrations   of  molecules chemically bonded to metal surfaces, which 
              reveal  the  local physical and chemical environment. Through  thin-  film
              technology the thickness of the metal can be varied  on  the  atomic  scale, 
              and the resulting  changes  in  surface  chemistry  detected. The influence of
              the molecules  on  the  electrical  properties of the metal can  also  be 
              detected,  giving  new insight into surface physics, electron  dynamics  in
              metals, and mechanisms of chemical sensor operation.  ***
