Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Real Variable Techniques in the Approximation of
               Functions and Boundary Value Problems in Nonsmooth Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9696267

Award Number: 9696267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodolfo H. Torres   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Proposal: DMS-962325  PI: Torres    Torres will continue with his work
              in harmonic analysis and partial differential equations. This work combines
              wavelet decompositions, singular integrals, and related real variable
              techniques. He  plans to study functions that can be characterized by their
              values on a discrete set of points. A scale of discrete function spaces
              introduced by Torres in his previous work quantifies the oscillatory properties
              of these functions. He will now use these spaces to measure the errors in
              various linear and nonlinear approximations of band-limited  signals.  He
              intends to provide optimal estimates that cannot be attained  with more
              classical techniques which only take into account the size of the functions.
              Other technical aspects of this part of the  research relate to  problems about
              operator theory and Besov spaces.  In the second part of his program, Torres
              will  continue his work on transmission problems in nonsmooth   domains. For
              example, he will  consider problems arising in electromagnetism.  He will use
              singular integrals and layer potentials  techniques.  He also wants to combine
              his work with recent numerical analysis techniques for the study of large
              systems of linear equations.     Band-limited signals are functions obtained as
              superposition of periodic waves whose frequencies remain bounded. Most signals
              in applications are band-limited and they can be recovered from the knowledge
              of their values on a discrete set of instants in time. This is very important
              for practical purposes because, often, a set of measured samples of a signal is
              all that is available from an experiment or a detection procedure. Fourier and
              Harmonic Analysis techniques codify, transform, and interpret the information
              and properties of a function or signal in a quantified way. In particular, the
              discrete character of wavelets and the techniques to be used make them amenable
              to numerical applications. Error estimates in approximations and the processes
              to minimize them  trans late into results about  compression of information. 
              Other related problems are found in tomography and  medical imaging.
              Transmission problems arise in physical situations in which an object interacts
              with the surrounding ambient space or when an object is composed of several
              different materials.  These problems require the simultaneous solution, inside
              and outside of a region in space, of a systems of differential equations that
              are coupled by  conditions on the boundary of the region. Effective tools for
              studying such problems in smooth domains are available, but it is very
              important to further develop the theory so it can adapted to domains that have
              corners or edges since they model realistic situation in the applied sciences.
