Title       : Materials Synthesis and Processing: Modeling and Control ofMacro-Phenomena and
               Micro-Structure in Steel Rolling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9696062

Award Number: 9696062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44342              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ampere A. Tseng ampere.tseng@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A combined numerical and experimental research program will               
              be developed to study the hot rolling process with emphasis on the             
              understanding of the thermomechanical behavior and its associated              
              microstructure development.  In the numerical approach, macro-heat             
              transfer and mechanical models will be integrated into a                       
              metallurgical- or micro-model to simulate the process considered.              
              With this integrated model, the relationship between the process               
              parameters and microstructure of the workpiece can be established.             
              In the experimental approach, the thermomechanical characteristics             
              of the rolling process will be simulated by a hot deformation                  
              tester.  The temperature and time dependent changes of                         
              microstructure during and after deformation will be examined.  The             
              testing data will be utilized to determine the flow behavior for               
              macro-modeling and the material parameters needed in the micro-                
              modeling.  The kinetic theories associated with statistical                    
              techniques will be adopted to form the governing equations for the             
              researched micro-models.  As a result, the needed boundary                     
              conditions for solving these equations will be provided by the                 
              experimental data.  The experimental study will also be used to                
              verify the modeling predictions to further refine the micro- and               
              macro-models developed.  Then the strategy to have better control              
              of the microstructure and mechanical properties can be developed.              
              Further understanding of the thermomechanical and metallurgical                
              phenomena should certainly make for operating the process more                 
              effectively cost-wise.  The research may also serve as a catalyst              
              to the development of a new rolling technology for new                         
              applications.                                                                  
                   The study may allow the production of steel shapes of improved            
              quality at higher speeds.
