Title       : Genetic Control of TCA Cycle During Seed Germination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9696154

Award Number: 9696154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63300              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Oliver doliver@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Mature oil seeds (cucumber, pumpkin, peanut, Brassica, etc) contain            
              few mitochondria and have low levels of tricarboxylic acid (TCA)               
              cycle enzymes.  Following imbibition the TCA cycle enzymes are                 
              synthesized de novo.  The biogenesis of the TCA cycle enzymes,                 
              however, is not uniform.  The non-decarboxylative portion of the               
              pathway (the reactions between succinate and oxaloacetate) is                  
              synthesized first.  A few days later, the enzymes of the                       
              decarboxylative part of the cycle, the reactions between pyruvate              
              (or citrate) and succinate, are formed.  This switch results from              
              changing metabolism in the cotyledons of these seeds.  Early in                
              germination the cotyledons are converting stored lipid to                      
              carbohydrate.  While the non-decarboxylative portion of the TCA                
              cycle is essential for this process the decarboxylative portion is             
              not present thus preventing carbon loss through the decarboxylation            
              reactions.  Later as these tissues become photosynthetic, a full               
              TCA cycle is needed and the enzymes of the decarboxylative portion             
              are synthesized.  In this proposal Dr. Oliver will examine the                 
              mechanism by which this differential expression of mitochondrial               
              proteins is accomplished using fumarase, an enzyme specific for the            
              non-decarboxylative part, and the NAD+-dependent isocitrate                    
              dehydrogenase, an enzyme found only in the decarboxylative portion             
              of the TCA cycle.  The proteins have been purified, antibody tools             
              are being produced, and N-terminal sequence information is being               
              obtained.  The antibody and/or oligonucleotide probes will be used             
              to isolate the cDNA (and then genomic) clones for these two                    
              proteins.  The level of control of gene expression(transcriptional,            
              translational, etc) will be determined by measuring mRNA levels and            
              with run on transcription assays.  Promoter-GUS contructs will be              
              transformed into Brassica napus and these transgenic plants will be            
              used to study, 1. the time course and tissue specificity of                    
              expression of both genes, 2. environmental and physiological                   
              factors that control the expression of these two genes, and 3.                 
              repression of TCA cycle proteins during seed maturation.  Promoter             
              analysis will be initiated.  These studies may be augmented by the             
              use of transient expression assays and rapid cycling Brassica or               
              Arabidopsis.
