Title       : Efficient Computer Algorithms for Symbolic Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9696203

Award Number: 9696203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich L. Kaltofen kaltofen@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               This project continues research in design, analysis,   implementation of
              efficient algorithms for several basic   computer  algebra  problems.  The
              parallel time complexity of solving linear    systems with a  minimum number of
              processors is further investigated.  New   sequential and  parallel randomized
              algorithms  for sparse linear systems are   explored, and  polynomial-time 
              algorithms that make irreducible polynomials   factorizable via  substitution
              of the variables by monomials are sought.      Another research  direction is
              how to handle  imprecise data in the course of  symbolic computation.  The 
              allowance of floating point   coefficients in a  symbolic (i.e.,  parameterized
              model) is considered crucial   for a symbolic  approach to real-world problem
              solving.  In particular, the    question of  computing in polynomial-time the
              nearest singular  Toeplitz   matrix for a given  Toeplitz matrix, and the
              nearest pair  of polynomials with a   common divisor for  a given pair of 
              relatively prime polynomials, is a starting   point for the  theory of
              precision-tolerant symbolic computation.    Ultimately,  the problem of 
              factoring over the complex numbers a minimally  perturbed   version of an 
              absolutely irreducible curve is  attacked.    Algorithm   implementation is 
              done using the DSC system for distributing a symbolic    computation over a  
              network of workstations.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
