Title       : Tyrosine Crosslinking in B. subtilis Spore Coat Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9696026

Award Number: 9696026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Deits   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan Biotech Inst
	      PO Box 27609
	      Lansing, MI  489090609    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to advance our understanding of the                
              assembly of the spore coat that surrounds and protects dormant                 
              spores of Bacillus subtilis.  The investigator has                             
              assembled new evidence that oxidative crosslinking of tyrosine                 
              residues in the spore coat is a significant element of the process             
              of spore coat morphogenesis.  Also, the lab has identified                     
              potential substrates for crosslinking among previously cloned genes            
              known to code for proteins comprising the spore coat, and has                  
              preliminary evidence that another spore coat protein, CotE, has                
              predicted structural elements which suggest that it might be the               
              enzyme responsible for carrying out this modification in vivo.                 
              CotE, expressed in E. coli, possesses the predicted ability to bind            
              heme , consistent with its proposed function as a peroxidase in                
              vivo.  The specific goals are to:   1.Quantify the amount of                   
              crosslinked tyrosine present in wild type B. Subtilis as a function            
              of time during spore formation and intracellular location.                     
              2. Verify biochemically that CotE is competent to carry out the                
              proposed crosslinking function.                                                
              3. Mutationally inactivate CotE and correlate changes in spore coat            
              structure with changes in CotE function to confirm its role in                 
              spore coat assembly and modification.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Certain bacteria are capable of surviving extreme conditions of                
              heat and cold by producing spores.  The coat proteins of these                 
              organisms are chemically modified to adapt to environmental                    
              stresses.  This research will study the enzyme that is responsible             
              for the modification as well as the target protein that it                     
              modifies.  This research could lead to the production of new                   
              biomaterials with altered properties which would be useful in                  
              extreme environments.
