Title       : Nonconvexity in Chemical Process Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9696120

Award Number: 9696120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71713              (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelo Lucia lucia@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Lucia - 9312066    Theoretically sound and reasonably reliable and
              efficient computer tools for finding local solutions to large chemical process
              optimization problems have been the focus of this PI's research.  He has been
              working on developing a successive quadratic programming (SQP) method for
              nonlinearly constrained optimizations problems (an example of such problems are
              the design of  separation units such as distillation columns).  SQP methods are
              a very powerful class of methods for solving nonlinear programming problems,
              particularly those with strong nonlinear constraints.  The single biggest
              weakness of SQP methods is the fact that iterative QP solutions can give
              directions of nondescent in the nonlinear program (NLP), even for convex
              quadratic programs.  For this research project the PI plans to:  A) Develop the
              theoretical framework for linear programming-based, asymmetric trust region
              methods that guarantee descent when the quadratic programming solution is not a
              descent direction.  B) Conduct concomitant numerical studies directed at
              developing the necessary rules for adjusting the trust region size to guarantee
              both descent and convergence to a local Kuhn-Tucker point.  C) Study the
              theoretical and computational implications of saddlepoint solutions to
              nonlinear programming algorithms.    In addition, he plans to look at the
              general role of nonconvexity in quadratic programming by:  1) Conducting a
              numerical investigation and study of the relationship between nonconvexity and
              the inadequacy of current active set methods, the occurrence of constraint
              redundancy, the presence of multiplicity, nondescent, the requirement of
              starting point feasibility/infeasibility, projected definiteness,
              indefiniteness, and projected singularity.  2) Developing, in parallel,
              reliable and efficient algorithms that address these and other issues,
              including (a) new active set methods capable of handling projected
              indefiniteness with feasible or infeasible starting points, (b) preprocessing a
              lgorithms that can identify all smallest nontrivial redundant subsets of a
              given set of constrains, and (c) incorporating (b) into (a) when singularity is
              encountered.  3) Establishing theoretical foundations to both guide and support
              the algorithmic developments in 2) above.
