Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Testing Object-Oriented Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1998      
File        : a9696157

Award Number: 9696157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Harrold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               This research investigates issues associated with analysis,  testing and
              maintenance of procedural and object-oriented  programs, with  emphasis on the
              problems presented by C and  C++.  Several issues of particular  concern are
              program  representation, integration testing, selective regression  testing and
              testing of object-oriented programs.  A program  representation  provides
              control flow, data dependence, and  control dependence information,  supporting
              required tools.   This representation must be efficient in terms of  both 
              construction time and storage space.  Algorithms that  accommodate program 
              modifications are sought.   Integration testing techniques make  use of the
              program  representation to validate interactions between procedures,  and
              practical regression testing techniques assist in  retesting program  after
              modifications.  Many of these  techniques are applicable to  object-oriented
              programs, but  additional techniques are being developed to test  individual 
              classes, selective regression testing techniques are extended  to identify the
              required testing in a subclass, and  both static and dynamic  analysis
              techniques are required  for the interaction among classes.  Finally, a
              prototype  system is being built to facilitate experiments, and  methods  for
              using the system in a distributed environment are investigated.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
