Title       : Computer-Aided Learning Modules for General-Education Geology Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9696106

Award Number: 9696106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Sandberg sandberp@columbia.dsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dakota State Univ
	      
	      Madison, SD  57042    605/256-5111

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project takes advantage of recent developments in multimedia  computer
              technology to create an integrated set of computer-aided  learning (CAL)
              modules to teach fundamental concepts of geology in  general education courses.
               The software consists of  graphics-intensive, interactive multimedia modules
              that will  include animation, video, sound, and hypertext linking across 
              topics.  Module topics include global geology, plate tectonics,  geologic time,
              Earth interior, Earth materials, global cycles,  human influences, and
              evolution of the Earth.  Questions throughout  the material provide immediate
              feedback to the students and guide  their progress.  Quizzes after each section
              assess concept  attainment and provide automated scoring for assessment of
              student  progress and effectiveness of the instructional media.  The new 
              modules build on the success of an award-winning pilot module  developed by the
              PI, and are guided by student evaluations  collected throughout the development
              and assessment phases.  The  initial target audience will be students in two
              large general  education courses for non-science majors (>60%
              freshmen-sophomores,  ~10% education majors) taught by the PI (History of Life)
              and the  Co-PI (Planet Earth).  The modules have broad applicability to any 
              introductory geology general education course, and will be  published, widely
              advertised, and disseminated nationally to  universities, colleges, junior
              colleges, and high schools.   Extensive use of the modules in the preparation
              of elementary and  secondary teachers is planned.
