Title       : In-Situ Electrochemical Processing of Light-Weight Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9696059

Award Number: 9696059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramana G. Reddy rreddy@coe.eng.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A new process for direct processing of light weight alloys by             
              fused salt electrolysis using low cost lithium oxide as a lithium              
              source will be investigated.  The principal objective of the                   
              research is to develop physico-chemical information that can be                
              applied to the direct processing of aluminum-lithium alloys for use            
              in the manufacture of high strength, low density structures.                   
              Specifically, the research will address the determination of the               
              following fundamental information:  a) The solubility of lithium               
              oxide in calcium fluoride-lithium fluoride melts will be determined            
              as a function of melt composition and temperature.  b) The anodic              
              overvoltage on graphite during the electrolysis of calcium                     
              fluoride-lithium fluoride-lithium oxide melts will be measured.                
              Anode reaction mechanism and limiting current density region will              
              be evaluated.  c) Efficiency of electrolysis will be determined.               
              Effect of temperature, electrolyte composition, anode and cathode              
              current densities, electrode spacing and stirring of the cathode               
              pool on efficiency will be evaluated.                                          
                   The method for processing of aluminum-lithium alloys will be              
              less expensive, use low cost lithium compound feed and save energy             
              by directly producing aluminum-lithium alloys within the                       
              electrolytic cell.
