Title       : CRB: Collaborative Research: Disease as a Threat to the Biodiversity of an
               Endangered Plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9696119

Award Number: 9696119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Jacobson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nature Conservancy
	      Suite 100
	      Arlington, VA  222031606    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Maintaining genetic diversity within an endangered species                
              is an important goal of conservation biology.  However, the                    
              threat of disease to endangered plants has been neglected in past              
                                                                                             
              studies.  Disease may cause plant numbers to decline and/or the                
              disease may reduce the genetic diversity within a population.  An              
                                                                                             
              example is a white rust disease of the Menzies'wallflower,                     
              Erysimum menziesii, an endangered plant restricted to vanishing                
              native dune communities along the northern California coast.                   
              Some populations of the plant suffer from the disease and,                     
              although the wallflower has been the object of extensive                       
              research, the destructive effect of the disease has not been                   
              investigated.  Both ecological and genetic studies are required.               
                                                                                             
              This research will closely examine the relationship between the                
              wallflower and its disease to assess if disease has caused the                 
              plant to become endangered or is keeping the plant form                        
              recovering.  In addition, the genetic diversity within both the                
              plant and pathogen populations will be measured for three years                
              and this  will provide an indication if diversity is being                     
              maintained during conservation or if there is any change in the                
              genetic structure.                                                             
              Many aspects of this research are unique.  It is a collaborative               
                                                                                             
              effort between The California Nature Conservancy, a conservation               
                                                                                             
              management organization, and Michigan State University, a                      
              traditional basic research institution.  This partnership will                 
              provide needed cooperative effort between basic science and                    
              applied conservation.  By combining genetic studies with                       
              population monitoring, management options specifically for                     
              Menzies' wallflower will be addressed.  In addition, this                      
              approach will introduce a generalized strategy to assess the                   
              impact of disease on other endangered plants.  The results will                
              provide the basis for future predictive mathematical models which              
                                                                                             
              can be used to evaluate how specific conservation activities                   
              would affect recovery.  From this, conservationists will be able               
                                                                                             
              to choose between management options.  Included with these                     
              applied aspects is the basic study of plant disease in natural                 
              populations.  This project will expand the discipline by                       
              introducing a new type of model system, one with different                     
              attributes than those currently under study.
