Title       : Voltage Independent Calcium Channels in Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  1996   
File        : a9696215

Award Number: 9696215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Strong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9422040    Many cellular functions are activated by calcium, which enters cells
              through specialized, highly regulated proteins (calcium channels) in the cell
              membrane.  In neurons, calcium entry alters the cell's electrical activity,
              secretion of neurotransmitter, and growth or regeneration of neuronal
              processes; it also activates several calcium-dependent enzymes which in turn
              can generate the type of long-lasting changes in neuronal properties thought to
              underlie learning and memory.  The proposed experiments will investigate a
              novel and poorly understood calcium entry pathway in neurons.  This class of
              calcium channels can be activated experimentally by forming a small cell free
              patch of membrane.  Although such channels are found in high density in several
              different neurons and muscles, their physiological activators are largely
              unknown.  Physiological functions of the channels are also unknown, although
              some evidence suggests they may help mediate the large, damaging calcium
              influxes seen under certain pathological conditions.  Recent experiments
              indicate that these channels may be rapidly activated by Nerve Growth Factor, a
              protein which causes neuronal differentiation and neurite outgrowth in several
              types of neurons.  The proposed experiments will examine the biochemical
              mechanisms by which Nerve Growth Factor and related molecules activate this
              class of calcium channel.  Additional experiments will examine a possible role
              of the channels in neurite outgrowth, and will attempt to isolate specific
              peptide blockers for these channels.  The primary techniques used are
              electrical measurement of the currents flowing through the channels, and rapid
              measurement of intracellular calcium concentration in single cells using
              fluorescent indicators.  These two techniques can be used simultaneously in a
              single cell.  The ability to study these pathways at a single channel level,
              coupled with direct measurement of one of their primary physiological effects
              (elevation of intracellular calcium), should  contribute to the understanding
              of this widespread but poorly understood calcium influx pathway.  The
              experiments will also contribute to an understanding of the actions of peptide
              growth factors.
