Title       : NSF-CGP Science and Engineering Fellows Program: Viscous- Damping Walls for
               Earthquake-Resistant Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9696046

Award Number: 9696046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54712              (Estimated)
Investigator: Austin Pan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : THM Pacific Inc
	      9342 Darrow Drive
	      Huntington Beach, CA  92646    /   -

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9503827  Pan    This award supports the collaboration of Dr. Austin Pan,  School
              of Civil Engineering, Purdue University and Mr.  Mitsuo Miyazaki, Sumitomo
              Construction Company, Tokyo,  Japan.  Project funding will enable Dr. Pan to
              spend six  months in Japan, resident at the Sumitomo Construction  Company, in
              order to learn about viscous-damping walls from  the inventor of this
              technology, Mr. Miyazaki.  Working  together, they will share their knowledge
              and experience to  expedite the development of viscous-damping walls and its 
              application for earthquake resistant construction.    This project brings
              together research scientists from two  countries working in the area of
              earthquake engineering. The  U. S. scientist will have the opportunity to
              become familiar  with research techniques, equipment, and facilities at 
              Sumitomo Construction Company while contributing to the  overall research
              effort. This collaboration will not only be  mutually beneficial to the U.S.
              and Japan, it will also  benefit all countries where earthquakes offer a
              prevailing  threat.  Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of  the
              Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific  knowledge through an
              international collaboration.  ***
