Title       : Copper-Metallothionein and a Novel Superoxide Dismutase in Organisms that Use
               Copper for Oxygen Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9696077

Award Number: 9696077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marius Brouwer Marius.Brouwer@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              R  5                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                        5    
                5        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    $       H       l                                        
                    D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       METABOLIC
              BIOCHEMISRY               Shelley A. Graves                   Shelley A. Graves
                        @    7\   e =       e               7                       7        
                                            j       j   j       j       j       j       j    
                                                                                ?   1        
                                                                        w       y       y    
                y               '                   T   Z   K   ?                       j    
                                                                                  ?          
                  j       j                                                                  
                  j               j               w                       ~           "   j  
                  j       j       j               w                                          
                                                                                Metabolic
              Biochemistry Panel Summary  Brouwer, M. MCB 9506050  The panel recognized the
              benefits of working with the blue crab as a model system for studying
              intracellular copper trafficking in eukaryotes.  The proposal is well focused
              and clearly articulated.  The collaborations, especially with the research
              group led by Dr. Ian M. Armitage, are seen as significantly strengthening the
              project.  It is felt that the present research program will yield new,
              interesting, and important structural information on copper-metallothionein
              (CuMT) isoforms. Form 7: This is an excellent research proposal which is now
              being recommended for funding after being resubmitted a third time to the
              program.  The PI has made careful use of revi ewers  comments and prepared a
              well-organized, clearly written, compelling proposal.  The panel was convinced
              of the advantages of working with the blue crab to obtain important information
              about Cu-metabolism applicable to higher animal systems.  The proposal received
              three  excellent  and one  very good  rating.  I am pleased to recommend this
              invertebrate project for funding. Brouwer, M. MCB-9506050  Copper is an
              essential but toxic element.  It is proposed to elucidate how this metal is
              converted intracellularly into a biologically useful form, while avoiding
              copper s toxic side effects.  Blue crabs will be used as a model system.  The
              blue crab is dependent on the copper-protein hemocyanin (Hc) for oxygen
              transport.  Four copper complexes function as a first line of defense against
              copper toxicity in the crab: copper-glutathione (Cu(I)-GSH), and three isoforms
              of the copper-metallothionein (CuMT) family.  CuMT-I and II are virtually
              identical.  CuMT-III is distinctive. Cu(I)-GSH can deliver copper for the
              activation of apohemocyanin and apoMT.  It is unknown whether CuMTs can
              participate in intracellular copper exchange.  The first objective then is to
              evaluate the hypothesis that CuMT-I/II and/or CuMT-III may transfer copper to
              apoHc with GSH acting as a metal-exchange mediator and GSSG as a
              copper-releasing agent.  Our second objective is to determine the metal-binding
              properties and three-dimensional structure of the two distinct CuMT isoforms by
              2 dimensional-NMR spectroscopy, in collaboration with Dr. Ian Armitage at Yale
              University.  Antioxidant enzymes, including the ubiquitous copper-zinc
              superoxide dismutase (CuSnSOD), in higher animal systems form a second line of
              defense against copper-induced oxidative cell damage.  However, it has not been
              possible to detect CuZnSOD in crabs and decapod crustacea in general.  The
              third objective of the project is to determine whether the cytosolic SOD in
              crabs is a novel protein, or a new, hitherto unknown member of the CuZnSOD
              family. %%% Copp er is an essential but toxic trace metal that has been
              implicated in oxidative damage to DNA, proteins, and cell membranes.  The
              long-term objective of this study is to gain a better understanding of the
              control of intracellular trafficking of copper, and of the molecular mechanisms
              involved in defense against copper-mediated oxidative damage.  Studies will be
              performed with the blue crab, Callinectes sapidus, which has a high requirement
              for copper in their respiratory pigment, hemocyanin.  There appear to be three
              metallothionein (low-molecular weight metal-detoxifying proteins) (CuMT)
              isoforms in the blue crab, which are structurally and functionally different
              from each other.  It is unknown, however, whether the CuMTs participate in
              intracellular copper-exchange processes.  To find out if they do, copper-free
              hemocyanin will be treated with different CuMTs in an attempt to restore normal
              hemocyanin function.  Secondly, two-dimensional  nuclear magnetic resonance
              (NMR) techniques will be used to determine the structure of blue crab CuMTs. 
              Studies will be performed in collaboration with Dr. Ian Arnitage at Yale
              University.  In addition to oxygen transport, it is believed that Cu operates
              in special enzymes together with zinc (Zn) to protect cells against certain
              toxic effects of oxygen.  This may occur in a special enzyme called Cu/Zn
              superoxide dismutase (SOD).  Consequently, the third objective of this project
              is to determine if such an activity exists in the blue crab, as in higher
              animal systems, and, if so, isolate and purify the CuZnSOD in an attempt to
              determine its structure and mechanism of operation. ***                        
              ;
