Title       : U.S.-Bulgarian Cooperative Research in Ultrashort-Pulse Laser Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9696137

Award Number: 9696137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Murnane   (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry C. Kapteyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9520874  Murnane    This grant supports a US-Bulgaria Research Project on
              "Cooperative Research in  Ultrashort-Pulse Laser Optics" between Drs. Margaret
              M. Murnane and Henry C.  Kapteyn of Washington State University, and Prof. Ivan
              P. Christov of the  Department of Physics of Sofia University.  This project
              will perform  coordinated experimental and theoretical work on novel techniques
              in  ultrashort light pulse generation and measurement.  The project will
              combine  the experimental expertise of the group at Washington State University
              with  the theoretical capabilities of the group at Sofia, to address important
              and  significant problems in ultrafast optics.  The investigators will perform:
              (1)  experimental and theoretical studies on ultrashort-pulse modelocked 
              Ti:sapphire lasers, to investigate the fundamental limits of modelocking, and 
              study the physics of the modelocking mechanisms with a view to design more 
              efficient and better femtosecond lasers; (2) studies of fundamental limits on 
              the electronic nonlinear response of materials, using light pulses of 
              unprecedented short duration, with a view toward impacting the design of 
              efficient frequency conversion techniques for ultrafast studies in many areas 
              of science, heretofore experimentally inaccessible; and (3) the generation of 
              1-10 femtosecond optical pulses in the ultraviolet and x-ray region of the 
              spectrum using novel and speculative methods, sources which would have uses in 
              the study of ultrafast chemical and material dynamics.    This project in
              physics fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific  knowledge by
              enabling leading experts in Bulgaria and the United States to  combine
              complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual  interest
              and competence.  ***
