Title       : GEM: On the Quiet-Time Flow Variability in the Earth's Plasma Sheet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9696006

Award Number: 9696006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vassilis Angelopoulos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                A statistical analysis of the properties of the low-speed flow  state of the
              earth's plasma sheet is approved.  The low flow state  plasma sheet (i.e., the
              quiet-time plasma sheet), is defined as the  complementary of the bursty bulk
              flow event (BBF event) state,  previously studied by the PI.  The low flow
              state is the most  probable state of the flow in the plasma sheet as it
              comprises 92-  95% of the available plasma sheet datasets.  This flow state 
              possesses an average flow pattern that can be explained in terms of  a 2-fluid
              picture of the plasma sheet.  That flow pattern will be  mapped on the
              ionosphere by use of current magnetic field models,  and the dependence of that
              pattern on the IMF sector will be  examined.      The non-BBF flows have a
              variance that is many times larger than  the average flow speed in the plasma
              sheet and persist even during  low AE conditions.  The unsteadiness of the flow
              may allow  convection in the plasma sheet to proceed, contrary to the pressure 
              balance inconsistency argument.  Thus the flow variability under  different
              geomagnetic conditions, and in different locations on the  X-Y plane will be
              studied as well as the correlation between  earthward convection and flow
              variability.  The flow variability  will be incorporated in a qualitative model
              of the plasma sheet  equilibrium.    The theory-guided statistical analysis of
              the quiet plasma sheet  flow field aspires to characterize the basic properties
              of the  ground state of the plasma sheet and its relevance to global 
              magnetospheric circulation.
