Title       : DNA Variability and Genetic Hitchhiking in Mus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1996  
File        : a9696183

Award Number: 9696183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45782              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Nachman nachman@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306493  Nachman       A central goal of population genetics is to understand
              the  process that shape genetic variation in natural populations of  organisms.
               An important phenomenon, knows as genetic hitchhiking,  involves the
              interaction of natural selection and genetic  recombination (genetic mixing
              between the two copies of a gene).   When a particular DNA mutation is favored
              by natural selection, it  may become more common in a population since
              individuals with the  mutation will replace individuals without it.  However,
              when  natural selection favors a particular DNA site, it will also affect 
              nearby DNA sites which are not themselves under selection.   Typically, genetic
              hitchhiking will cause a reduction in DNA  variability at these nearby sites. 
              The amount of reduction depends  on the rate of recombination.  This
              relationship is important  because it allows us to look for evidence of natural
              selection by  comparing levels of DNA variability in genes with different 
              recombination rates.  Recent studies on fruit flies (Drosophila)  have
              demonstrated that genetic hitchhiking may affect a large  portion of the
              genome.  This has broad significance for genome  evolution, including the
              implication that natural selection may be  acting quite frequently.%%%       To
              learn if these findings represent a general aspect of  molecular evolution,
              this study will look for evidence of genetic  hitchhiking in the house mouse,
              Mus domesticus.  This will be  achieved by comparing levels of DNA sequence
              variation among four  important genes on the X-chromosome:  two with high
              recombination  rates (Pip and Amg), and two with lower recombination rates
              (Hprt  and G6pd).  If genetic hitchhiking is common, then the two genes  with a
              high recombination rate should show a greater amount of DNA  sequence
              variability than the two genes with a low recombination  rate.  Three of these
              four genes in mice serve as important models  for human genetic diseases (Hprt:
               Lesch-Nyhan syndrome; G6pd:  hemolytic anemia: Plp: P elizaeus-Merzbacher
              disease).
