Title       : Ontogenetic Evidence for Phylogenetic Trends in Legumes (Fabaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1995   
File        : a9696001

Award Number: 9696001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley C. Tucker tucker@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research will use comparative evidence from the              
              ontogeny of flowers to address phylogeny of legumes.  Polarization             
              methods will use outgroup comparison.  Preliminary trees based on              
              33 taxa representing major tribes of the three subfamilies of                  
              Leguminosae and 30 traditional characters from mature flower and               
              vegetative structure were developed for comparative purposes.  To              
              date, 17 qualitative ontogenetic characters with discrete character            
              states have been derived based on direct observation of floral                 
              ontogenies with SEM; most are heterochronic.  Preliminary results              
              show some unexpected relationships among tribes and subfamilies                
              that need to be assessed in terms of characters used: i.e.,                    
              caesalpinioids Gleditsia and Ceratonia are a basal sister group to             
              the rest of the legumes; and Caesalpiniodeae appears non-                      
              monophyletic.  The research will also test the hypothesis that                 
              specialized character states are first expressed late in floral                
              ontogeny, using species of Sophora, a papilionoid with diverse                 
              pollinators.  In addition, presumably different development                    
              pathways leading to convergent floral structure will be documented             
              in three caesalpinioid genera (Cassia s. str., Chamaecrista, Senna)            
              that are strikingly alike in specialized character states.
