Title       : RUI: Systematics and Genetic Biogeography of Mielichhoferia (Bryopsida)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9696228

Award Number: 9696228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155279             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Jonathan Shaw shaw@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9419772  Shaw       Some of the more spectacular cases of evolutionary
              adaptation to novel environments include the mosses, and in particular those
              species that grow on mine tailings and other substrates rich in mineral ores. 
              Dr. Jonathan Shaw of Ithaca College, with assistance from several undergraduate
              students, is studying population and species-level genetic variation in
              northern species of the moss genus Mielichhoferia, so-called copper mosses,
              with the goal of understanding historical and ecological controls on the
              present distribution of the four northern species in North America and Europe. 
              In addition to morphological features of the small gametophyte and sporophyte
              stages of the plant, Dr. Shaw is  analyzing variation at allelic loci by
              protein electrophoresis, and will be adding new data from analysis of
              chloroplast DNA variation as well.  Prior studies have demonstrated unique
              marker alleles of individual populations of the moss species, enabling study of
              the path of historical migration and of possible hybridization between species.
                    The pattern of genetic variation among related species of mosses has been
              little studied, despite the interesting haploid nature of the major vegetative
              (gametophytic) stage found in nature.  This study poses several challenging
              contrasts between widespread and narrowly restricted taxa, between species with
              wide genetic variability and those quite limited, and between reproductively
              isolated taxa and those potentially able to hybridize with relatives.
