Title       : Aqueous-Phase Photochemical Formation of Hydrogen Peroxide and Hydroxyl Radical
               in Clouds and Fogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9696226

Award Number: 9696226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Faust bcfaust@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307171  Faust       Aqueous-phase reactions of hydrogen peroxide (HOOH) and 
              hydroxyl radical (OH) in atmospheric water drops play crucial roles  in the
              chemistry of the troposphere, yet knowledge of the sources  of these oxidants
              to the water drops is incomplete.   While gas-to-  drop partitioning of HOOH
              and OH has received much study,  comparatively little attention has been
              focussed on aqueous-phase  photochemical reactions as sources of these oxidants
              to atmospheric  water drops.       The objectives of this research are: (a)
              determination of  quantum yields and sunlight rates of HOOH and OH
              photo-formation in  authentic cloud and fog waters collected over several years
              from  several locations, (b) determination of the seasonal dependence of  HOOH
              and OH photo-formation, (c) comparisons of the relative  importance of
              aqueous-phase photochemistry versus gas-to-drop  partitioning as sources of
              HOOH and OH to atmospheric water drops,  (d) to evaluate chemical and Physical
              parameters of authentic  atmospheric waters as predictors (based on mechanistic
               considerations) of the HOOH and OH photo-formation rates and of the  OH
              lifetime, (e) to determine rates and quantum yields of HOOH  photo-formation
              from compounds of relevance to cloud and fog  chemistry, and (f) to increase
              the understanding of mechanisms  responsible for photochemical formation of the
              oxidants in  authentic atmospheric waters and form the individual compounds.   
                 The project will characterize the photo-formation of HOOH and  OH in
              authentic cloud and fog waters obtained form several high  elevation sites. 
              Additionally, survey studies will be carried out  on the HOOH photo-formation
              form well-defined aqueous solutions of  individual organic compounds.      
              Overall, the results form this proposal will allow for a more  accurate
              understanding to the sources of HOOH and OH to cloud and  fog drops.  This will
              improve our understanding of the atmospheric  chemical cycles of peroxides,
              sulfur, carbon, iron, and other  elements.   This new knowledge will enhance
              our predictions of  sulfuric acid and sulfate aerosol formation that affect
              acid  deposition and the global cooling effect exerted by sulfate  aerosols.
