Title       : Neural Circuitry and Aerodynimcs of Flight Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9696240

Award Number: 9696240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Emmeline Edwards                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Dickinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Flight in insects is a sophisticated behavior which requires an                
              array of physiological and morphological specializations. Flight               
              behavior provides a convenient system for investigating temporally             
              precise neural processes, as well as novel aerodynamic mechanisms.             
              The research to be done under this award to Dr. Michael Dickinson              
              focuses on the flight control of insects at several levels of                  
              analysis: from the physiological properties of identified neurons              
              and muscles to the mechanics of wings and resultant production of              
              aerodynamic forces. The work will characterize the neural circuitry            
              and flight forces underlying a specific steroetyped component of               
              flight control behavior which involves the rapid rotation of the               
              wings during the transition from downstroke to upstroke which is               
              modulated during turning manuevers. The timing may be controlled               
              by a specific steering muscle whose output is modified by both                 
              rapid sensory feedback from receptors on the wings as well as                  
              visual input descending from the head. The circuitry will be                   
              studied by intracellular recording from motor neurons during                   
              controlled stimulation of sensory pathways. The effects of muscle              
              stimulation on wing rotation will also be tested. The flight                   
              apparatus will be equipped with a torque balance, so that the                  
              aerodynamic forces can be directly correlated with changes in the              
              timing of the flight locomotion. This research will contribute to              
              the understanding of rapid sensory-motor processing and aerodynamic            
              mechanisms of flight.
