Title       : Mathematical Models of Dynamics and Evolution in Structured Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2000    
File        : a9696219

Award Number: 9696219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78411              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shripad D. Tuljapurkar tulja@mvri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mountain View Research
	      2251 Grant Road Suite A
	      Los Altos, CA  94024    415/937-1280

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9505535  Kambysellis       Dr. Kambyselis requests funds for a small Grant for 
              Exploratory Research (SGER).  The project aims to develop an  experimental
              methodology whereby specific genes can be transferred  from the genome of one
              Drosophila species into another, without the  use of genetic markers in the
              recipient species as traditionally  required for such genetic manipulations. 
              Whereas there is a vast  array of genetic mutants available for the species
              Drosophila  melanogaster, most other Drosophila species of interest to 
              evolutionary and developmental biologist lack available mutants,  limiting
              their genetic analysis.  To rectify this situation and  facilitate analysis of
              gene expression and the evolution of gene  regulation in the endemic Hawaiian
              Drosophila and other groups,  novel vectors using as markers neomycin
              resistance or the green  fluorescent protein will be developed to establish a
              transformation  system applicable to any Drosophila species.         The
              successful development of this methodology will have broad  application,
              facilitating genetic analyses of basic phenomena such  as behavior, evolution,
              and the role of pattern formation is  development, as examples.  Even wider
              application may ensure if the  general approach of transgenic insect formation
              can subsequently be  extended to insects of economic importance, enabling novel
               approaches to agricultural problems.
