Title       : NSF-CGP Science Engineering Fellows Program: Functional Role of Different
               Classes of Neocortical Inhibitory Interneurons in the Thalamocortical Circuit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9696047

Award Number: 9696047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60234              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ariel Agmon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9503844  Agmon    This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Ariel Agmon 
              of the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology at the  University of
              California-Irvine and Dr. Yasuo Kawaguchi of  the Bio-Mimetic Control Research
              Center of the Institute of  Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN). Project
              funding will  enable Dr. Agmon to spend one year in Japan, resident at  RIKEN,
              in order to study the functional role of different  classes of neocortical
              inhibitory interneurons in the  thalamocortical circuit. Dr. Agmon has
              previously studied  the functional and morphological organization of 
              thalamocortical connections in mature and developing  animals. Dr. Kawaguchi
              has been instrumental in shedding  light on the rich diversity of morphological
              and  electrophysiological properties of inhibitory interneurons  in the cortex.
              Dr. Agmon will combine his expertise with  that of Dr. Kawaguchi to study the
              functional and  morphological organization of inhibition with the 
              thalamocortical circuit.    This proposal brings together research scientists
              from two  countries working in the area of neuronal anatomy and  physiology.
              The U. S. scientist will have the opportunity to  become familiar with research
              techniques, equipment, and  facilities at RIKEN while contributing to the
              overall  research effort. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the  objectives of
              the Program in its exchange and transfer of  scientific knowledge through an
              international collaboration.  ***
