Title       : PYI: Evolutionary History of Double Fertilization and the Endosperm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9696013

Award Number: 9696013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170301             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Friedman ned@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The evolutionary history of double fertilization and endosperm,                
              two of the most important reproductive features associated with                
              the origin and success of flowering plants will be examined. The               
              developmental fate of the second fertilization in the genus                    
              Ephedra, a non-flowering seed plant and a basal member of the                  
              most closely related extant group of plants (Gnetales) to the                  
              angiosperms, will be studied. The ultimate goal of this work is                
              to determine whether the second fertilization product in Ephedra               
              exhibits endosperm-like qualities that would support a new                     
              hypothesis for a pre-flowering plant origin of endosperm.                      
              Evidential support for this hypothesis would fundamentally alter               
              our current concepts of the evolutionary history and origins of                
              flowering plants.                                                              
                                                                                             
              A second set of studies will examine mate choice in non-                       
              flowering seed plants. Although more than fifty percent of                     
              flowering plant species exhibit some type of genetic                           
              incompatibility mechanism that prevents the fertilization of                   
              ovules by pollen from closely related individuals, evidence for                
              similar incompatibility systems among non-flowering seed plants,               
              is rare. Initial studies using Douglas fir have, for the first                 
              time, documented pre-zygotic response to pollen quality outside                
              of flowering plants. Planned studies will examine the competitive              
              effects of mixed genetic loads of pollen (and female response to               
              the genetic constitution of pollen) in loblolly pine, a major                  
              forestry crop in the southeastern US.
