Title       : Circadian Clock - Regulated Transcription in Arabidopsis Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9696255

Award Number: 9696255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve A. Kay stevek@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9316756  We propose to build upon the progress we have made in this
              system  towards understanding how the circadian clock effects changes in  the
              transcription of the Arabidopsis cab2 gene.  In particular, we  wish to further
              characterize a 78bp DNA fragment that we have shown  to be able to confer
              circadian regulation upon heterologous  promoters.  We wish to dissect at the
              nucleotide level the precise  genomic targets for the signal transduction
              pathways that emanate  from the circadian clock and phytochrome.  These studies
              will be  greatly enhanced by using a cab2-luciferase gene fusion that  provides
              a bioluminescent marker for monitoring cab2 transcription  in living transgenic
              seedlings.  Furthermore, we have identified  three specific DNA binding
              activities that recognize conserved  targets within the cab2 5'upstream region.
               We propose a detailed  characterization of these proteins that will define
              their  contribution to regulated transcription and will ultimately result  in
              cloning the genes that encode these factors.  This will provide  a first step
              from the genomic targets towards the signal  transduction components that
              regulate cab2 transcription.  %%%  This proposal describes experiments that
              address a central question  in biology:  What is the mechanism of action of the
              circadian  clock?  Given the ubiquitous presence of circadian-regulated 
              processes, advances in one particular system should have broad  impact.  We
              have chosen higher plants as our model system, and we  will focus our studies
              in Arabidopsis thaliana.  ***
