Title       : Research Technician Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0091771

Award Number: 0091771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Derry lad9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne M. Kay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0091771
Derry

This grant provides technical support for operations of the
              thermal ionization mass spectrometry and inductively coupled plasma mass
              spectrometry facilities in the Department of Earth and atmospheric sciences,
              Cornell University.  NSF funds and Cornell University funds will be used to
              support the salary of Dr. Linda Godfrey, laboratory manager.  Dr. Godfrey has
              the primary responsibility for overseeing the operation and maintenance of the
              instrumentation and associated clean laboratory facilities. Currently
              implemented analytical techniques include strontium, neodymium and lead isotope
              analysis by TIMS, and a variety of trace element analyses by ICP-MS, including
              hydride generation.  In addition to supporting a range of ongoing projects
              funded by NSF and other sources, Dr. Godfrey will be improving or developing
              analytical protocols for the new high resolution magnetic sector ICP-MS for Pb
              isotope analyses (current applications include tracing anthropogenic and
              aerosol inputs of Pb in soils), Ca isotope dilution analysis (current
              applications include tracing Ca transfer across the placenta in pregnant
              mammals), and U isotope analysis (current applications include understanding
              weathering processes and mass balance for U in soils).
	Current research
              projects (funded) that will be supported include 1) application of trace
              element and Sr, Nd and Pb isotope data to delineate atmospheric(including
              anthropogenic) vs. weathering inputs to Hawaiian ecosystems; 2) chemical and
              isotopic study of geothermal and stream waters along the Main Central Thrust,
              Nepal, to study role of geothermal circulation in extracting heat and volatiles
              from tectonically active crust and their impact on stream fluxes; 3) use of
              Ge/Si ratios to estimate aerosol fluxes of silica to the global oceans; 4)
              Ge/Si ratios as a tracer of weathering fluxes and plant-soil interactions; 5)
              Sr, Nd and Pb isotopic data on subduction-related volcanism in Patagonia; 6)
              trace element distributions in archaeological wood as an indicator of eruptive
              chronology in the eastern Mediterranean; 7) fate and transport of metals (Cu,
              Zn, Ag) in peatland soils; 8) speciation and behavior of dissolved Al in
              tropical soils.; 9) authigenesis of silicate phases during early diagenesis;
              10) isotopic (Sr, Nd, Pb) constraints on sources of plume volcanism, Galapagos
              hot spot.
***


