Title       : Cellular and Molecular Events in Early Leech Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0091261

Award Number: 0091261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Weisblat weisblat@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091261
Weisblat

Glossiphoniid leeches such as Helobdella robusta, are
              useful for studying developmental processes for two reasons: first, they are
              relatively simple animals with large, accessible embryos that are suited for
              combined cellular and molecular techniques.  Second, since leeches belong to
              the phylum Annelida, an otherwise poorly studied group, the results obtained
              are useful for making interphyletic comparisons.  Such comparisons are
              essential to distinguish general developmental processes from phylum-specific
              ones, and also to learn how evolutionary modification of developmental
              processes leads to the appearance of diverse animal types.  

For example,
              annelids and arthropods resemble each other (and differ from mollusks) in that
              they both have segmented body plans.  But the early Helobdella embryo is
              strikingly different from the early Drosophila embryo and similar to molluscan
              embryos.  Thus, the question of how cell fates are determined in the early
              leech embryo is of considerable interest.  

The experiments to be undertaken
              fall into two main areas.  Most of the proposed effort will go into continuing
              investigations of cell fate determination and differentiation, combining
              reverse genetic approaches with embryological techniques for which the
              Helobdella embryo is well suited.  Specific topics to be investigated
              include:
	1. The mesoderm-ectoderm fate decision.  Dr. Weisblat and his
              research group will test the hypothesis that maternally inherited transcripts
              of Hro-nos, the nanos homolog in Helobdella, are translated only at the animal
              pole of the embryo, and that inheriting high levels of HRO-NOS protein causes
              the animal daughter of macromere D' to assume an ectodermal fate.
	2. The
              origins of the germline.  Hro-nos is also transcribed zygotically.  The
              hypothesis that Hro-nos  is associated with primordial germ cells in leech, as
              in other bilaterians will also be tested.
	3. Signalling by HRO-HH, a
              hedgehog-class gene product in gut formation.  Preliminary results indicate
              that HRO-HH signaling from endoderm is critical for gut formation in leech as
              in vertebrate.  Experiments will be undertaken to confirm this result and look
              for downstream targets of HRO-NOS signaling.

The second part of the work
              entails investigations of the dynamics of cells and cellular processes. 
              Specific topics to be investigated include:
	1. The regulation of cell-cell
              fusion.  An early step in leech midgut formation entails the fusion of
              macromeres A''' and B''', a process which is regulated by signals emanating
              from the D quadrant of the embryo.  Blastomere isolation and recombination
              experiments will be performed to pinpoint the timing and source of the
              signal.
	2. The dynamics of early WNT signalling. Dr. Weisblat's group has
              recently discovered that a WNT signalling pathway is operative in the 2-cell
              embryo of the leech, and serves in part to regulate cell-cell adhesion
              following the first cell division.  This is the earliest possible example of
              intercellular embryonic signalling.  The experiments proposed are designed to
              determine whether WNT expression is regulated at the level of transcription,
              translation, or post-translational processing.


