Title       : Senders & Their Sensory Environments: Acoustic Lessons From a Radiation of
               Ancient Grasshoppers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0091189

Award Number: 0091189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moira J. van Staaden mvs@caspar.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Communication between individuals is ultimately dependent on the functioning of
              sensory organs, such as eyes or ears, and is affected by a variety of factors,
              ranging from the physics of signal transmission in the microhabitat, to the
              neural characteristics of peripheral receptor organs.  Although mate choice
              scenarios have been thoroughly investigated, the evolutionary links between the
              environment and sensory systems remain virtually unexplored.  Notable
              exceptions occur in fairly advanced vertebrate groups such as frogs and fish. 
              However, the vertebrate central nervous system is almost certainly more plastic
              than is the peripheral nervous system, and changes in sensory characteristics
              at this level are difficult to evaluate.  In contrast, sensory change in
              invertebrates is considerably more concentrated at the periphery, thus
              invertebrates may provide useful model systems.  Bladder grasshoppers
              (Orthoptera, Pneumoridae) are highly specialized for long distance (~2 km)
              acoustic signaling and presently occupy a range of contrasting
              sensory-ecological environments.  This small family, in which each individual
              has a dozen ears of two distinct types, offers a unique opportunity to
              investigate the role of sensory biology in evolutionary processes.  
	The
              contributions of environmental constraints and ear structure and function will
              be explored in this ancient group.  To determine whether habitat is a
              significant selection pressure for divergent calling songs, a series of
              acoustic playback experiments will be performed to compare the efficiency of
              sound transmission in forest, grassland and desert habitats.  The detailed
              morphological structure of both a tympanate- and pleural ears will be compared
              across species, and microscanning laser vibrometry will yield relative
              estimates of ear tuning and sensitivity.  These will indicate to what extent
              ears are matched to the frequency spectra of species-specific calls, and the
              potential for sensory partitioning across different habitats.  Finally, the
              evolutionary history of the pneumorid family will be reconstructed using DNA
              sequencing of the mitochondrial 16S rRNA gene to provide the infrastructure for
              integrated comparative analyses.
	This project involves international travel,
              and will be carried out in collaboration with several undergraduate, graduate,
              and post-doctoral associates.  The results of this study will provide insight
              into the complex associations that exist between the environment and sensory
              systems, and the potential role of these interactions in the speciation
              process.  Moreover, evolved features of these unique invertebrate ears may be
              relevant in the design of small, highly sensitive hearing devices.

