Title       : Serine Carboxypeptidase-like Proteins: Misunderstood Catalysts in Plant
               Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0091419

Award Number: 0091419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495803             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clint Chapple   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Serine carboxypeptidase-like (SCPL) proteins have been identified in organisms
              ranging from yeast to humans.  Although the Arabidopsis genome alone is
              estimated to encode approximately 50 SCPL proteins, the functions of these
              enzymes, and similar proteins throughout the plant kingdom, are essentially
              unknown. Sinapoylmalate and sinapoylcholine are two of the major
              phenylpropanoid metabolites in Arabidopsis thaliana and are found in leaves and
              seeds, respectively.  A TLC-based screen identified several mutant lines that
              accumulate the biochemical precursor of these compounds, sinapoylglucose, in
              their leaves and seeds in place of sinapoylmalate and sinapoylcholine,
              respectively.  These mutations have been named SNG1 and SNG2 for
              sinapoylglucose accumulator.  The SNG1 gene has been cloned and shown to encode
              sinapoylglucose:malate sinapoyltransferase (SMT), an SCPL protein.  In order to
              begin to understand how proteins of this type can catalyze reactions of this
              type, an in-depth analysis of SMT and the reaction that it catalyzes will be
              conducted. Additional mutants have also been isolated in which SCPL genes
              flanking SMT are deleted.  These mutants have novel biochemical phenotypes
              associated with the absence of these genes.  In this project, the compounds
              that are affected by these mutations will be identified, the pathways by which
              they are synthesized will be elucidated, and the enzymes required for their
              accumulation will be characterized. Finally, the map-based cloning of the SNG2
              gene is nearing completion and provides strong evidence that it encodes
              sinapoylglucose:choline sinapoyltransferase, yet another SCPL protein.  The
              characterization of the reactions catalyzed by these enzymes will provide new
              insights into how these enzymes function. Ultimately, these experiments may
              lead to the ability to alter plant metabolism, and potentially enable the
              design of enzymes with novel catalytic abilities.
