Title       : Analysis of JAK Pathway Activation in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0091535

Award Number: 0091535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Harrison dough@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091535
Harrison

Communication between cells is a vital factor in proper
              development and maintenance of multicellular organisms.  The number of
              molecules that serve as signals is enormous, yet the mechanisms by which cells
              can respond to signals are much more restricted.  A finite number of signaling
              pathways have emerged as reutilized intracellular signaling cascades that
              initiate appropriate cellular responses.  The long term objectives of this
              research are to elucidate mechanisms of cellular communication and to
              understand how different signals are integrated and interpreted to regulate
              developmental events.  One conserved intracellular cascade that has been found
              in organisms from slime mold to human is the Janus kinase (JAK) signaling
              pathway.  In vertebrates, JAK signaling is the primary mechanism for response
              of cells to a wide array of cytokines and growth factors.  The fruit fly,
              Drosophila melanogaster, was chosen to study JAK signaling because it uses the
              JAK pathway in the same manner as humans, yet is amenable to genetic and
              developmental manipulation.  The only known activator of JAK signaling in
              Drosophila is the Unpaired (Upd) protein.  Previously funded research
              (IBN-9723944) focused on the molecular and biochemical characterization of upd.
               The Upd protein bears no recognizable similarity to previously identified
              mammalian proteins, but is similar to a protein from a closely related fruit
              fly species, Drosophila ananassae.  Both Om(1E) and updgenes are found in both
              of these Drosophila species.  Furthermore, the recent release of the Drosophila
              genome sequence has identified two additional, less conserved predicted
              proteins that have homology to Upd.  The functions of these three new genes
              will be investigated, as well as the relationships of these genes to upd and to
              one another.  Understanding of the molecules and mechanisms of JAK pathway
              activation in Drosophila will likely provide insights into developmental
              signaling in many multicellular organisms.  The primary goals of this research
              are to:  (1) characterize, molecularly, biochemically, and phenotypically, the
              Drosophila melanogaster Om(1E) gene, (2) determine the functional relationships
              between Om(1E) and upd, (3) characterize, molecularly and phenotypically, two
              other proteins with homology to Upd, and (4) identify additional components of
              JAK signaling and related pathways using genetic screens.


