Title       : Synthesis and Reactivity of Substituted Cyclopentadienylmetals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a0091770

Award Number: 0091770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Halterman rhalterman@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research addresses several main goals within the context of
              cyclopentadienyl metal complexes. Efficient synthetic methods will be developed
              for the synthesis of known cyclopentadienyl ligands and complexes as well as
              new chiral cyclopentadienyl and indenyl metal complexes. Chiral indenyl and
              cyclopentadienyl ligands bearing tethered donor ligands will be synthesized and
              coordinated to metals. Finally, the activity of the chiral complexes in
              enantioselective carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bond forming reactions will
              be explored. Ligand syntheses will be effected through exploitation of the
              cross-coupling reactions of 2-bromoindenyl complexes, the ring closing
              metathesis reaction (yielding indenes from phenyldienes), and the
              chromium(II)/nickel carbonyl addition method to convert bromoarenes or
              bromoalkenes and ketones or aldehydes to substituted indenes and
              cyclopentadienes.

With this award, the Organic Synthesis Program is
              supporting the research of Professor Ronald L. Halterman of the Department of
              Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Oklahoma. Professor Halterman's
              studies are directed toward the synthesis of new catalysts designed to effect
              the formation of carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds with precise control
              over the detailed three-dimensional structure ("stereochemistry") of the
              products. These studies, focused largely on the synthesis of new
              stereochemically defined "scaffolds" to support catalytically active metal
              centers, are of direct relevance to the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and
              polymeric materials, endeavors in which the need for stereochemical control
              continues to grow.
