Title       : SBIR Phase II: Combinatorial Synthesis of Electrocatalysts for Ozone Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0091446

Award Number: 0091446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Tennakoon charles.tennakoon@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    979/693-0017

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project describes an
              innovative combinatorial approach to the discovery of new electrocatalysts for
              electrochemical ozone generation.  Ozone is increasingly being used in water
              treatment, as a sanitizing agent in the food industry and is preferred over
              chlorine and its derivatives.  Electrochemical ozone generation, where ozone is
              generated by electrolysis of water, can potentially offer several cost and
              process advantages over the conventional electrical discharge methods of ozone
              generation.  However, existing methods for generating ozone electrochemically
              use electrodes, which offer low Faradaic (i.e., current) efficiencies and have
              limited materials stability.  In Phase I, ozone electrocatalysts were screened
              using a combinatorial approach, and two novel electrocatalysts for ozone
              formation were identified.  A new rapid screening approach was also devised and
              will be used to evaluate focussed combinatorial arrays in Phase II. Phase II
              will identify the precise stoichiometries of the new ozone electrocatalysts
              using the techniques pioneered in Phase I.  The catalysts will then be
              synthesized on a macro scale and evaluated in ozone cells using existing ozone
              electrocatalysts as a benchmark.  

The catalysts identified during this
              project will enable a more cost-effective generation of ozone with applications
              in municipal water treatment, point-of-entry and point-of-use water treatment,
              food sanitation, medical waste treatment and medical sterilization.  Ozone
              could also be utilized in the chemical industry as a replacement for chlorine
              in a variety of processes, e.g. paper and pulp bleaching. 

