Title       : Stromal Processing Peptidase Function in the Chloroplast Import Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0091272

Award Number: 0091272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gayle K. Lamppa gklamppa@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary - Lamppa MCB-0091272

The long term goal of this project is to
              understand the pathway of protein import into the chloroplast, and to elucidate
              at the molecular level the components involved and how they function. The
              chloroplast is the site of photosynthesis and also houses an amazing array of
              biosynthetic pathways needed for normal plant growth and development. As a
              multifunctional organelle, it participates in the synthesis of fatty acids,
              branched and aromatic amino acids, plant hormones, tetrapyrroles, terpenoids,
              as well as being required for nitrogen and sulfur reduction. The biogenesis of
              the chloroplast, and plastid function in different organs, depends on the
              correct targeting and transport of nuclear-encoded proteins from the cytoplasm.
              Typically, these proteins are synthesized with an N-terminal transit peptide
              that facilitates multiple steps in a general import pathway. Ultimately,
              transit peptides are removed as precursors enter the stroma, releasing mature
              proteins for incorporation into the biological complexes of the organelle.
              Because of its critical role in chloroplast import, and thus organellar
              biogenesis, the studies of this project will focus on the nature of the
              proteolytic machinery needed for precursor maturation. A stromal processing
              peptidase (SPP) that removes the transit peptides from precursors targeted to
              the chloroplast was previously characterized. It is a member of a new class of
              metallopeptidases that share a signature His-X-X-Glu-His motif at the catalytic
              site, yet all recognize very different substrates. The first objective of this
              proposal is to understand how SPP recognizes and interacts with the transit
              peptide targeted to the chloroplast. It has been demonstrated that SPP has a
              high affinity binding site for the transit peptide, and a major goal is to
              identify this site on SPP. The hypothesis that SPP has a distinct domain for
              transit peptide recognition, separate from the conserved catalytic domain, will
              be tested. A new in vitro binding assay will be used that depends on SPP
              expressed in E. coli as a recombinant enzyme. The hypothesis that the transit
              peptide also contains special structural features which facilitate this
              protein-protein interaction will be examined. The second objective is to
              investigate a new function of SPP that has been discovered. SPP binds the
              transit peptide, and then after release of the mature protein, SPP converts the
              transit peptide to a subfragment form that it no longer binds. A new
              degradative activity in the chloroplast has been identified that degrades the
              subfragment, and thus, is involved in transit peptide turnover. The degradative
              activity is ATP- and metal-dependent and is distinguishable from SPP itself. It
              appears that a regulated sequence of events occurs as SPP functions in the
              general import pathway in which SPP recognizes, binds and cleaves the transit
              peptide before its release for degradation. The third objective is to
              characterize the properties of the ATP-dependent degradative activity using
              biochemical methods. Selective degradation of proteins that are recognized as
              abnormal, or unfolded, or those at the termination of a pathway which are no
              longer functional is now considered an essential quality control mechanism for
              maintaining cellular homeostasis and normal development. It is likely that
              transit peptide turnover is equally important for chloroplast biogenesis. These
              studies are significant for a number of reasons. First, understanding how
              different components of the import machinery carry out their functions provides
              insight into how the chloroplast is assembled and maintained. Second, the
              chloroplast is one of two energy-producing organelles found in eucaryotes, the
              other being the mitochondria. However, the chloroplast carries out the unique
              role of converting light energy into ATP and reducing power. Given that most of
              the proteins required for photosynthesis and the other biosynthetic pathways of
              the chloroplast are imported, and must be cleaved to release functional
              products, the specificity and regulation of transit peptide removal is
              undoubtedly of critical importance to chloroplast biogenesis. Finally, given
              the central role of the chloroplast in plant development and the enormous
              amount of protein that must be  imported during chloroplast biogenesis, transit
              peptide removal is one of the most significant posttranslational modification
              events that occurs in a plant cell. Work on this project will provide both
              research and educational opportunities at the postgraduate, graduate and
              undergraduate student levels in the field of cell biology, and the plant
              sciences. An important contribution will be made to the training of
              undergraduate students who participate in the Career Research Opportunities
              Program to enhance their success as professionals, and those eligible for the
              Work Study Program at the University of Chicago, which makes available matching
              funds for their work in research laboratories.

