Title       : Molecular Genetics of Arabidopsis Titan Mutants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0091754

Award Number: 0091754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Meinke meinke@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091754
Meinke

The titan (ttn) mutants of Arabidopsis exhibit dramatic
              alterations in
mitosis and cell cycle control during seed development.  The
              common
feature among these mutants is that endosperm nuclei become enlarged
              and
highly polyploid.  Mutant embryos differ in cell size, morphology,
              and
viability, depending on the locus involved.  Three titan mutants
              with
distinct phenotypes were first identified in the Meinke laboratory 4
              years
ago.  During the previous grant period, 10 additional titan mutants
              were
recovered and 5 TITAN genes cloned in collaboration with
              Novartis
(Syngenta).  Several of these genes encode condensin (SMC)
              proteins
required for chromosome condensation and dosage compensation. 
              Another
gene product is related to the ARF class of GTP binding
              proteins
associated with vesicle trafficking.  The remaining genes are
              involved
with other cellular processes.  What remains to be determined is how
              these
diverse proteins interact to influence nuclear division and cell
              viability
during seed development.    

This project will make it possible
              to continue the analysis of titan
mutants and determine the relationship
              between gene function, nuclear
dynamics, and cell growth during seed
              development.  Emphasis will be
placed on the SMC class of titans because these
              proteins appear to be most
directly linked to the mutant phenotype.  Project
              objectives are to
identify the remaining SMC gene knockouts through reverse
              genetics,
characterize nuclear and cytoskeletal defects in more detail
              through
fluorescence and electron microscopy, analyze phenotypes of multiple
              SMC
knockouts, and determine how SMC functions in plants compare with
              those
established in other organisms.  The ARF class of titans will be
              examined
first by attempting to complement ttn1 with an ARF-GAP that maps to
              the
TTN1 region.  This should complete a map-based cloning effort
              initiated
during the last grant period.  The other class of titans will be
              examined
in part by analyzing more tagged endosperm mutants from the
              Novartis
collection, including those that have intermediate titan
              phenotypes.
These additional mutants will be compared with existing titans
              to
establish the complex network of genes that influence
              endosperm
development.  

The titan phenotype demonstrates that Arabidopsis
              endosperm tissue
provides an ideal environment for proliferation of aberrant
              nuclei
defective in mitosis and cell cycle control.  Detailed analysis of
              these
mutants should provide valuable insights into novel features of
              nuclear
dynamics during endosperm development and evolution.  The long-term
              goal
is to understand the complex mechanisms that regulate endosperm
              formation
in angiosperms. 



