Title       : SBIR Phase II: Neuromorphic Color Sensor for Object and Place Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0091594

Award Number: 0091594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony M. Lewis tlewis@iguana-robotics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iguana Robotics
	      805 E. Buckthorn Circle
	      Mahomet, IL  61853    217/586-6525

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6840,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II Project proposes the
              construction of a miniature object recognition and color segmentation system on
              a chip.  This chip will be tuned to recognize various predefined targets in
              natural environments.  The chip will use an object recognition model, color
              histogramming, originally derived from research in cognitive neuroscience. 
              Taking advantage of recent advances in Neuromorphic Engineering, the company
              will implement  the basic sensing and computational elements directly in
              silicon using mixed analog/digital processing.  In contrast, implementing the
              same model or algorithm with conventional microprocessor technology would
              require that the basic computations be simulated as an intermediate step.  The
              removal of this intermediate step will result in an intelligent sensor with
              dramatically lower cost, smaller volume, and reduced power usage-achievements
              not possible using competing microprocessor-based technology.

The
              applications for this technology include intelligent toys and prosthetic
              devices.  A toy might be made to recognize, and therefore be able to respond
              to, the presence of another toy or specially designed environment. More
              advanced and elaborated versions of the chip might be used as an aid to the
              blind by assisting them in finding standardized (i.e. specially colored)
              objects.  For example, a blind person might be assisted in localizing a coffee
              mug, distinguishing between two similar items of clothing differing only in
              color, or finding a standardized 'EXIT' sign in a building.  The broader impact
              of this technology is that it will help bridge the gap between the natural,
              unstructured environment and computing technology.

