Title       : Expanding Innovation Opportunities in Tennessee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0091632

Award Number: 0091632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $579694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen E. Johnson gjohnson@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0091632		
Johnson			

This award is to Tennessee Technological University to
              support the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0082).

Partners
The partners include Tennessee Technological University;
              Austin Pea University; East Tennessee State University; University of Memphis;
              Middle Tennessee State University; Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Tennessee
              Biotechnology Association; Cumberland Emerging Technologies; TenneSeed;
              Tennessee Board of Regents.

Proposed Activities
The activities for this
              award include screening new ideas for suitability for commercialization; new
              courses in entrepreneurial training; spin-off companies for students;
              development of an electronic communication system to track developments and
              offer assistance to small spin-off companies; connecting the research,
              knowledge, discovery of the universities to the generation of new patents, and
              licenses, stimulate new economic growth and economic well being in the
              state.

Proposed Innovation
The innovation goals for this award include
              creation of intellectual property by the universities in the state, transfer of
              new knowledge to the private sector, creation of new economic enterprise,
              raising the economic well being of the entire state (most of the economic
              wealth is in the eastern part of the state).  This activity will also provide
              the necessary workforce training to support the new business and
              industry.

Potential Economic Impact
The economic outcome will be the
              general economic well being of the region.

Potential Societal Impact
The
              societal benefits include increased economic well being for the region and
              participation of under-represented groups in the enterprise.


