Title       : Intracellular Traffic of Small Nuclear RNA to the Nucleolus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0091166

Award Number: 0091166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thilo S. Lange Thilo_Lange@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
PROJECT SUMMARY

The nucleolus is a highly dynamic sub-organellar
              compartment whose diverse roles are now only beginning to be understood.  One
              such function involves the assembly of spliceosomes, a function poorly
              understood.   This project will determine the pathway and mechanism by which
              the U6 snRNA travels through the nucleolus prior to its assembly into
              spliceosomes.  The results of this project should thus provide new and
              important insights into this aspect of nucleolar function.  
The sequences
              required for nucleolar localization or nucleolar export of U6 snRNA will be
              identified by injection into Xenopus oocytes of fluorescein-labeled transcripts
              of U6 snRNA carrying various mutations with subsequent analysis of nucleolar
              preparations by microscopy. A mini-construct containing the identified
              nucleolar localization elements (NoLEs) of U6 snRNA fused to unrelated
              sequences will reveal if the sequences identified as NoLEs are not only
              required but also sufficient for nucleolar localization. A fusion construct of
              U6 nucleolar export sequences and the snoRNA Box C/D terminal stem motif will
              be studied.
Primer extension assays will be employed to elucidate if nucleolar
              localization of U6 is required for its modification (2'-O-methylations and
              pseudouridylations). Modification will be examined for endogenous U6, and for
              synthetic wild type U6 and synthetic mutant U6 (that cannot localize to
              nucleoli) which have been injected into oocytes depleted of endogenous U6
              snRNA. A mini-construct containing a fusion of the region of U6 which becomes
              methylated by the guide snoRNA mgU6-77 with 40 nt of unrelated sequence will be
              tested for nucleolar localization after depletion of the guide snoRNA to
              investigate whether guide snoRNAs play a role in U6 snRNA nucleolar
              localization.
Synthetic copies of fluorescein-labelled U4 or U5 snRNAs will be
              injected into Xenopus oocytes to examine if they localize transiently in
              nucleoli. If so, antisense oligonucleotide mediated depletion of U6 snRNA will
              reveal if U4 and U5 snRNA nucleolar localization require the presence of U6,
              or, conversely with depletion of U4 or U5 snRNAs, if U6 nucleolar localization
              requires U4 or U5 snRNAs. The same set of experiments will also be carried out
              at longer time points after injection to inquire if the nucleolar export of U6
              snRNA requires U4 and/or U5 snRNP, and to analyze if export occurs only after
              the di-snRNP and/or tri-snRNP have formed. 
A candidate protein that may
              mediate the nucleolar localization of U6 snRNA by binding to its NoLEs is the
              La protein. La binds to the 3' end of U6 snRNA, within the region that is
              required for nucleolar localization. The 3'-OH of synthetic U6 snRNA will be
              converted to a 3' phosphate to prevent association with La, thus allowing
              analysis of whether La binding is required for U6 snRNA nucleolar localization.
              If so, the specific region within La that targets this protein to the nucleolus
              will be determined, and whether the state of La phosphorylation is important
              for transient localization to the nucleolus.


