Title       : Modeling the Brainstem Neural Mechanisms for the Respiratory Pattern Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0091942

Award Number: 0091942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya A. Rybak rybak@cbis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The brain integrates and coordinates neural processing across multiple levels
              of organization to produce behavior.  This project takes the neural control of
              breathing as a system for computational modeling of cross-level integration of
              cellular, network and systems neural mechanisms.  The overall objective is to
              build a united multi-level model of neural control of respiration, within a
              uniform framework to incorporate existing data and current hypotheses on
              respiratory control.  It remains controversial whether respiratory oscillation
              is produced primarily by endogenous cellular 'pacemaker' activity, or instead
              by properties of excitation and inhibition within a network circuit.  This
              project models membrane activity for single respiratory neurons to investigate
              bursting activity; models the whole circuitry of the central pattern generator
              (CPG) network to investigate how connectivity can result in a steady
              respiratory rhythm with realistic firing patterns and changes from external
              perturbations; and elaborates the CPG model to generate a pacemaker-driven
              rhythm under simulated conditions.  Mechanisms and conditions for the
              transition between pacemaker-driven and network-based states for generating
              rhythms are investigated in computational models and directly compared to
              experimental biological data from other laboratories.
   Results will clarify
              fundamental aspects of the important topic of respiratory control, may settle a
              current controversy, and will have an impact beyond basic neuroscience,
              eventually to biomedical work including control-systems analysis of physiology.
               The complex multi-scale approach is novel, and will provide valuable
              postdoctoral and student training.

