Title       : Bioseparations via Coupled TPP and Electrostatic Forces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0091552

Award Number: 0091552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor G. J. Rodgers victor-rodgers@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew L. Zydney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0091552
Bioseparations using Coupled TPP and Electrostatic Forces
Victor
              G.J. Rodgers (University of Iowa) 
Andrew L. Zydney (University of
              Delaware)

Abstract

Membrane processes have great potential for use in the
              downstream purification of a wide range of biological products.  However,
              current devices are limited by a lack of selectivity and problems associated
              with protein fouling.  The goal of this work is to examine the development of
              an enhanced membrane separation technology that combines the use of interfacial
              electrical interactions to enhance the overall selectivity with transmembrane
              pressure pulsing (TPP) to reduce membrane fouling and increase flux. Initial
              experimental studies are using well-defined protein solutions containing either
              one or two proteins and standard ultrafiltration membranes with well
              characterized properties.  Batch-cell and crossflow ultrafiltration (UF)
              experiments will be performed to evaluate the transport of model
              single-component solutions and binary mixtures of proteins with and without
              TPP.   Data obtained over a range of buffer conditions indicate the efficacy of
              using membranes with different surface-charge characteristics to exploit
              electrostatic interactions on the separation. Protein charge is determined by
              capillary electrophoresis, and the membrane charge is analyzed both before and
              after each run by measuring the streaming potential.  Post-operative solution
              analysis and membrane hydraulic permeability data are used to determine
              quantitatively the extent of membrane fouling as a function of operating
              conditions, membrane surface characteristics, and protein properties.  The data
              analysis employs factorial design and analysis of variance (ANOVA) to discern
              the most significant factors in improving solute sieving, solute flux, and
              overall purification factor.  These experimental studies are complimented by
              theoretical analyses of bulk and membrane transport phenomena, including the
              effects of both the electrostatic interactions and the transmembrane pressure
              pulsing.

The combination of dynamic TPP with the proper exploitation of
              electrostatic interactions has the potential to provide significant
              enhancements in protein-separation membrane performance.  In particular, the
              use of electrical interactions to repel selectively like-charged species should
              enable very high resolution separations to be accomplished with commercially
              available membrane materials.  Transmembrane pressure pulsing will allow these
              devices to be operated at much higher throughput while minimizing membrane
              fouling.  The net result is that this technology should be able to improve
              dramatically the overall yield, purification factor, and throughput
              characteristics of membrane systems, allowing these devices to be used for an
              entirely new range of applications in the biotechnology and biomedical
              industries.  For example, because membrane processes are inherently cost
              effective and cause little damage to fragile biological components, successful
              implementation of this technology could enable processes for the production of
              new therapeutic proteins and nutraceuticals from natural sources like milk and
              plasma, the development of new biomedical devices for removal of
              auto-antibodies from plasma, or the treatment of life-threatening diseases with
              dynamic mass-transfer-based artificial organs.  

