Title       : CAREER: Social Behavior and Genetics in a Fission-Fusion Society of African
               Elephants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0091612

Award Number: 0091612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $476114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Alberts alberts@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              CAREER:  Social behavior and genetics in a fission-fusion society.  Susan C.
              Alberts

Focusing on a wild population of African elephants, the proposed
              project will test critical hypotheses about the evolution of social behavior,
              using both behavioral data and genetic techniques.  These hypotheses address
              (1) the causes of differences in mating success among males, (2) the extent and
              mechanisms of inbreeding avoidance, (3) the extent to which social
              relationships are determined by kinship, and (4) the impact of behavior on the
              genetic structure of populations.  The questions addressed in this proposal are
              of both general importance for understanding the evolution of social behavior,
              and of particular importance for understanding the relationship between
              behavior and genes in a well-studied population of a threatened species. 
              
	The work will involve the African elephant population in Amboseli National
              Park, Kenya, which has been the subject of ongoing behavioral and demographic
              studies since 1974.  Elephants, like many social mammals, exhibit long-term
              associations among female relatives, and mating behavior that favors a class of
              socially dominant males.  However, unlike most mammals, elephants exhibit a
              very fluid form of fission-fusion society, in which an individual elephant may
              associate with almost every member of the population in a given year.  This
              raises unique questions about inbreeding avoidance where relatives encounter
              each other unpredictably, about cooperation in unstable social settings, and
              about genetic differentiation and gene flow within and between fluid societies.
              The genetic component of the project will include a large-scale microsatellite
              analysis and a study of mitochondrial DNA, focusing on 400 individuals.  These
              genetic data will be used to establish (1) paternity for a subset of calves,
              (2) levels of relatedness between breeding females and males, (3) levels of
              genetic relatedness between females in focal families, and (4) the distribution
              of maternal and paternal kin networks within and across families. 
 The
              educational component of the project includes graduate and undergraduate course
              development, as well as the development of a workshop for Durham area high
              school biology teachers, who have expressed a pressing need for additional
              course content for their classrooms.  Durham area public schools have a high
              (>60%) minority enrollment as well as a strong commitment to science education,
              including the teaching of evolution. The workshop aims to provide course
              content in behavioral ecology, and to capitalize on the strong popular appeal
              of this sub-discipline in order to increase interest in basic biological
              research among Durham's diverse student population.

