Title       : Regulatory Components for Host Recognition by a Fungal Plant Pathogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0091091

Award Number: 0091091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Straney ds106@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant pathogenic fungi have developed traits that allow their entry and
              pathogenesis on specific host plants.  A key adaptation is the regulation of
              these traits so that they are expressed at the appropriate time and level, as
              well as on the correct host. This project focuses upon fungal recognition a
              host-specific compound for the regulation of its virulence traits. Pisatin, an
              antimicrobial isoflavonoid, is produced specifically by garden pea (Pisum
              sativum) as a phytoalexin. Nectria haematococca (anamorph Fusarium solani), a
              pathogen of pea, is able to recognize and respond to the presence of this host
              compound. One pisatin-induced trait is the expression of the pisatin
              demethylase gene (PDA1), which encodes a cytochrome P450 that detoxifies
              pisatin. Other traits involved in pea pathogenicity are also induced by
              pisatin, suggesting that pisatin acts as a host-selective cue to coordinate
              expression of these different traits.  Previous NSF-supported research
              identified a 40 bp regulatory element on the PDA1 promoter that provides the
              pisatin-response.  Manipulation of regulatory elements in the promoter showed
              that pisatin is the major signal controlling PDA1 expression during pea
              pathogenesis.  A gene encoding a DNA-binding protein that specifically binds
              the 40 bp pisatin-responsive element was identified using the yeast one-hybrid
              system. The goal of this project is to test if the encoded DNA-binding protein
              is a direct determinant of pisatin-responsive PDA1 expression.  Transformation
              will be used to perform targeted gene disruption of this gene in N.
              haematococca. The effect of disruption upon the pisatin-inducibility PDA1 will
              be determined.  A loss of pisatin-responsive expression will be significant in
              indicating direct function in pisatin signaling.  This will allow future
              experiments to test if the same DNA-binding protein controls other
              pisatin-induced pea pathogenicity traits as well. Overall, these results will
              provide a model of a signaling pathway through which this soilborne plant
              pathogen is able to chemically detect its host and trigger the traits needed
              for pathogenesis of that host. This is important for not only understanding the
              components needed for host-adaptation in plant pathogenesis but for developing
              future controls of plant disease.  
