Title       : STTR Phase II: High Twisting Power Chiral Materials for Nanostructured Bragg
               Reflective Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0091522

Award Number: 0091522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497063             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. William Doane bdoane@kentdisplays.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent Displays, Inc.
	      343 Portage Blvd.
	      Kent, OH  44240    330/673-8784

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II Project develops a new
              class of chiral materials, the dioxolanes, which provide unprecedented helical
              twisting power.  When added to a nematic liquid crystal, a concentration of
              only a few percent is required to twist the nematic phase into a tight helix
              with a periodicity of the wavelength of light.  Because of the low
              concentration, the chiral additive does not dilute important physical
              properties of the nematic material required to optimize Cholesteric displays
              for brightness, contrast, speed and low operating voltages.  Being simple
              molecular structures, dioxolane derivatives can be synthesized in both left and
              right hand moieties to enable, for the first time, Cholesteric displays that
              nearly double the reflective brightness to where it approaches that which we
              are used to seeing from paper. Phase II research has both a basic and an
              applied component.  The basic component studies the helical twisting power and
              its relationship to the molecular structure of the chiral compounds and host
              mixtures.  The applied component uses this information to design and develop
              chiral additives for advanced Cholesteric displays for use in electronic books
              and other handheld devices.

The chiral materials will be used in display
              products primarily used in handheld devices whee low power, sunlight
              readability, and wide angle viewing of high resolution, full color images are
              important.  Devices targeted are electronic book, cell phones, pagers, etc.


