Title       : South Dakota Rushmore Initiative for Excellence in Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0091948

Award Number: 0091948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Martha L. James                         
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Rice james_rice@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Royce C. Engstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry O. Farwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Benfield  (Project Director former)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The South Dakota "Rushmore Initiative for Excellence in Research" will feature
              infrastructure enhancements in three targeted areas:  (a) The Center for
              Biocomplexity Studies will be a collaborative, interdisciplinary effort to
              study the ecosystems of the Northern Great Plains and their sensitivity to
              internal and external forcings; (2) Materials and Processes of the 21st Century
              will focus on microelectronic materials and devices, structured nanocomposites
              and photodynamics; and (3) Molecular and Cellular Biology Core Facilities will
              build expertise in bioinformatics and proteomics.  In addition, a Scientific
              Visualization and Information Technologies Core will be established, providing
              a visualization network to the participating universities.  South Dakota State
              University, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, and the University of
              South Dakota will collaborate in the various activities and programs to
              implement new strategies designed to build public support for research and
              integrate it into the state's technological future.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               Infrastructure support for these targeted areas will include
              new faculty start up packages, postdoctoral and graduate student fellowships,
              support for undergraduates, conference support and various outreach activities
              in education and economic development to involve a broader constituency in the
              process of science and discovery.  The combination of these activities will
              contribute to enhancing South Dakota's research competitiveness.
