Title       : SBIR Phase II: Variable-Focal-Length Liquid Crystal Objective Lens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a0091550

Award Number: 0091550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jackie Lin jackie.lin@reveo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhan He  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Reveo Inc
	      3 Westchester Plaza
	      Elmsford, NY  105231609    914/345-9556

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is designed to
              develop and commercialize our electrically controllable, dynamic-focusing
              liquid crystal microlens/microlens array device for 3D optical media readout
              and writing.  The device will be the worlds first compact, electrically
              controllable, dynamic focusing liquid crystal (LC) microlens reading/writing
              device for 3D data storage, and has the potential to revolutionize optical data
              storage and retrieval.  The device will dramatically increase both the reading
              and writing speed of conventional CD/DVD systems and multi-layer DVDs and will
              be the enabling component in the next generation of truly 3D data storage
              technologies. In Phase I,  the feasibility of the technology was demonstrated
              and tested various dynamic liquid crystal lens structures to gain an
              understanding of the issues of design, fabrication, and optical properties of
              LC microlenses.  Building on this success, Phase II is dedicated  to the
              optimization of the LC microlens structures and the development of a
              fast-switching dynamic focusing LC microlens with large variable focal length
              range and numerical aperture. Finally,  a microlens array to develop parallel
              reading/writing devices will be designed and built.  A prototype 3D reading
              device will be demonstrated. In Phase III, Reveo will commercialize the new
              technology.

Optical storage offers higher capacities, removable platters,
              and more durable media than magnetic disk storage, but it is limited by slow
              access speeds and higher costs of drives and media.  The first product to be
              developed from the microlens technology will be an electrically-controllable,
              dynamic-focusing liquid crystal microlens device for integration into the data
              reading system of current DVD players and other optical storage drivers.  The
              device will maximize retrieval efficiency of current optical storage media so
              customers can immediately enjoy the benefits of 3D data storage technology. 

