Title       : Synchrony and Diachrony of the Word in Georgian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a0091691

Award Number: 0091691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38231              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice C. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Georgian is a member of the Kartvelian (South Caucasian) language family, spoken
              in the Republic of Georgia, formerly part of the U.S.S.R. The research will
              focus on certain synchronic and diachronic aspects of the structure of complex
              words in Georgian because some seem to pose a challenge to current theories of
              word structure. For example, although it is generally held that words do not
              contain conjunctions, units that appear to be words routinely do contain da
              'and' in Georgian, such as oc-da-or-i [20-and-2-NOM] 'twenty-two'. Though it is
              accepted that in general phrases cannot form the basis of words, in Georgian
              units that have the characteristics of words can routinely be based on
              postpositional phrases, such as umlaut-amde-li [umlaut-until-ADJ-NOM] 'before
              umlaut (ADJ)', where the suffix -(e)l forms an adjective, from umlaut-amde
              'until umlaut', headed by -amde 'until', which appears to be a postposition,
              not a case suffix. While it is generally accepted that words are anaphoric
              islands, in Georgian units such as u-sen-o '*you-less' are routine, where sen
              'you (SG)' is a fully referential pronoun, and u--o is a circumfix
              (prefix-suffix combination).

This project is intended as a contribution to
              the description of synchronic and diachronic universals of language; the
              specific goals of the project are the detailed description of anaphoric
              islandhood, phrasal recursivity, and coordination inside words in Georgian; the
              description and explanation of the origins of circumfixes in Georgian and the
              Kartvelian languages; and the exploration of possible origins of apparent
              violations of the constraint on phrasal recursivity.

Research on synchronic
              phenomena will take place in the Republic of Georgia and will be conducted in
              Georgian through one-on-one consultations with native speakers. The primary
              research methods involve consultants reading aloud written Georgian words (for
              syllabification, stress, and other phonological phenomena) and sentences,
              together with consultants commenting on or correcting Georgian words, phrases,
              and sentences read aloud by the P.I. Research on diachronic phenomena will
              include close reading of Old Georgian texts and other comparative and
              historical documents, reading of materials in libraries in the Republic of
              Georgia, and discussion with colleagues there.

The significance of the
              project is not limited to the analysis and explanation of phenomena particular
              to Georgian; rather, these phenomena will be related to proposed universals of
              word structure. It is expected that the project will provide: testing of claims
              made in the recent literature on universal characteristics of the word; a study
              of the origins of circumfixes; and study of the origins of apparent phrasal
              recursivity.
