Title       : The Origins of Mesoamerican Maize Agriculture: Climate and Human Intentionality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0091490

Award Number: 0091490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99804              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce F. Benz benzb@txwes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Wesleyan University
	      P.O.Box 50010
	      Fort Worth, TX  761050010    817/534-0251

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
With National Science Foundation support Dr. Bruce Benz will conduct detailed
              analyses of maize (Zea mays L. subsp. Mays) collected in archaeological
              excavations in the Tehuacan region and in Ocampo Cave, Mexico. Through the
              study of its evolution he plans to document the complementary roles of
              intentional human selection and environmental inducement in the domestication
              of maize and its emergence as the principal staple in Mesoamerica from ca. 4700
              years ago until the time of the Spanish Conquest. Through detailed morphometric
              analysis, radiocarbon dating and oxygen and hydrogen isotopic analysis of
              selected samples he will address the following questions: 1. During what time
              periods did morphological change occur and how fast or slow did the maize ear
              change in shape and productivity during the period ca. 3500 BC to AD 1500? 2.
              What proportion of morphological change in the maize ear can be attributed to
              natural selection and what proportion to random genetic drift? 3. What effect
              did fluctuations in temperature and effective moisture have on maize's
              morphological change and productivity? 4. At what time and for what reasons did
              subsequent diversification processes operate to give rise to the numerous
              extant races of Mexican maize? 

The "Neolithic Revolution" - the
              domestication of plants and animals - constituted a fundamental turning point
              in human development because the productivity and reliability of these
              resources provided the stable subsistence base which gave rise to complex
              societies and civilization. In the North and Middle America maize, in
              conjunction with squash and beans, provided the basis for this change and
              therefore understanding the processes with led to its domestication is
              essential for reconstructing how prehistoric societies developed. Evidence to
              date indicates that maize was domesticated in Middle America and subsequently
              spread both North and South. While abundant well preserved samples have been
              recovered in cave sites in Mexico much of this material remains unstudied and
              Dr. Benz's examination of several stratigraphic sequences and their synthesis
              will constitute a major research contribution. Many researchers, biologists and
              archaeologists alike, wish to understand the interactions among plant species,
              human behavior and environment (changes in temperature and rainfall) which
              resulted in the apparently independent domestication of many species at roughly
              the same time in many parts of the world and thus the potential significance of
              Dr. Benz's research is broad. 

