Title       : SBIR Phase II: Instrument for Tumor Cell Purging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0091448

Award Number: 0091448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manfred R. Koller fkoller@oncosis.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oncosis
	      6199 Cornerstone Court
	      San Diego, CA  92121    619/550-1770

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project describes a
              novel laser-based technology for large-scale analysis and processing of living
              cells.  One application of this technology is the detection and elimination of
              contaminating tumor cells from autologous hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
              transplants for cancer patients.  Published studies have shown that:  (1)
              contaminating tumor cells contribute to cancer relapse; (2) successful tumor
              purging provides a clinical benefit; and (3) current purging methods are
              inadequate. Therefore, technology that reliably eliminates tumor cells from
              transplants, while leaving HSCs undamaged, is needed. A patented innovative
              approach integrating fluorescence scanning cytometry, real-time image analysis,
              and specific laser-induced killing of individual cell targets will be used. 
              The Phase II project will complete the clinical-scale prototype instrument,
              leading into clinical trials.  The instrument design will then be configured
              for successful commercial manufacturing, and further improvements in
              capabilities will be pursued in order to maintain market leadership and expand
              into other markets.

The studies conducted in the Phase II project will lead
              to commercialization of a method to eliminate detectable tumor cells from an
              HSC transplant with a several hour automated procedure.  The resulting
              instrumentation will also be useful in a number of other clinical and research
              applications that require cell analysis and purification with high purity,
              yield and speed.  

