Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Universal Protein Interaction Biosensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0091357

Award Number: 0091357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia C. Bamdad cbamdad@minervabio.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minerva
	      142 Church St
	      Newton, MA  02458    617/821-8773

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1108,9102,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is focused on
              developing nanotechnology reagents and tools for the emerging field of
              proteomics.  The technology is modular. This means that universal reagents are
              produced to which an end-user can, in a simple step, attach any protein or
              antibody for a variety of biological assays.  The detection technology under
              development is electronic.  Electronic detection can be readily multiplexed for
              high throughput assays.  Large numbers of experiments can be simultaneously
              analyzed, over short periods of time, using state of the art electronics
              techniques like time-division multiplexing.  Since the output of the technology
              is electronic, massive data sets can be directly transferred to bioinformatics
              systems for automated analysis and storage.  The technology uses cheap off the
              shelf components coupled with proprietary state of the art, nanotechnology
              reagents.  The speed and multiplexing capabilities of the technology make it
              orders of magnitude less expensive than existing or competing technologies. 
              The technology will be tailored to the special needs of proteomics: the study
              of the function of the gene products, proteins. With the sequencing of the
              human genome nearing completion, the need for tools to facilitate the study of
              proteomics is a high priority near-term application.

Pharmaceutical
              companies would use this technology to identify families of proteins that are
              implicated in disease and construct databases that define networks of
              interacting proteins to determine points of intervention and potential drug
              targets.  End-users will prefer to use the proposed technology because it will
              be more cost effective, sensitive, faster and flexible enough to adapted to
              many user applications.

