Title       : Integrative Functions of Swimming: Locomotor Mechanics in High Performance
               Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a0091987

Award Number: 0091987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Shadwick rshadwick@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey B. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This investigation will explore natural design for high performance locomotion
              in marine fishes. The principle goal of this work is to determine how
              specialized muscle anatomy in tunas (Family Scombridae) and lamnid sharks
              (Family Lamnidae) enhances their swimming performance. Ongoing studies of tunas
              have led to the hypothesis that, compared to other bony fish, the uniquely
              internal and more anterior location of the red muscle used for sustained
              swimming provides an advantage for locomotion, not a mechanical disadvantage as
              previously thought. Tunas and lamnid sharks, although separated for four
              hundred million years in their evolution, have many similarities in body form.
              Thus, it is further hypothesized that functional similarities in muscle
              contractile properties occur also, and that compared to other sharks the
              lamnids are indeed high performance swimmers. A comparative study of the
              mechanical design for locomotion will be undertaken using the short-fin mako
              shark (Isurus oxyrinchus).  Live makos approximately 1 m in length will be
              collected locally, and placed in a large circular holding tank with
              flow-through sea water. For biomechanical studies, individual sharks will be
              transferred to a large water tunnel treadmill, built at the Scripps
              Institution, which allows fish to swim steadily against a current at controlled
              speeds while remaining in a fixed location relative to observers.
              State-of-the-art techniques will be employed to study muscle performance during
              swimming. Fish will be instrumented with fine wire electrodes to record muscle
              activation patterns.  In addition, 2mm diameter sonomicrometer crystals will be
              implanted into red and white muscle to obtain measurements of local muscle
              shortening at different longitudinal positions. This digital sonomicrometry
              system will permit measurement of muscle deformation in three dimensions, and
              quantification of differential shortening and shearing between adjacent red and
              white fibers, which is hypothesized to occur. Coupled with these measurements
              will be kinematic analysis of digital video images to quantify the properties
              of the wave of bending that travels along the body of the shark with each cycle
              of muscle contraction. The resulting data set will allow a direct comparison of
              swimming kinematics with tunas as well as non-lamnid sharks. Also it will
              provide the details of muscle shortening and activation timing that are needed
              for in vitro muscle contraction experiments. Mechanical analysis of swimming
              muscle performance will focus on power production under simulated in vivo
              operating conditions. This will be done using the work-loop technique, in which
              isolated samples of muscle fibers are forced to contract cyclically as length,
              frequency and activation patterns are varied, and power production is measured.
              The novelty of this research is evident, since there are no detailed studies of
              muscle function in swimming of any lamnid shark. The new data will contribute
              substantially to the meager body of knowledge on such animals. The existing
              facilities, expertise, and the local availability of experimental animals
              together present a unique opportunity to study the locomotor biomechanics of
              one of the most intriguing but poorly understood marine oceanic predators. 


