Title       : The Interactions of Energetic Particles with the Solar Wind - A Theoretical
               Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0091527

Award Number: 0091527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Lee marty.lee@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will work toward a quantitative understanding of the energetic
              particle structure of the heliosphere and the fundamental processes that govern
              that structure. The main effort concentrates on theoretical studies of the
              interactions of energetic particles with the solar wind. The studies will be
              broad-based and include solar energetic particles, galactic cosmic rays,
              interstellar pickup ions, shock-accelerated particles such as the corotating
              ion events, and the solar wind itself. The investigations will include both the
              global spatial and temporal distributions of the energetic particles, and the
              microprocesses governing their interactions with the ambient plasma, including
              wave excitation by the energetic particles. Analytical methods will be
              emphasized where possible. The studies will also emphasize comparisons between
              the theoretical predictions and ground-based and spacecraft observations,
              including specifically those by ACE, SOHO, Cluster, Wind, Ulysses and Voyager.
              Specific topics of research include an analytical theory for the acceleration
              and transport of solar energetic particles at an evolving
              coronal/interplanetary shock including proton-excited waves and magnetic
              focusing, which propels ions from the turbulent sheath adjacent to the shock
              into interplanetary space. The investigators will construct an improved theory
              of ion acceleration at corotating interaction regions in the solar wind
              including injection mechanisms, a sheath of proton-excited waves, and azimuth
              asymmetry of the accelerated interstellar pickup ions. They will also
              investigate of the evolution of the proton and minor ion distribution functions
              in the solar wind due to gravity, the ambipolar electric field, magnetic
              focusing and scattering by ion-cyclotron waves.
