Title       : Physiological Basis of Metabolism and Activity: The Cardiopulmonary Physiology
               of Digestion and Exercise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0091308

Award Number: 0091308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert F. Bennett abennett@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Hicks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates cardiopulmonary (heart, lung, and circulatory)
              function during elevated metabolism. Previously, physiologists could only
              induce substantially elevated metabolism in ecotherms by exercising them.
              Hence, it was not possible to separate the elements of cardiopulmonary function
              associated with elevated metabolism per se from those elements specific to
              exercise.  Recent experiments with reptiles have demonstrated that digestion
              may increase metabolism to levels equal to those during maximal activity.
              Elevated metabolism stimulated by exercise induces hyperventilation.  Elevated
              metabolism stimulated by digestion induces hypoventilation.  The investigators
              will undertake experiments to determine the physiological basis for
              hypoventilation during digestion. In other experiments, the investigators will
              measure gas exchange, blood gas and acid-base status, cardiac shunting and
              blood flow distribution simultaneously.  They will compare animals subjected to
              various combinations of resting, exercising, feeding, and fasting to determine
              how the conflicting demands of digestion and exercise are resolved. This
              research will permit an understanding of the match between supply and demand in
              metabolic gas exchange and the identification of those elements that are
              stereotyped and state-independent from those that are flexible and
              state-dependent.  



