Title       : Children and Neighborhoods: A Randomized Study of Mobility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0091854

Award Number: 0091854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $724900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Kling kling@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
                  During the past several decades, poverty in the U.S. has
              become more urban and more spatially concentrated, particularly among racial
              and ethnic minorities.  In this proposal, we outline a strategy designed to
              assess the effects of residential location in high-poverty neighborhoods on
              child learning and development, and to illuminate the basic mechanisms through
              which these effects occur.  To execute this strategy, we propose to utilize the
              research platform provided by the Moving To Opportunity (MTO) demonstration
              program, developed by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
              (HUD).  MTO used a random lottery among housing-project residents in five of
              the nation's largest cities to offer rent subsidies that could be used to move
              to lower poverty neighborhoods.  Data collected from children and their parents
              will be used to examine the effects of neighborhoods on child outcomes, and on
              the role of family and neighborhood factors that may lead to these
              outcomes.
	The randomization of the subsidy will be used to identify the
              causal effect of residential location on child and family outcomes using a more
              scientifically credible research design than has been used in previous
              research.  This experimental design will be used to solve the fundamental
              selection problem in non-experimental research, where comparisons between
              individuals living in different neighborhoods may be biased by the fact that
              families choose their residential location.  Furthermore, we will be able to
              minimize potential survey attrition bias, because substantial tracking has been
              done to keep sample location information current.
	Preliminary research has
              been conducted at several MTO sites.  In Boston, a survey designed by Kling and
              his colleagues was completed approximately two years after random assignment
              with 520 of 540 sample households, for a 96% response rate.  Moves to lower
              poverty neighborhoods induced by MTO subsidy offers appear to have produced
              significant improvements in the problem behaviors of boys, the physical health
              of boys and girls, and the overall and mental health of household heads,
              without substantially worsening social isolation of participating families. 
              Analyses by Brooks-Gunn and Leventhal of initial data from the New York site
              suggest similar results.  Research by Duncan and his colleagues using data from
              the Baltimore site suggests reductions in criminal behavior among adolescent
              boys.  Additional research is needed, however, to directly assess educational
              achievement of children, to understand the mechanisms through which
              neighborhoods affect learning, and to see if initial program benefits persist. 
              Larger sample sizes will also facilitate analyses of particular subgroups, by
              age, race, gender, or time since random assignment. 
	This proposal provides a
              plan to expand MTO research to include an in-home interview with up to two
              children ages 5 to 11 per household (and a parent), for an approximate sampling
              universe of 3900 children and with a survey response rate target of 90%.  Data
              will be collected on children's educational achieve-ment; children's behavior
              problems and delinquency; social networks, peer deviance, and exposure to
              violence; future expectations and efficacy in school, community, and family;
              home environ-ment, family routines, primary caregiver characteristics, and
              child care arrangements; and the economic and demographic situation of the
              family.  This research is designed to complement HUD's concurrent policy
              evaluation centered on MTO household heads, and will enable a much deeper
              exploration of the relationship between children and their neighborhoods.  The
              analysis will provide critical evidence on basic environmental factors that
              influence key developmental outcomes such as knowledge and skill acquisition
              and social behavior.


