Title       : Regulation of Cell Proliferation during Plant Organ Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0091306

Award Number: 0091306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan R. Singer, Program Officer        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keiko Torii ktorii@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luca Comai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091306
Torii		

Body size of multicellular organisms depends on the
              coordinated interplay of cell proliferation and differentiation of the
              developmental program.  In higher plants, organ formation occurs throughout the
              life cycle by continual activity of the shoot meristem.  Because plant cells
              lack motility due to rigid cell walls, spatio-temporal patterns of cell
              division and cell expansion are thought to ultimately determine plant body
              size.  Although the cell cycle machinery that drives cell division has been
              extensively studied in plants, little is known about how the machinery acts in
              the context of growth and development of a plant as a whole.  A goal of this
              proposal is to elucidate the connection between plant morphogenesis and cell
              proliferation by investigating roles of cell cycle regulators in specifying
              organ cell numbers, and therefore the organ size. 

Drs. Torii, Comai, and
              Roberts have identified eight Arabidopsis genes similar to the mammalian cyclin
              kinase inhibitor (CKI) p27kip1, which acts as a negative regulator of the cell
              cycle.  Preliminary analyses of the Arabidopsis thaliana CKIs (AtCKI) suggested
              that mRNA suppression of the AtCKI causes enlargement of mature organs,
              presumably due to both an enlarged shoot meristem and delayed cessation of the
              meristematic competence of developing organs.  The research in the present
              project period is intended to: (1) Biochemically characterize the AtCKI, (2)
              Analyze the relationship between cell proliferation and organogenesis by
              characterizing plants altered in the AtCKI levels, (3) Examine functional
              redundancy among different AtCKIs, and (4) Understand interplays between
              AtCKI-mediated cell proliferation and characterized developmental regulatory
              pathways. 

These experiments should provide a novel insight into
              developmental mechanism controlling plant organ size and define the roles for
              cell cycle control in plant organogenesis.  Moreover, this research should lay
              the foundation for designing desirable organ sizes through genetic
              manipulation.
 


