Title       : A Developmental Perspective on the Evolution of Insect Wings and Imaginal Discs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0091005

Award Number: 0091005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Jockusch jockusch@sp.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091005
Jockusch

Insect wings and imaginal discs are two key innovations
              that have contributed to the spectacular success of the clades that they
              characterize.  However, the developmental basis for the origins of these traits
              remains poorly understood.  The work proposed here is a comparative analysis of
              wing development in two species of insects that retain morphologically more
              ancestral modes of wing development, the beetle Tribolium castaneum and the
              grasshopper Schistocerca americana, and a parallel analysis in one primitively
              wingless hexapod, the thysanuran Thermobia domestica.  These comparisons will
              be used to address two significant questions in insect evolution:  Did the
              origin of imaginal discs require major changes in both primordium allocation
              and disc patterning or did it result from more limited developmental changes? 
              Are wings homologous to dorsal branches of ancestral arthropod legs or did they
              arise de novo from the dorsal thorax?  Presently, most of what is known about
              wing development comes from a single species, the fruit fly Drosophila
              melanogaster.  At a morphological level, wing development in Drosophila is
              derived.  This grant proposes to use comparative molecular data to determine in
              what respects Drosophila wings develop by retained ancestral mechanisms and to
              what extent by novel mechanisms that may be related to the evolution and early
              allocation of imaginal discs.  This work has three specific aims:  (1) to
              examine the conservation of the Drosophila appendage allocation mechanism
              (involving, in part, interactions among the genes wingless, ecapentaplegic, and
              distal-less) in other insects using studies of gene expression and function;
              (2) to compare the expression of four genes important in Drosophila wing
              development- snail, escargot, apterous and wingless- in the developing wings of
              Schistocerca and Tribolium, and in the thoracic lobes of Thermobia to establish
              whether the mechanisms that pattern the wing are broadly conserved; (3) to
              identify the embryonic source of wing cells in these species using a
              combination of lineage tracing and laser ablation techniques.

