Title       : Cell Division in a Model Archaeon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0091571

Award Number: 0091571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419884             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Margolin William.Margolin@uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Spudich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-5847

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              How does a single cell divide to become two cells? This is a fundamentally
              important and
yet unsolved biological question. In prokaryotes, this essential
              cellular process is
initiated and directed by the tubulin-like FtsZ protein,
              which forms a polymeric ring,
called the Z-ring, at the division site during
              the initial stages of cytokinesis. The
Z-ring then contracts, persisting at
              the leading edge of the invaginating cytoplasmic
membrane throughout the
              division process.
FtsZ is present in the three major biological
              kingdoms-bacteria, archaea, and
organelles.in eukaryotes. Because very little
              is known about cell division or cellular
organization in the archaea, the goal
              of this research program is to gain insight into the
mechanism of archaeal
              cell division and how FtsZ coordinates this process. Halobacterium
salinarum
              is the system of choice to study FtsZ-based cell division in the archaea
              for
several reasons. First, relatively sophisticated genetic and cytological
              tools, such as a
salt-resistant green fluorescent protein (GFP), have been
              recently developed for this
organism. Second, H. salinarum grows at convenient
              temperatures in air, and thus can be
cultivated without any special equipment.
              Third, its complete genome sequence has
recently been completed, making H.
              salinarum the best archaeon in which to apply
functional genomics. Fourth, H.
              salinarum harbors five copies of ftsZ: ftsZ1 and ftsZ2
are highly similar to
              ftsZ orthologs from other species, whereas the other three are more
divergent
              but are nevertheless clearly ftsZ homologs. This unprecedented
              complexity
promises to reveal interesting and novel aspects of FtsZ function.
              Fifth, despite the
potential complexity of FtsZ interactions, there are no
              other homologs of bacterial cell
division proteins in this organism (which is
              also true for other archaea). This, along
with the presence of a relatively
              simple S-layer instead of a peptidoglycan cell wall,
suggests that cell
              division in H. salinarum may be more streamlined than that of the
bacterial
              model systems and therefore potentially easier to solve. Finally, the rod
              shape
and relatively large size of H. salinarum cells greatly facilitates
              cytological analysis.
The objectives of this project are to (i) define the
              roles of the five FtsZ
homologs, in particular the two most conserved copies,
              in H. salinarum cell division; (ii)
understand what regulates assembly and
              placement of the Z-ring in H. salinarum, with
potential candidates including
              the two MinD homologs present in the proteome; and (iii)
identify other
              factors involved in cell division and in a potentially novel cytoskeleton
in
              this organism. These objectives will be addressed by construction of gene
              knockouts,
protein overexpression and purification, assays for GTP binding and
              hydrolysis,
self-assembly measurements, and in vivo protein localization and
              quantitation using GFP
fusions and immunodetection. These studies should make
              a major contribution to
our understanding of cell division mechanisms, protein
              targeting and dynamics, and
cellular organization of archaea, and should
              complement studies of cell division in
bacterial and organellar model systems.
              Moreover,  genome sequence of H. salinarum,
coupled with its accessibility,
              affords a timely opportunity for students to develop an
in-depth research
              project on the cell biology of an archaeon.

