Title       : Regulation of Phosphoinositide Metabolism and Early Responses to Osmotic Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0091090

Award Number: 0091090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy F. Boss wendy_boss@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              SUMMARY
Polyphosphorylated inositol lipids provide a means for plants to
              transmit signals within and between cells as well as being key regulators of
              cellular metabolism in their own right. Plants as sessile organisms respond to
              most environmental stimuli by altering their pattern of growth. Sustained
              increases in PI metabolism correlate positively with cell elongation in maize
              pulvini and with pollen tube growth, and yet little is known about the
              regulation of plant inositol phospholipid biosynthesis.
Phosphatidylinositol 4
              monophosphate (PtdIns4P) is the most abundant of the polyphosphorylated lipids
              in plants. Thus the investigator hypothesizes that it is a key regulator of
              plant signal transduction. There are two genes encoding PtdIns 4-kinase
              (PtdIns4K), the enzyme that synthesizes PtdIns4P. One isoform, PtdIns4Kalpha,
              copurifies with F-actin in plants and has a PH (pleckstrin homology)
              domain.
This preliminary results lead to the hypothesis that the PH domain
              regulates PtdIns4Kalpha activity and
coordinates membrane signaling with actin
              filament formation. The molecular and biochemical tools are available to test
              these hypotheses.
The goals of this project are:
1. To isolate PtdIns4Kalpha
              knockout mutants of Arabidopsis, to characterize them biochemically and
              genetically (micro-array profiling) and to monitor their response to osmotic
              stress;
2. To identify plant proteins which bind specifically to
              AtPtdIns4Kalpha. 
These data are essential to understand how plants as sessile
              organisms use the PI pathway to sense and respond to external stimuli. By
              identifying proteins that interact with the lipid kinases, this research will
              begin to build a network of interacting signaling.
