Title       : SBIR Phase II: Holographic Disk Data Storage on a New Photochromic Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0091591

Award Number: 0091591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph DeMasi newspan@nsotech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Span Opto-Tech Inc
	      9380 SW 72nd Street, B-180
	      Miami, FL  331733243    305/275-6998

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project studies
              holographic data storage in a new ion-exchanged photochromic glass disk. It is
              well known that holographic data storage can significantly increase data
              storage capacity and reduce access time.  However, the technology maturity of
              holographic data storage is believed to be impeded by: the lack of good
              holographic material that can be erased and recorded optically with almost
              unlimited rewriting cycles, with large index modulation for large capacity
              multiplexed data recording, and with long lifetime and immunity to destructive
              readout for archival applications. As demonstrated in Phase I the new
              ion-exchanged photochromic glass can satisfy all above requirements. In
              addition, it does not require developing or fixing after hologram recording
              making it an attractive candidate to replace other holographic materials in
              holographic storage applications.  The Phase II research will first explore
              techniques to increase the recording volume thickness.  The holographic
              performance parameters will again be determined after the thickness
              improvement.  A compact holographic storage system will then be designed and
              constructed to show the effectiveness of disk type storage application.  High
              capacity storage will be demonstrated. Commercial development will be explored
              with some major storage companies. 

Using the new ion-exchanged glass can
              significantly improve the holographic data storage technology for commercial
              and military applications such as computer data storage, on-line storage,
              library archival applications, image storage and processing for medical
              applications and military target identification, and fast access to large
              intelligent databases.



