Title       : RUI: Structure/Function Analysis of the Himar1 Transposon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0091044

Award Number: 0091044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364036             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Lampe lampe@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goals of this project are to understand the structure and function
              of the Himar1 transposase. A series of in vitro and in vivo E. coli assays and
              screens will be used to determine the amino acids responsible for mediating the
              several activities of Himar1 transposase that constitute transposition.  In
              vitro mutagenesis will be used to create a series of C-terminal truncations of
              transposase each of which will be screened by gel shift assays to determine how
              much of the protein can be deleted before DNA binding activity is eliminated. 
              Random and specific point mutations in the DNA binding domain will then be
              introduced and the mutations assayed for their effects in vivo and in vitro. 
              The boundaries of the catalytic domain, the part of the protein responsible for
              the DNA breakage and joining reactions, will be mutated randomly and at
              conserved positions based on an alignment of many mariner-family transposons
              and the mutants screened for the ability to either excise the transposon or
              insert it into a target.  The motif responsible for mediating target site TA
              dinucleotide identification will be localized with an E. coli screen which will
              allow the identification of randomly mutated Himar1 transposase constructs that
              complete insertion into improper target sequences.   Finally, the DNA sequence
              of the inverted terminal repeat  (ITR) will be mutated to determine the minimum
              sequences required for transposition.  High-resolution chemical footprinting
              will be carried out to determine which base pairs are specifically contacted by
              transposase.  Finally, a random mutagenesis screen will be performed to
              determine the effects of each position in the ITR on transposition frequency. 
              By understanding the structure and function of this transposable element it is
              hoped that its utility in a variety of species will be dramatically improved.
