Title       : Metal Homeostasis and Tolerance in Plant Chloroplasts - The Role of PAA1 and
               AtCUTA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0091163

Award Number: 0091163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marinus Pilon pilon@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9187,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	All organisms must regulate metal homeostasis, which involves metal
uptake,
              transport, storage, and distribution. The goal of this research is
to gain
              insight into the basic mechanisms by which heavy metal homeostasis
is
              regulated in plants, particularly in the chloroplast. The chloroplast is
the
              location of photosynthesis, the process that drives all life on earth.
This
              complex process involves a set of enzymes and pigments, many of which
require
              specific heavy metal ions as cofactors, e.g. copper, iron,
magnesium,
              manganese, and zinc. Although these metals are necessary
components of the
              photosynthetic machinery - as well as of other enzymes in
the cell - they are
              toxic when present in excess. Therefore,
chloroplast copper homeostasis is
              vital for plant heath and productivity.
This project focuses on two
              Arabidopsis thaliana  genes, PAA1 and AtCUTA,
both thought to be involved in
              metal homeostasis. Judged from the presence
of putative chloroplast import
              sequences, both gene products are predicted
to be functional in the
              chloroplast. Based on similarities with genes
cloned from other sources, Paa1
              protein is likely involved in copper
transport, and AtCutA protein in the
              regulation of copper tolerance. These
hypotheses regarding the location and
              functions of these proteins are
analyzed in this project. The mRNA levels of
              both genes will be
analyzed with respect to tissue distribution, developmental
              stage, and
environmental conditions such as metal toxicity or metal
              deficiency. The
intracellular location of the proteins encoded by the genes
              will be
determined. To investigate the functions of the genes in vivo,
              Dr.Pilon will analyze plant lines
that have T-DNA insertions and plant lines
              that overexpress the genes.  They will be studied  with respect to metal
              homeostasis and assembly of the photosynthetic apparatus. Finally, the metal
              binding properties and metal specificity of the encoded proteins will be
              determined.  

The results from this project will provide much-needed
              fundamental knowledge about
heavy metal homeostasis mechanisms in
              chloroplasts, a largely unexplored field of research.  In addition,  this work
              may lead to the development of strategies to manipulate metal tolerance and
              accumulation in
plants. This, in turn, may be used to increase crop yields and
              nutritional
value of plants, or to help clean up metal-contaminated sites.
