Title       : SBIR Phase II: Imaging Subsurface Fluid Flow with Time-Lapse Seismic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a0091452

Award Number: 0091452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493450             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Lumley david.lumley@4thwaveimaging.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fourth Wave Imaging
	      16A Journey, Suite 200
	      Aliso Viejo, CA  92656    949/916-9787

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 1266,9189,9215,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project concerns the
              development and implementation of seismic imaging and inversion methods and
              parallel computer algorithms to estimate subsurface fluid-flow properties from
              time-lapse seismic data.  In recent years, there has been exponential growth in
              time-lapse seismology project activity.  These projects have yielded seismic
              difference anomalies that result from monitoring time-variant changes in the
              earth's subsurface related to fluid flow.  However, such anomalies are often
              qualitative and ambiguous--what causes the anomalies, and what do they mean? 
              The proposed Phase II research will enable the capability to make quantitative
              estimates of the 3D distribution of subsurface fluid pressure and fluid
              saturation changes that cause the seismic anomalies, using wave-equation
              seismic imaging and inversion techniques, coupled with rock physics analysis. 
              The research consists of three parts: optimized parallel software and
              computational design, amplitude preserved seismic imaging and impedance
              inversion, and robust rock physics inversion to estimate pressure and
              saturation.  The software and services generated by this Phase II research will
              be invaluable to help guide new wells and optimize reservoir management
              decisions in the 70+ oilfields world-wide that are being actively monitored
              with time-lapse seismic data. 

Near-term commercial applications of the
              proposed research include petroleum industry mapping and monitoring of
              commercial oil reserves, monitoring of costly injected fluids (water, steam,
              CO2, miscible gas), and imaging pressure compartmentalization and the leaking
              or sealing properties of faults and fractures. Non-petroleum applications may
              include monitoring groundwater reserves, near-surface monitoring of contaminant
              plumes and environmental clean-up projects. Potential far-market applications
              may include sub-sea acoustic imaging, synthetic aperture radar satellite
              imaging, and medical imaging. 




