Title       : Functional Roles for Tetrahymena RAD51 During Conjugation and the Cell Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0091194

Award Number: 0091194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Romero romero@lenti.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ciliated protozoa possess an unusual genome organization that effectively
              divides the labor of somatic and germline genetic functions between two
              distinct nuclei.  The micronucleus is the germline nucleus, divides mitotically
              during vegetative growth, is diploid (2N = 10 for Tetrahymena), and is
              transcriptionally silent.  In contrast, the macronucleus is the somatic
              nucleus, divides amitotically, contains multiple copies of all genes, and is
              transcriptionally active.  Sexual reproduction, or conjugation, is a tightly
              controlled process in Tetrahymena whose progression follows a predictable
              pattern over approximately twelve hours.  Soon after two Tetrahymena cells of
              opposite mating type form a conjugating pair, the micronuclei undergo a series
              of meiotic and mitotic divisions.  Following these nuclear divisions,
              conjugants exchange haploid nuclei, which then fuse to produce a zygotic,
              diploid nucleus.  Late in conjugation the parental macronuclei are destroyed,
              and a new macronucleus develops from a copy of the zygotic micronucleus. 
              Macronuclear development proceeds in a pre-programmed and controlled manner
              that involves a series of site-specific chromosome breakage and DNA deletion
              events.

A functional study of the highly conserved DNA strand transfer
              protein Rad51 (the eukaryotic homolog to the bacterial recA recombinase) from
              Tetrahymena thermophila has been initiated.  Tetrahymena RAD51 expression
              varies under a number of different environmental conditions and developmental
              stages.  RAD51 expression increases following exposure to DNA damaging agents. 
              In addition, RAD51 levels vary during both the vegetative cell cycle and
              conjugation.  Disruption of the somatic RAD51 locus results in failure of
              conjugating cells to complete meiosis, and in vegetative cell cycle defects
              that lead to an accumulation of hypodiploid cells.  Conjugation of germline,
              homozygous rad51 null strains lead to a block of the first vegetative cell
              division following conjugation, resulting in an arrest at the exconjugant
              developmental stage.  In order to more precisely decipher the role of Rad51p
              during conjugation, a conditional, temperature sensitive (t.s.) allele of
              Tetrahymena RAD51 will be identified.  Plasmid-encoded Tetrahymena Rad51p will
              be tested for complementation of a yeast rad51 null strain.  Successful
              complementation will make it possible to directly screen for Tetrahymena RAD51
              t.s. alleles in yeast.  If the Tetrahymena RAD51 homolog fails to complement a
              yeast rad51 null strain, plasmid-encoded yeast RAD51 will be mutagenized,
              introduced into a rad51 null strain, and screened for a t.s. allele.  Missense
              mutations of conserved amino acid(s) that confer a t.s. phenotype to the yeast
              Rad51p will be introduced to the Tetrahymena homolog, which will subsequently
              be expressed in Tetrahymena rad51 null exconjugants.  A RAD51 conditional
              mutant that can be inactivated during conjugation at the restrictive
              temperature will provide insight into how developmentally controlled genome
              rearrangements in Tetrahymena, including those leading to rDNA palindrome
              formation, are mediated.

A more complete understanding of these
              developmentally controlled recombination will provide insight into how similar
              processes are achieved in other organisms, such as the rearrangement of
              vertebrate immunoglobulin genes.  Mechanisms by which DNA sequences are
              rearranged can be more easily explored and understood using a single-celled
              model organism such as Tetrahymena.


