Title       : RUI: In Vivo and in Vitro Analysis of Modified Chloroplast Rieske Iron-Sulfur
               Proteins of Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0091415

Award Number: 0091415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toivo Kallas kallas@uwosh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Oshkosh
	      800 Algoma Boulevard
	      Oshkosh, WI  549013551    920/424-1415

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Rieske iron-sulfur protein of the chloroplast cytochrome b6 f complex has
              essential roles in energy transduction, redox-sensing, and in biochemical
              signaling to regulate photosynthesis. A unique movement of the iron-sulfur
              cluster domain is necessary for catalytic activity and probably for signaling.
              The research will investigate the role of protein structural features in signal
              transduction, catalytic activity, and assembly. 

Modified Rieske proteins
              will be studied in the alga Chlamydomonas, in isolated complexes, and as
              overproduced proteins in vitro. Specific objectives are: 1) Mutational
              investigations in vivo and in vitro of the role of the Rieske protein
              N-terminus and inflexible hinge domains in signal transduction and catalysis.
              Included are cysteine insertions to attach fluorescent probes to isolated
              complexes for assessment of possible
Rieske N-terminal movement in signaling.
              2) Mutational studies in vivo of an N-terminal Lys-Arg motif and its possible
              role in .pH-dependent, Rieske protein translocation across the thylakoid
              membrane. 3) Analysis of overproduced, modified Rieske proteins (such as those
              lacking the disulfide bridge) by spectroscopic methods to characterize
              structure/function relationships. Proteins of particular interest may be
              purified for structure determination. 4) In vitro reconstitution of
              overproduced Rieske proteins with Rieske-depleted cytochrome b6 f complex.
              Success would allow in vitro studies of Rieske protein interactions with
              neighboring subunits and possible LHCII kinase activation in signaling. 

The
              research is multifaceted, relies on stimulating collaborations, and will
              provide important new insights into fundamental mechanisms of photosynthesis
              and membrane proteins. It will contribute to complementary research and
              teaching activities at UW-Oshkosh and will provide excellent training
              opportunities for MS and undergraduate students.

