Title       : Regulation of Photosynthetic Electron Transport Genes in Chlamydomonas
               Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0091020

Award Number: 0091020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439999             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Stern ds28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091020  David Stern
Chloroplasts, the site of photosynthesis, are derived from
              a cyanobacterial ancestor and have progressively transferred most of their
              genetic information to the nucleus. Because chloroplasts contain up to 5,000
              proteins, today the vast majority are of nuclear origin. Among these proteins
              are a myriad which are required for correct expression of the genes which
              remain in the chloroplast. This project focuses on nucleus encoded proteins
              which regulate messenger RNA lifetime in the green alga Chlamydomonas
              reinhardtii, as well as on how chloroplast ribosomes recognize the site at
              which protein synthesis must be initiated. This project will further earlier
              analyses which revealed that at least 5 nuclear genes encode products which
              affect the stability of petD mRNA, which encodes subunit IV of the cytochrome
              b6/f complex, an essential protein for photosynthesis. One of these genes,
              Mcd1, has been cloned and the details of its interaction with the petD mRNA
              will be elucidated. Another gene whose product may form part of a multiprotein
              complex with Mcd1 will also be studied. This gene, mcd4, was identified through
              a genetic screen based on photosynthetic capability. Mcd4 has been targeted
              because it appears to have unique attributes with respect to other nuclear
              genes involved in chloroplast biogenesis. The second aspect of the project
              concerns translation initiation, and in particular the interaction between the
              initiator tRNA and the nucleotide upstream of the translation initiation codon
              of petA, which encodes cytochrome f. The generality of this interaction will be
              investigated, as well as the role of the so-called Shine-Dalgarno sequence,
              whose functionality in bacterial protein synthesis is well-established, but
              whose role in chloroplasts is somewhat controversial and clearly variable.
              Overall, this project will elucidate mechanisms of communication between
              different compartments of eukaryotic cells, a fundamental issue in
              understanding intracellular regulation. 
