Title       : Primary Processes in Photosystem I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0091250

Award Number: 0091250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Blankenship Blankenship@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Photosynthetic organisms use a twofold strategy to capture and store solar
              energy. An antenna system first collects light and then transfers the energy to
              an electron transfer system that converts electronic excitation into redox
              energy that can be used for cell growth. In most photosynthetic systems, the
              antenna and electron transfer functions are located on separable complexes and
              can be studied independently. However, in Photosystem I of oxygenic
              photosynthetic organisms, the antenna and electron transfer functions are fused
              into a single large complex that serves both functions. Experiments are
              proposed to improve our current fragmentary understanding of the energy
              trapping processes, primary photochemistry and early secondary electron
              transfer reactions in this important class of photosynthetic reaction centers.
              Overall goals of the work are to understand the coupling of the antenna system
              to the electron transfer system and the pathway of the early electron transfer
              processes. 

	Specific experiments in this project include: 1) Studies on
              Photosystem I mutants in the quinone and pigment binding regions, 2) Separation
              of the Photosystem I reaction center complex into antenna and electron transfer
              domains using protein engineering and 3) Analysis of Photosystem I energy
              trapping and electron transfer in a newly-discovered chlorophyll d-containing
              organism, Acaryochloris marina. 

	This project will increase our
              understanding of how plants and other photosynthetic organisms convert the
              energy of sunlight into chemical energy. The process of photosynthesis supplies
              all of our food and most of our energy needs. This project is designed to give
              detailed knowledge of the chemical mechanism of this essential biological
              process.

