Title       : The Bacteriophytochrome Photoreceptor From Deinococcus radiodurans: A Paradigm
               for the Phytochrome Signaling Cascade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a0091413

Award Number: 0091413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Vierstra vierstra@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katrina T. Forest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Plants use sunlight as a source of energy for photosynthesis and as an
              environmental cue to coordinate their development to the ambient light
              conditions and seasonal cycles.  A number of photoreceptors are responsible for
              detecting these light signals.  The most influential are the phytochromes, a
              family of chromophore-bearing proteins that absorbs red and far-red light. 
              They act as light-regulated switches for a number of agriculturally important
              processes, including seed germination, chloroplast maturation, pigmentation,
              stem growth, flowering, and senescence to name a few.  Despite their
              importance, we still do not fully understand how phytochromes allow plants to
              sense the intensity, direction, and duration of the light signal.  A major
              barrier to this understanding has been the dearth of simple
              genetically-tractable models for the study of phytochromes without the
              complications of other photoreceptors and photosynthesis.  We have
              simultaneously overcome these problems with the recent discovery of a single
              phytochrome-like photoreceptor system in the non-photosynthetic bacterium,
              Deinococcus radiodurans [Davis et al. (1999) Science 286: 2517-2520].  Like
              phytochromes, the D. radiodurans bacteriophytochrome photoreceptor (BphP)
              absorbs red and far-red light.  Studies on BphP suggest that it acts as a
              protein kinase that begins light sensing by phosphorylating other proteins. 
              Ultimately this signal stimulates the bacterium to produce carotenoids,
              pigments typically used to protect plants from high light conditions.  The goal
              of this project is to study the D. radiodurans BphP phytochrome to understand
              its structure and mechanism of action.  The BphP photoreceptor will be
              characterized at the biochemical level to determine the identity of its natural
              chromophore and the way it is linked to the protein.  The pathway that
              synthesizes the chromophore will be determined.   Attempts will be made to
              crystallize the protein so that its structure can be defined.   Via a number of
              methods, the biochemical steps that lead from BphP to light-stimulated
              carotenoid production will be defined. Completion of this work will begin to
              provide the first description of a phytochrome signal transduction pathway that
              can then be used as a framework for understanding how phytochromes work in crop
              plants. 



