Title       : SBIR Phase II: Understanding 'Construction/Deconstruction' and the Role of
               Resistance in Accelerated Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a0091356

Award Number: 0091356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lia A. DiBello liadibello@msn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WTRI
	      1425 Russ Blvd.
	      San Diego, CA  92101    619/232-8054

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 6850,9102,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
              need to improve the success rate at which new technologies can be introduced
              into the workplace.  A methodology and service,  ATTAIN(TM), has been conceived
              to accelerate the integration of technology by rapidly and aggressively
              identifying critical processes and practices in the organization and shifting
              them in value-added ways at the level of worker cognition and operational
              specifics.  This method has been shown to be highly successful, but is labor
              intensive, expensive, and requires highly skilled practitioners.  Furthermore,
              the method upon which ATTAIN is based is not sufficiently targeted.  That is,
              more often than not, businesses have only 3-4 workplace processes or practices
              that need to be changed in order to increase the company's competitiveness. 
              The original method does not single these out as more important than other
              elements of the workplace.  To date,  increasing the effective incorporation of
              new technology by changing workplace practice and worker cognition through
              specialized simulation training, but not at identifying the most appropriate
              target for the technology implementation or change has been very successful. 
              The work of Phase II will involve integrating the current methods with those of
              another company.  Their method has been shown to identify the "vital few"
              practices that mitigate a company's overall competitive survival and which are
              the most appropriate targets for change.  Phase II has two goals.  First, a
              hybrid method that is quicker and more targeted will be developed.  Second, a
              practitioner training approach and supporting materials that make it possible
              for professionals without extensive experience to deliver the method in a high
              quality manner will be developed.

Training and licensing practitioners in a
              hybrid method of workplace learning will contribute significantly to the
              problem of efficient and successful technology integration and implementation
              of new technologies.

