Title       : Retrograde Amnesia for Trace Fear Conditioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0091487

Award Number: 0091487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Fanselow fanselow@psych.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              How the brain extracts information to from the environment and stores that
              information as a memory is a fundamental but unanswered question in behavioral
              neuroscience.  The brain structure that is most intimately associated with
              memory in humans and other animals is the hippocampus.  Damage to this brain
              area produces amnesia, or loss of memory, that shares many features in all
              mammals.  This project focuses on two of these commonalties.  One is that
              memories that were acquired shortly before hippocampal damage are lost but
              older memories remain.  This pattern of memory loss is called temporally graded
              retrograde amnesia.  Retrograde amnesia in rats will be examined by making very
              precise damage to the hippocampus after various times after rats are trained on
              a task that is not normally forgotten.  The task is fear conditioning, where
              rats show an emotional reaction to stimuli that have previously predicted that
              they will receive a brief mild electric footshock.
Another feature of the
              amnesia that stems from hippocampal damage is that certain types of memories
              are lost and others are completely spared.  For example, if people with
              hippocampal damage are taught a new motor skill like tennis, their tennis
              playing ability will continual improve but they will have no memory of ever
              playing tennis. They remember how to play without being able to remember that
              they played.  One form of this selective memory loss will be examined.  If a
              tone predicts shock, hippocampal lesions may or may not cause amnesia for the
              relation between tone and the learned emotion.  If the tone and shock overlap
              in time the hippocampus is not necessary.  However, if a brief period of time
              is placed between tone termination and shock onset the hippocampus is necessary
              for memory.  This type of conditioning is called trace conditioning and
              retrograde amnesia for trace conditioning following hippocampal damage will be
              examined.
Amnesia for trace conditioning is unusual because it differs from
              other forms of memory for which the hippocampus is needed.  Usually rats with
              hippocampal damage have problems with memory for spatial locations or for
              stimuli that are composed of several different components.  In this project it
              will be determined whether retrograde amnesia for trace conditioning and
              complex configurations stem from the same or different functions of the
              hippocampus.  It will also be determined if various manipulations that alter
              the ability of normal animals to learn trace conditioning can alleviate the
              amnesia for trace conditioning.  By investigating and contrasting these forms
              of memory it is hoped to find exactly what the hippocampus is extracting from
              experience and more precisely define what is lost and preserved in amnesia.

