Title       : Foldamers with Emergent Functionality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a0091931

Award Number: 0091931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Moore moore@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Jeffrey S. Moore,
              of the Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, is
              exploring the synthesis and properties of chain molecules that adopt ordered
              conformations in solution ("foldamers"), analogous to the behavior of proteins
              and nucleic acids. Professor Moore's studies target the molecular recognition
              properties of foldamers and the development of approaches for the synthesis and
              selection of functionally active foldamer sequences. Phenyl piperazine
              substrates are designed to be accommodated in the helical cavities of
              oligomers, while alternative functionalization of the oligomers provides fully
              encapsulated cavities with end capping groups capable of further pi-pi stacking
              and hydrogen bonding interactions.

Proteins and nucleic acids adopt ordered
              three dimensional structures in solution, with the details of their structures
              critical to their biological function. With the support of the Organic
              Synthesis Program, Professor Jeffrey S. Moore, of the Department of Chemistry,
              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, is exploring the properties of
              synthetic molecules ("foldamers")  which are designed to fold into specific
              three dimensional structures. By studying methods to bring about the formation
              of desired, compact structures, complemented by the development of new
              techniques for the efficient synthesis of large molecules (macromolecules),
              Professor Moore is addressing the structural features responsible for the
              adoption of specific structures by foldamers. This information, in turn, is
              providing insight into the factors responsible for the binding of small organic
              molecules by macromolecules. Since macromolecular structure dictates many of
              the properties of polymers, these studies promise a better understanding of
              polymer chemistry and materials science,  and, in addition, may enhance our
              understanding of the structure and properties of biological macromolecules.
