Title       : SBIR Phase II: Phase Locking of High Power Fiber Laser Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0091378

Award Number: 0091378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Cheo p.cheo@att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PC Photonics Corporation
	      64 Windward Way
	      Waterford, CT  06385    203/443-4356

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed at
              achieving the first ever 350W (cw) output power in a high brightness and
              diffraction-limited laser beam from a multicore phase-locked fiber laser array.
              Under Phase I, the feasibility of the unique power combining concept has been
              demonstrated by phase-locking a group of 7 Yb-doped single mode fiber lasers,
              embedded in a common cladding. In addition, a theoretical model has been
              developed, providing a deeper understanding of physical mechanisms responsible
              for phase-locking of a multicore fiber laser array.  These results clearly
              indicate that this extremely challenging goal for Phase II can be accomplished.
              Nevertheless, there remain several obstacles that need to be removed before
              embarking on commercialization.  First, a significant improvement of the
              laser
performance must be made.  This can be accomplished by exploring various
              parameters, which include fiber length, cavity finesse, gain saturation,
              temperature and stress distributions, as well as fiber structural parameters,
              such as core separation and the V-value. In addition, an order of magnitude
              improvement for efficient coupling of pump power into the clad must be made. 
              To advance this technology, various pumping techniques will be explored, in
              particular the side-pumping of the fiber laser from the cladding walls, instead
              of the fiber end facets.  If successfully developed, this could be the most
              viable way to obtain the maximum output power without causing catastrophic
              damage.  Finally, the reliability of the device when operating at very high
              power level must be established by raising the power damaging threshold.
              

High power diode-pumped multicore fiber lasers can be very competitive in
              the market place as compared to high power diode-pumped solid-state lasers and
              C02 lasers presently employed by automotive, aerospace and ship-building
              industries for precision drilling, high-speed cutting and welding of metals and
              composition materials.

