Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Plant Circadian Rhythms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0091008

Award Number: 0091008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Robertson McClung Mcclung@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rhythmic biological phenomena which recur at approximately 24 hour intervals in
              the absence of environmental time cues are termed circadian rhythms, and their
              timing is regulated by an endogenous biological clock.  Circadian rhythms are
              widespread both within any given organism and among diverse taxa.  Genetic and
              molecular biological studies, primarily in a subset of model organisms, have
              begun to identify the components of circadian systems.  Although plants have
              provided many examples of rhythmic outputs and our understanding of
              photoreceptors of circadian input pathways is well-advanced, plants have lagged
              in the identification of components of the central circadian oscillator. 
              Increased understanding of plant responses to environmental input and to
              endogenous temporal cues has agricultural importance, in particular because
              both environmental cues and the circadian clock contribute to the photoperiodic
              decision to flower. In addition, there is temporal variation in the response to
              biotic and abiotic stresses, which may prove particularly relevant to attempts
              to increase agricultural productivity. Arabidopsis mutants affected in clock
              function, termed circadian timing defective (ctd) and out of phase (oop), have
              been isolated using the circadian rhythm in resistance/sensitivity to SO2
              exposure that results from circadian rhythms in stomatal aperture and gas
              exchange. For example, oop1 and oop2 represent novel alleles of the
              photoreceptors PHYTOCHROME B and CRYPTOCHROME 1, respectively.  The
              determination of the molecular mechanisms by which phyBoop1 and cry1oop2 affect
              circadian phase will afford insight into this integral but poorly understood
              aspect of circadian rhythmicity.  phyBoop1 and cry1oop2 affect both blue and
              red light signaling in a semi-dominant manner, suggesting that the mutant
              proteins titrate components common to red and blue light signaling pathways
              that provide photic input to the clock.  The identification of proteins
              interacting with phyBoop1 and cry1oop2 represents an important goal in the
              elucidation of this pathway.  A second goal is the cloning and the genetic and
              molecular characterization of a long period mutant, ctd2.  Although it has not
              yet been established that the CTD2 gene encodes a component of a central clock
              oscillator, the characterization of the ctd2 mutant and the isolation of the
              CTD2 gene will contribute to the elucidation of the mechanisms of clock
              function. Potential functions for the CTD2 gene and its product include roles
              as a component of the central oscillator, as a component of input pathways that
              provide environmental information to the clock, as well as a component of
              output pathways that transmit temporal information from the clock to the
              overtly rhythmic phenomena.



