Title       : Workshop on New Frontiers in Psycholinguistic Studies of Chinese, Santa Barbara,
               CA, July 13-15, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a0091607

Award Number: 0091607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping Li pli@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the last fifty years, linguists and psycholinguists have produced a large
              body of work on language processing in adults and language learning in
              children. Most of our knowledge in this domain has come from studies of
              Indo-European languages, in particular, English. Such results are usually
              interpreted as universal properties of language, and generalized accordingly.
              In recent years, however, there has been a surge of interest in the study of
              non-Indo-European languages. This interest to a certain degree reflects a
              'paradigm shift', a reconceptualization of the role of cross-linguistic
              variation, in place of an emphasis on linguistic universals. The
              psycholinguistic study of Chinese represents one very important step in this
              direction. 

The phonological, orthographic, lexical, and grammatical
              structures of the Chinese language differ significantly from those of
              Indo-European languages on which major theories of linguistics and
              psycholinguistics are based. One the one hand, Chinese presents a major
              challenge to psycholinguists who attempt to understand the dynamics of language
              processing and language acquisition; on the other hand, it also presents new
              windows on cognitive processes and new opportunities for psycholinguistic
              analyses. In the last two decades, researchers have used a variety of
              theoretical and experimental paradigms to examine Chinese language processing
              and its acquisition. More recently, they have used Chinese as a crucial test
              case, applying neural and computational approaches to examine core problems in
              psycholinguistics. These new approaches have not only examined the
              psycholinguistic processes of Chinese, but also attempted to shed new light on
              language processing and language acquisition in general.

The specific aim of
              this project is to advance our understanding of the psycholinguistic processes
              and mechanisms in Chinese language processing and language acquisition by
              organizing a workshop as part of the Linguistic Society of America (LSA) Summer
              Linguistic Institute 2001 (to be held at the University of California, Santa
              Barbara, July 13-15, 2001). The workshop draws together eminent scholars who
              have done pioneering work in Chinese psycholinguistics. It provides an ideal
              forum for researchers to disseminate and integrate their exciting new ideas and
              share their aspirations for future directions.
