Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Categorization and Expertise in Human Visual Cognition
               II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0091752

Award Number: 0091752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isabel Gauthier isabel.gauthier@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Visual object recognition occurs at different levels of abstraction ranging from
              categorical levels, e.g., "dog," to the more specific individual level, e.g.,
              "my English hound."  Moreover, we can develop "expertise" at one of these
              levels for a given category; for instance, bird watchers are experts at the
              species level.  This research will continue to investigate the roles of level
              of categorization and perceptual expertise in the development of cognitive and
              neural mechanisms selective for object categories (such as faces or birds). 
              Because different methods offer different strengths and weaknesses, this
              research will involve converging evidence, including behavioral psychophysics,
              functional brain imaging (fMRI), and event related potentials (ERPs) in normal
              humans, as well as extending these techniques to brain-injured individuals. 
              The research program is divided into four sections addressing different
              questions:

1)  How do people become perceptual experts?  A first set of
              experiments will manipulate whether subjects rely on their own observations or
              require feedback and supervision.  A second set of studies will examine whether
              non-visual knowledge about objects contributes to the learning process and
              affects the organization of category-specific areas.  Other experiments will
              test the plasticity of the brain regions, which support object recognition,
              investigating whether damage to one area can be compensated for by
              reorganization of other areas.
 
2)  What are the computational roles of
              different brain areas within the network that mediates expertise with
              visually-similar objects?  Experiments using a combination of fMRI, ERP, and
              behavioral measures will investigate how different category-selective brain
              areas support identification at the categorical, subordinate, and individual
              levels.
 
3)  What is the capacity of perceptual expertise?  Experiments will
              test whether one can become an expert with many different classes of objects
              (e.g., birds, dogs, cars, faces, flowers, etc.), as well as whether there is
              interference when objects from different expertise domains are processed at the
              same time.
 
4)  Can perceptual expertise be acquired more easily with some
              object geometries?  In particular, adaptive pressures for accurate face
              recognition may have "biased" the system to prefer face-like configurations. 
              By manipulating the visual structure of stimulus objects, behavioral and fMRI
              experiments will investigate the geometric constraints on the acquisition of
              expertise.

Overall, these experiments should help us to better understand
              the nature of visual object recognition, elucidating how a single system can
              support the wide range of recognition tasks we are able to perform. The
              implications of these findings vary from possible protocols for the
              rehabilitation of brain-injured individuals to the better education of
              learning-impaired children (e.g., as in autism) to the development of more
              effective and robust machine vision systems for face and object recognition.
