Title       : CAREER: Use of Atomic-Level Models to Study Lipid Bilayer Membranes and to
               Enhance Undergraduate Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0091508

Award Number: 0091508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Feller fellers@wabash.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wabash College
	      301 West Wabash
	      Crawfordsville, IN  47933    317/362-1400

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              FELLER
0091508

Biological membranes are inherently heterogeneous and
              disordered in the physiologically relevant liquid-crystalline phase, thus
              atomic-level structural data is difficult to obtain experimentally. In this
              project, molecular dynamics simulations will be carried out on membranes
              containing a variety of phospholipids, as well as small solutes, nonionic
              surfactants, and peptides. These simulations will complement the existing body
              of experimental data from NMR. Specifically, many of the analyses will extract
              bilayer properties that aid in the interpretation of experimental data on lipid
              and lipid-solute interactions, and on complex membranes incorporating lipids
              with detergents, small solutes, membrane-bound peptides, and trans-membrane
              proteins.  This research will extensively involve undergraduate students as
              co-workers. In addition to testing simulation methods, carrying out
              simulations, and analyzing/interpreting simulation results, students will
              present their results to the campus community and national and regional
              scientific meetings. These presentations will prepare them for careers as
              scientific researchers and will demonstrate exciting opportunities available to
              prospective science majors. Additional enhancement of undergraduate education
              will come through the development of molecular modeling exercises that can be
              utilized throughout the chemistry curriculum, and the use of "p-chem
              portfolios".

This career development plan includes an integrated program of
              research and teaching centered around the use of molecular dynamics computer
              simulation to probe the structure and dynamics of lipid bilayer membranes. This
              research program will have significant impact on undergraduate instruction
              through the transfer of molecular modeling techniques from the research
              laboratory to the chemistry curriculum at Wabash College, as well as via the
              research internships that will be available to numerous students during the
              academic year and summer.

