Title       : The Effects of Migration, Productivity, and Scale on Metacommunity Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0091776

Award Number: 0091776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Miller miller@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0091776.  Thomas Miller.  

Understanding patterns of community organization
              requires a focus on multiple scales of time and space.  A metacommunity
              perspective in its most simple form distinguishes mechanisms that operate
              locally, such as competition and predation, from those which operate at broader
              spatial and temporal scales, such as migration and extinction.  Although the
              conceptual basis and ramifications of such scale-dependence are well developed,
              few empirical or experimental tests have been undertaken to address aspects of
              metacommunity theory.

The proposed research uses "inquiline" (tenant or
              dweller) species, which live in water-filled leaves of pitcher plants to
              quantify the effects of the rate and spatial scale of dispersal on the local
              and regional structure of communities.  Inquiline communities contain mosquito
              and chironomid larvae, as well as copepods, cladocerans, aquatic mites,
              rotifers, protozoa, and bacteria.  The primary source of energy to this aquatic
              system comes from dead invertebrates that are captured by the host plant rather
              than from photosynthetic production.  These communities are convenient natural
              microcosms because of the ease with which they can be manipulated and
              replicated in field conditions.  They are especially appropriate for studying
              metacommunity dynamics because interactions clearly can be distinguished
              between those of local (e.g., predation, competition, resource availability)
              and regional (e.g., migration and disturbance).  

More specifically, the
              rate and scale (local versus regional) of migration of species among individual
              pitcher plant communities, as well as the productivity of the system as a whole
              will be manipulated to conform to a factorial design, thereby facilitating
              statistical analyses.  Weekly monitoring of the entire community will permit
              the estimation of the abundance and growth rate of constituent species, as well
              as the composition and diversity of communities.  In tandem, these experiments
              and observations will allow a deep understanding of the extent to which local
              and regional mechanisms affect community characteristics, and the degree to
              which such results are predicated on the production of the system.





