Title       : Salvaging the Anchoring and Adjusting Heuristic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a0091416

Award Number: 0091416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91333              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Gilovich tdg1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              What is the likely price of the Dow next year?  How long can the 
patient
              expect to live?  How many lives are likely to be lost in a 
looming military
              campaign?  Questions such as these confront decision 
makers every day.  The
              proposed research seeks to understand, and 
ultimately improve, the precise
              psychological processes by which such 
judgments are made.  Often such
              judgments are made by adjusting from 
some initial starting point.  The Dow is
              at 10,500 right now, so one 
might estimate it will be at 11,000 next year. 
              The last patient with 
the same symptoms lived for 6 months, so one might
              estimate a 
survival time of one year.  Psychologists, economists, and
              marketing 
scholars have investigated such "anchoring and adjustment"
              processes 
during the past twenty-five years and have found that a person's
              
ultimate judgment tends to be too close to the initial value-i.e., 
the
              initial value serves as an "anchor" that biases the ultimate 
judgment.

The
              present research seeks to build on existing knowledge of 
anchoring and
              adjustment processes by pointing out (with empirical 
justification) an
              important misunderstanding in the current 
literature.  The proposed
              experiments are designed to show that the 
psychological processes invoked by
              real-world problems like those 
above are quite different from those invoked
              in the standard 
paradigms used to investigate anchoring and adjustment. 
              Real-world 
problems like those above involve explicit adjustment from the
              
initial value; the standard anchoring paradigm involves simple 
priming of
              anchor-consistent information.  By directing the field to 
the true source of
              anchoring effects in real-world contexts, the 
proposed research promises to
              point the way to strategies that can be 
used to improve the accuracy of
              important real-world forecasts.

