Title       : SBIR Phase II: Advanced Formal Techniques for Dependable Reactive Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0091499

Award Number: 0091499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Sims sims@reactive-systems.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reactive systems, Inc.
	      114 Bleeker St
	      Port Jefferson, NY  11777    516/473-2931

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop the
              automated tool support that will enable engineers to deploy powerful and
              mathematically rigorous, yet easy-to-use and cost-effective, techniques to
              model, analyze and implement correct and reliable reactive software systems.
              Such systems are intended to maintain an ongoing interaction with their
              environment in order to provide appropriate responses to stimuli the
              environment generates.  Examples include the embedded software found in
              medical, automotive, aeronautical, consumer-electronic, e-commerce, and
              telecommunications applications. Many of these are safety- or
              business-critical. Providing an enabling technology for the cost-effective
              development of correctly functioning reactive systems would thus be of great
              social and economic benefit to the nation.

The main tangible outcome of the
              proposed effort and the flagship product will be the React tool environment. 
              React will allow reactive-system designers to create mathematical models of
              their systems; validate models via simulation and automatic verification; and
              automatically generate implementations or test suites from models. The key
              innovation of the proposed technology is its reliance on powerful formal
              techniques, developed by RSI for modeling systems and validating properties of
              these models in a fully automatic fashion.


