Title       : CAREER: Advanced Bioelectromagnetics for Wireless Biomedical Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0091599

Award Number: 0091599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gianluca Lazzi lazzi@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With advances in wireless communications, medicine, and biocompatible
              electronics, novel ideas to
seamlessly integrate information technology and
              bioelectromagnetics toward the development of wireless
implantable biomedical
              devices need to be explored. Bioelectromagnetic phenomena are intrinsic to
              the
vital function of all living tissues, and a thorough understanding of both
              the internal electromagnetic
fields and the coupling of external
              electromagnetic fields to the human body represent a challenge that
will
              significantly contribute to the development of new biomedical devices for the
              21st century.
The objective of this proposal is to bring about fundamental
              advances toward the development of novel
wireless transcutaneous
              electromagnetic devices for biomedical applications by integrating in the
              same
framework macro- and micro-scale phenomena. The study will start from
              considering the development of
suitable antenna systems for power and data
              telemetry between units internal and external to the human
body, to reach the
              level of understanding how induced and spontaneous electrical signals can
              be
meaningfully used in the development of biomedical devices. Macro-scale
              interactions of exogenous and
endogenous electromagnetic fields in the human
              body will be interfaced with microbioelectromagnetic
modeling, with the focus
              on characterizing exposure and excited electrical activity at the cellular
              and
molecular level. Such studies will help in understanding and elucidating
              the mechanisms of interaction of
electromagnetic fields with biological
              tissues, with potential applications to neural responses to
electromagnetic
              excitations.
Full-wave Finite-Difference Time-Domain based numerical methods
              will be used for this complete
modeling effort, with integration of
              quasi-static methods for the low frequency modeling of neural
responses.
              Experimental systems to test the performance of the developed implantable
              wireless links will
be fabricated, while computational models of the neural
              responses will be validated through collaboration
with researchers at Johns
              Hopkins University.
The impact of the proposed research activity will extend
              from the development of a epiretinal prosthesis
to restore sight in over
              10,000,000 visually impaired to the development of wireless devices for
              sensing
the daily evolution of cancer. Collaborations with the Johns Hopkins
              Wilmer Eye Institute and biomedical
companies are already in place to provide
              the necessary medical help and expertise.
This project will offer a unique
              research environment with strong interdisciplinary and
              multi-institutional
collaborations that will provide graduate and
              undergraduate students an unprecedented exposure to
innovative technologies
              for the 21st century. New educational approaches aimed to present a
              broader
system-oriented view of the role of electromagnetics and
              bioelectromagnetics in today's and tomorrow's
technology will be pursued to
              expose students early in their career to a new and timely perspective
              of
careers in engineering electromagnetics and bioelectromagnetics.

