Title       : Control of Plant Cell Shape by the ASB Loci in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0091393

Award Number: 0091393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Oppenheimer doppenhe@biology.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091393
Oppenheimer 

Plant cell shape plays a crucial role in plant cell
              function. Because of this relationship, understanding how plant cell shape is
              controlled is of fundamental importance to our understanding of plant cell
              biology. In addition, understanding how cell shape is controlled may allow the
              manipulation of cell shape, and hence cell function, in important crop plants
              for agricultural benefit. One of the best model systems for studying the
              control of plant cell shape is the trichome, or plant hair, on the higher plant
              Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse ear cress).

It is well established that the
              cortical microtubule (MT) array plays a large role in controlling the direction
              of plant cell expansion which is the major determinant of plant cell shape.
              However, the mechanisms that organize the cortical MTs during a change in the
              direction of cell expansion (such as initiation of root hairs or trichome
              branches) remain an unresolved problem in plant biology. We are using a genetic
              approach to identify the genes (and ultimately the proteins) that participate
              in a specific, localized cell expansion event-the initiation of trichome
              branches. Arabidopsis trichomes are large, single cells consisting of three or
              four branches on a stalk. This proposal focuses on four newly discovered loci
              (the ASYMMETRIC BRANCH [ASB] loci) that control trichome branch position and
              length. Recent evidence suggests that the MT cytoskeleton plays an important
              role in trichome branch initiation, whereas the actin cytoskeleton plays a
              leading role in trichome expansion.

The immediate goals of the proposed
              research are to test hypotheses concerning the organization of the actin and MT
              cytoskeletons in ASB mutants, and to determine the genetic relationship of the
              ASB genes (which control branch position) to the genes that control branch
              number. The cytoskeleton studies, along with the genetic analyses, will provide
              a  framework for a functional dissection of the ASBgene products once the genes
              are cloned. Accomplishing the objectives of the proposed research will provide
              critical information about the mechanisms by which cell expansion is
              controlled. Because plant cells share cell walls and thus cannot migrate large
              distances during development like animal cells, the direction of cell expansion
              is a primary determinant of plant morphogenesis. Therefore, mechanisms by which
              plants control the precise spatial pattern of localized cell expansion is
              central to our understanding of plant development

