Title       : Structure and Function of the T-cell Receptor Zeta Chain Cytoplasmic Domain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0091072

Award Number: 0091072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $745000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Stern stern@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Structure and Function of the T-cell Receptor Zeta Chain Cytoplasmic Domain
T
              cells are activated upon encounter with another cell that carries on its
              surface a peptide antigen bound to an MHC protein, as part of the process by
              which foreign material in the body is recognized and cleared by the immune
              system. The interaction involves specific recognition of the MHC-peptide
              complexes by clonotypic T-cell receptor (TCR) subunits, as well as
              antigen-independent interactions between adhesion molecules and other cell
              surface receptors from the T cell and the antigen presenting cell. Clustering
              of TCR complexes at the T-cell surface using antibodies or multivalent antigens
              can induce T cell processes characteristic of interaction with an
              antigen-presenting cell, suggesting that clustering or aggregation of TCR
              components is
important for initiation of T-cell activation. Cytoplasmic
              domains of the TCR gamma, delta, epsilon, and particularly zeta subunits are
              responsible for transmitting extracellular binding signals into the T cell.
              Unlike other cell surface receptor systems activated by oligomerization, TCR
              cytoplasmic domains do not appear to carry intrinsic or associated enzymatic
              activities. Membrane-bound and cytoplasmic kinases interact with TCR
              cytoplasmic domains upon antigen engagement, triggering cytoplasmic signaling
              cascades. Despite intensive study, the mechanism by which clustering of T-cell
              surface receptors can leads to cytoplasmic signaling is not clear and is a
              major outstanding problem in the field. In the proposed research, the structure
              and function of the TCR zeta chain cytoplasmic domain will be investigated.
              Specifically, a newly discovered lipid-binding activity will be characterized.
              Lipid binding induces a structural alteration in the TCR zeta chain cytoplasmic
              domain, and the conforynational change controls accessibility to src- family
              kinases in vitro. Possible roles of this lipid binding activity and
              conformational change in the T-cell activation pathway will be investigated.
              The specific objectives or the proposed research are to determine the
              requirements for inducing the lipid-dependent conforrnational change, to
              produce a detailed structural description of the lipid-bound structure, to
              investigate the confon-national change of cytoplasmic domain in the context of
              the full-length zeta subunit protein, and to evaluate the importance of the
              conformational change in signaling processes in vivo. These objectives will be
              pursued through a variety of spectroscopic studies of purified receptor
              cytoplasmic domains in complex with various detergents and lipids, and
              biochemical assays of signaling processes in vitro and in vivo.

