Title       : From Atoms to Clusters and Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0091941

Award Number: 0091941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530400             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Stephen Berry berry@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              R. Stephen Berry of the University of Chicago is supported by the Theoretical
              and Computational Chemistry Program to carry out research that combines
              computation and analytic theory to address understanding the dynamics of
              increasingly complex systems at the microscopic level.  The research falls into
              the following areas: (1) correlation of electrons in atoms, (2) structures and
              dynamics of small clusters and nonrigid molecules, (3) the relation between
              chaotic or regular dynamics and the kinetics of such systems, (4) the phase and
              phase changes of small systems, and how these are related to the phase
              transitions of different orders in bulk systems, (5) the topographies of
              many-dimensional potential surfaces and how these topographies determine the
              glass-forming or structure-seeking character of the substance, and (6) the
              application of the concepts and results of the preceding topics to the
              dynamics, folding, and relaxation of proteins.  The overall objective of this
              project is to enhance the understanding of and application to systems comprised
              of tens to hundreds of thousands of atoms.  The goals of this study include
              developing a picture of how clusters, nanoscale particles, and proteins or
              collections of proteins undergo changes, such as melting and structural
              changes, magnetic-to-nonmagnetic transitions, or reorganization associated with
              very controlled annealing that can optimize the yield of a desired morphology.
              

Clusters are special forms of matter that lie between isolated atoms and
              molecules at one extreme and solid materials at the other extreme.  Properties
              of clusters are important because they bridge these two limits, and can enable
              understanding of why and how substances organize into highly selective
              structures such as crystalline materials or properly-folded proteins.  The
              outcomes of this research are anticipated to deepen the understanding of
              commonplace properties of matter, and impact applications in disciplines such
              as materials science and biology.
