Title       : RUI: The Role of Verb Morphology in the Construction of Grammar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0091702

Award Number: 0091702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Weist weist@fredonia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Fredonia
	      Central Avenue
	      Fredonia, NY  14063    716/673-3111

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Working within the framework of Role and Reference Grammar, we will examine how
              the semantic structure of predicates guides the acquisition of verb morphology,
              and how predicate structures are mapped onto syntactic structures. We refer to
              the basic methodology of this project as "predicate tracking". Utilizing tests
              of lexical aspect, we identify different types of predicates within the child's
              lexicon, e.g., activities versus accomplishments, and we trace the emergence of
              their tense/aspect and agreement morphology. For each predicate, we determine
              the history of the emergence of minimal morphological pairs. We intend to base
              this analysis on existing data from children learning Polish and English that
              are found in the CHILDES archives.

 Based on our pilot research, we
              anticipate the following outcomes: 1) The precise pattern in the acquisition of
              tense/aspect morphology will be different for telic, e.g., to fall, versus
              atelic, to play, predicates demonstrating the fundamental role of semantic
              structure. Hence, we expect to find that the acquisition of the inflectional
              system is not an autonomous syntactic phenomenon. 2) We expect to find that
              tense is likely to be productive prior to viewpoint aspect, and that this
              pattern will be more pronounced in English than Polish. A tense-aspect sequence
              would constitute an anomaly for the genetic programming of the prototypical
              X-bar structure and the application of the economy principle. 3) In Polish,
              where finite and non-finite forms are morphologically distinct, we expect that
              infinitives will be found in complex sentence constructions of the form (I
              want) +verb+INF, i.e., they will not be optional. 4) In Polish, there is
              agreement in person and number across the tenses, and it is possible to
              determine if the acquisition pattern exhibits a "piecemeal" or an
              "across-the-board" trend. Finally, we intend to evaluate the relationship
              between predicate structure and agreement as a means of determining the nature
              of the concept of subject in child language.
