Title       : Structural and Functional Characterization of Cyanoglobin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0091182

Award Number: 0091182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juliette T. Lecomte jtl1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lecomte, Juliette
0091182

Cyanobacteria are oxygenic prokaryotes now known
              to produce a hemoglobin (Hb) related to certain bacterial and protozoan
              hemoglobins.  Although in nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria, hemoglobin appears to
              protect the nitrogenase complex from oxidative damage, in non-nitrogen-fixing
              cyanobacteria, such as Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, the role of hemoglobin
              remains a mystery.  The immediate goal of this project is to study the
              relationship between structure and reactivity in the hemoglobin of
              Synechocystis.

Biophysical methods (NMR spectroscopy, optical spectroscopy,
              centrifugation, redox potential measurements) and biochemical methods (genetic
              manipulations, immunostaining techniques, phenotypic characterization,
              site-directed mutagenesis) will be applied to 1) investigate Synechocystis Hb
              in vivo; 2) determine its three-dimensional structure in solution; and 3)
              analyze the molecular determinants of its heme coordination and electrochemical
              properties.  Comparison will be made to other hemoglobins to develop an atomic
              level understanding of heme reactivity in cyanobacterial globins and situate
              these proteins in their evolutionary context.

The globin family of proteins
              has representatives in practically all kingdoms of organisms.  In vertebrates,
              hemoglobins and myoglobins are responsible for the transport and storage of
              oxygen but in primitive organisms, the functional roles of globins include
              oxygen scavenging, delivery, sensing, and detoxification, and management of
              nitrosative stress.  Cyanobacteria such as Synechocystis can be manipulated
              experimentally like other prokaryotes and subjected to genetic methods.  Thus
              they are ideally suited for studies of ancient hemoglobins.  A description of
              the function of cyanobacterial hemoglobins is expected to provide fundamental
              insight in the biochemistry of organisms essential in the global cycling of
              carbon and nitrogen.

The project will serve as a support in teaching
              activities such as a biological chemistry course and an NMR course.  It will
              provide excellent opportunities for undergraduate and graduate student training
              in biophysical and biochemical methods and foster multidisciplinary
              interactions.

