Title       : Study of Structure-Physical Properties Relation of New Materials with Reduced
               Dimensionality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0091639

Award Number: 0091639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299677             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans D. Hochheimer dieter@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter K. Dorhout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is devoted to investigating the influence of dimensionality on the
              physical  properties of a new class of materials by tuning the dimensionality
              with pressure. The goal is to achieve an understanding which will provide the
              basis for tailoring materials for special applications . The project is a
              combination of materials synthesis, the application of high pressure techniques
              and theoretical modeling . In addition to the use of conventional diamond anvil
              cells and large volume pressure cells for hydrostatic pressure studies, a newly
              developed device for the simultaneous application of hydrostatic pressure and
              uniaxial stress will be employed. These will permit the control of parameters
              like lattice constant, bond length, and interaction strength in a manner not
              possible before.  These experimental methods combined with theoretical modeling
              will lead to a better understanding of the structure - physical properties
              relation. The result will be improved tailoring of materials for applications
              by replacing the external pressure of our measurement by chemical pressure
              (substitution of atoms) or by growing thin films on substrates which are not
              lattice matched. Specific attention will be devoted to: 1)The synthesis of new
              materials of fundamental and technological importance and the investigation of
              their physics and chemistry at ambient and high pressure; 2) employ a new
              device for the application of "pure" strain which will allow transport and
              optical measurements at low temperatures and in a magnetic field; 3) develop
              collaborations concerning theoretical modeling with staff of the Los Alamos
              National Laboratory; and 4)  provide interdisciplinary educational
              opportunities for graduate students.
%%%                               
This
              project is an experimental and theoretical program in materials  research and
              education. The experimental studies will be conducted at the Colorado State
              University while the theoretical work will be done in collaboration with staff
              of the Los Alamos National Laboratory.   The scientific problems that confront
              chemists and physicists in expanding their abilities to control smaller and
              more complex electronics will be elucidated through careful studies of
              low-dimensional materials which will be especially synthesized for this
              purpose.  These materials, which display constrained dimensions, may behave as
              efficient, new semiconductor wires or sheets of atomic dimensions or
              nanodevices.  In order to understand the physical phenomena associated with
              low-dimensional materials, very controlled studies will be performed whereby
              the research team will carefully apply pressures along predetermined directions
              in materials in order to correlate environmental and dimensional changes with
              electronic responses.  By understanding the fundamental physical phenomena in
              low-dimensional materials, new, perhaps more efficient materials can be
              designed that will improve upon the conventional, commercial electronic
              materials. An important feature of the program is the multidisciplinary,
              international research team that is assembled.  Research will be performed by
              students who will be part of a team of chemists and physicists in academic,
              National, and international laboratories.  Students will participate in the
              synthesis, characterization and design of new materials and will travel to
              National research facilities at the Los Alamos and Argonne National
              Laboratories to utilize the latest, state-of-the-art instrumentation and will
              interact with the Nation's best chemists and physicists. 
***

