Title       : Viability Analysis of Frankia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0091138

Award Number: 0091138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Olivia Harriott oharriott@fair1.fairfield.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairfield University
	      North Benson Road
	      Fairfield, CT  06824    203/255-5411

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9109,9136,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term objective of the this research is to develop a gene transfer
              system for the N2-fixing actinomycete Frankia.  However, aspects of Frankia
              growth and genetics present challenges to the development of gene transfer
              methods.  Among the potential barriers is the slow growth rate of Frankia in
              laboratory culture.  To compound the problem, strains such as strain CpI1,
              often form tightly packed mycelial masses (pellets) in liquid culture.  Pellet
              morphology may deny sub-populations of cells within the pellet access to
              nutrients and subsequently limit growth.  Pellet formation may also inhibit
              gene transfer in Frankia by limiting the number of viable target cells
              available, or by suppressing the growth of genetically altered mycelia.  The
              immediate goal is to clarify and improve on the physiological state of
              laboratory cultures of Frankia.  The results of preliminary growth studies have
              shown that the anionic polymer, Carbopol 941 (carbopol; BF Goodrich, Cleveland,
              OH) encourages dispersed growth of Frankia in liquid culture.  The PI will
              investigate the effects of carbopol concentration on the growth rate and
              morphology of Frankia and, concurrently, test the usefulness of the fluorescent
              cell impermeant dye Sytox Green (SG; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in
              determining Frankia viability.  SG selectively stains dead or dying cells on
              the basis of cell membrane integrity.  Because the condition of the cell
              membrane impacts cellular processes, cell viability can be inferred from the
              staining patterns with SG. The viability of Frankia mycelia  and differentiated
              vesicles growing in the presence and absence of carbopol will be assessed using
              SG and epifluorescence microscopy.  The rationale for this work is that if
              carbopol can lengthen the exponential growth phase and facilitate dispersed
              growth, its use in media to prepare recipient cells, or to grow genetically
              manipulated cells, may increase the potential for introduction of DNA into
              Frankia, and subsequent expression of recombinant traits. 
