Title       : SGER Proposal:Pagodroma Group Stratigraphy and Paleontology: Participation in
               ANARE 2000-2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0091676

Award Number: 0091676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Harwood dharwood1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9178,9237,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0091676											
Harwood

This award, provided by the Office of Polar
              Programs, allows a US investigator to join a geological field team of the
              Australian National Antarctic Research Expedition (ANARE) in the Prince Charles
              Mountains of East Antarctica. The purpose of the fieldwork is to investigate
              past fluctuations of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet that are recorded in glacial
              strata of the Pagodroma Group in the region. The mountains flank the sides of
              the Lambert Graben, through which the largest catchment area of the East
              Antarctic Ice Sheet drains into Prydz Bay. Preliminary fieldwork on the
              Pagodroma Group has been conducted by the Russian Antarctic Expeditions and the
              ANARE. Field and laboratory work has identified several marine fossiliferous in
              situ stratigraphic units and other units that contain glacially reworked marine
              sediments >300 km inland from the current coastline. These sediments were
              deposited during ice sheet and ice shelf retreat, during the Miocene and
              Pliocene-Pleistocene, and were dated through diatom and foraminiferal
              biostratigraphy and amino acid racemization. Paleoenvironmental conditions
              during these times of glacial retreat and open marine deposition are determined
              from in situ marine microfossil data. In contrast, erosional and ice grounding
              features evident in the strata represent intervals of glacial advance. This
              award will facilitate collaboration between the principal investigator and
              Australian colleagues on geological field research during ANARE 2000-2001 and
              will support subsequent preliminary laboratory analysis on recovered Pagodroma
              Group materials in order to establish age and paleoenvironmental relationships.
              Prior field reconnaissance in the area and air photo interpretation of
              potential new deposits will direct the initial field activities during the
              coming field season. Chief areas of study are in three regions: the Amery Oasis
              area, the Lanyon/Meredith area and, if logistical support is available, along
              the eastern low margin of Fisher Massif. Recent discussions about the Neogene
              history of Antarctic glaciation center on the age of the Sirius Group and mode
              of emplacement of marine diatoms in these strata. Preliminary results from
              coeval strata of the Pagodroma Group support interpretations of significant
              variation in volume of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet during the Late Neogene.
              The abundance of diatoms in some intervals of the Pagodroma Group (up to3.5%
              biogenic silica) and the stratigraphic position of in situ marine diatomaceous
              laminites prevents contrary discussions about wind-derivation of these marine
              microfossils. Significant basic documentation of stratigraphy (in the field)
              and paleontological content (in the laboratory) is required to place the
              disparate deposits into a temporal and stratigraphic framework and enable
              correlation within the Prince Charles Mountains and into other areas of
              Antarctica. If preliminary examination of the recovered materials identifies
              productive samples for micropaleontological analysis, a follow-up proposal will
              be prepared to support further study of these materials.

