Title       : SBIR Phase II: Problem Solving Environment for Reduced Kinetic Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0091593

Award Number: 0091593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Montgomery montgomery@reaction-eng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reaction Engineering Intl
	      77 West 200 South
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84101    801/364-6925

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
              computational Problem Solving Environment (PSE) for the creation, optimization,
              testing, and application of reduced chemical kinetic mechanisms.  Inclusion of
              detailed chemistry into 3D simulations with turbulence-chemistry interaction
              will be computationally intractable for the foreseeable future.  Practical
              simulation of reacting flows requires reduced mechanisms tailored to the
              application and conditions of interest.  The PSE created in Phase I allows the
              user to rapidly create reduced mechanisms, set up multi-parameter test problems
              for comparison to detailed chemistry, and interrogate and visualize the results
              more thoroughly than was previously possible. Human effort for reduced
              mechanism validation is reduced from days to hours. Rigorous testing is
              necessary to make reduced mechanisms a reliable commercial product. In Phase II
              the PSE will be extended to automatically optimize reduced mechanisms to the
              users' specification, and produce reduced mechanism modules for a variety of
              applications that seamlessly integrate into a variety of Computational Fluid
              Dynamics codes.

These technologies will have commercial value due to the
              ever-increasing need to include more detailed chemistry into the design and
              analysis software used by scientists and engineers.  The problem solving
              environment provides the engineer with the ability to rapidly create reduced
              mechanisms, set up multiple test problems covering a multidimensional parameter
              space for comparison to detailed chemistry, and efficiently interrogate and
              visualize the results.

