Title       : Conference: Energy Landscapes of Proteins, Glasses and Clusters: Dynamics,
               Folding, Function and Prediction, to be held April 1-5, 2001 in San Diego, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0091839

Award Number: 0091839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Brooks, III brooks@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Brooks, III Charles L.
MCB-0091839

Energy landscape theory was the
              springboard for development of the "new view'" of protein
folding. This
              framework is responsible for our growing quantitative understanding of
protein
              folding mechanism and detailed connections to experiments probing the
              folding
process. Parallel development of landscape theory in the study of
              clusters and glasses has
also significantly shaped understanding in this
              field. The interchange of ideas and
concepts between these two distinct areas
              has added to the growth of each. However, more
detailed exchanges and forums
              for discussion and presentation of underlying ideas and
questions will aid
              continuing development of both areas. The goal of this symposium is to
provide
              this forum for a discussion of common themes between folding and glasses
              and
cluster phenomena, to promote the exchange of ideas between these
              communities, to survey
the advances that have hallmarked each area, and to
              point to the challenges that remain in
both.

The exciting new advances that
              have taken place in these areas of investigation would have
been impossible
              without the integration of the new theoretical and experimental advances
in
              computational chemistry and physical chemistry that have been successfully
              applied to
molecular biology and biochemistry. In this symposium, we will
              integrate the different
groups that have taken part in shaping the successes
              this interdisciplinary persuit aimed
at a quantitative understanding of the
              folding problem. The ACS Spring Meeting in 2001 at
San Diego will provide the
              appropriate forum for this event.
