Title       : Horizontal and Vertical Gene Transmission in Ascomycete Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0091196

Award Number: 0091196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. St.Leger rl106@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the mechanisms generating genetic diversity among
              ascomycete fungi enabling them to adapt to a broad array of habitats as
              saprophytes and pathogens. While gene duplication and divergence are presumed
              to play an important role in evolving an array of chemical weaponry for this
              purpose, the hypothesis is that many toxins, enzymes and antibiotics are of
              bacterial, specifically streptomycete origin, and have been acquired by
              horizontal gene transfer. An expressed sequence tag project
              (http://TEGR.umd.edu) on the ascomycete insect pathogen Metarhizium anisopliae
              identified 15 genes encoding enzymes and toxins that have counterparts in
              various streptomycetes.  Some of these genes have so far been found only in M.
              anisopliae among eukaryotes, while others have also been found in some related
              plant and insect pathogens. To date, available sequence data derives from a
              small number of species, insufficient to conduct a comparative analysis on the
              evolution of gene diversity. This project will employ PCR techniques to sample
              representative fungal lineages to confirm the origin and identify recipients of
              these streptomycete-like sequences. Phylogenetic modeling will be used to
              deduce the number and timing of any transfer events, the direction in which
              they occurred and the extent to which genes have been lost from different
              fungal lineages. To investigate the role of gene duplication and divergence in
              a large family of pathogenicity-related genes, a comparison of subtilisin-like
              protease sequences among genotypic classes of M. anisopliae to elucidate the
              relationships of these genes and determine how orthologs have diverged through
              recent selection on different hosts will be conducted. By calculating rates of
              mutations the extent to which the subtilisins comprise a rapidly duplicating
              multigene family and whether they are diversifying by strong selective pressure
              (positive Darwinian evolution) or random fixation of neutral mutations will be
              determined. Together, these experiments will provide important new information
              on fungal genes that contribute to ecological diversification and could lead to
              reinterpretation of ascomycete gene diversity in the context of streptomycete
              gene diversity and gene transfer.

