Title       : The Role of the Arabidopsis HYL1 Gene in Hormone Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a0091650

Award Number: 0091650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina V. Fedoroff nvf1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant growth and development, as well as plant responses to stress, are
              orchestrated by several hormones.  The action of the hormones within the plant
              and within individual cells depends on proteins that transmit the hormone
              signals to evoke both biochemical and transcriptional changes. This project has
              the objective of analyzing an Arabidopsis transposon insertion mutation,
              designated hyponastic leaves (hyl1), that alters the plant's responses to
              several hormones simultaneously. Preliminary evidence suggests that the mutant
              gene encodes a nuclear protein that binds to double-stranded RNA. Mutant plants
              are short, slow to flower, have curled leaves, produce few seeds, and have
              slow-growing roots that do not respond to gravity normally.  Mutant plants show
              a reduced sensitivity to the auxin and cytokinin hormones and are
              hypersensitive to the hormone abscisic acid (ABA).  Genetic and molecular
              experiments in the project are designed to understand how the protein encoded
              by the HYL1 gene participates in the plant's perception and response to
              different hormones. The importance of these experiments is that they will
              contribute to our understanding of how plants coordinate their responses to the
              multiple hormone signals that impinge on their cells.  Although the experiments
              are being performed in the model plant Arabidopsis, knowledge gained in such a
              system can be transferred readily to crop plants because higher plants use the
              same or similar systems to regulate growth and stress responses.  Such
              knowledge will be very important in future efforts to improve the ability of
              agricultural plants to maintain productivity under adverse conditions.


