Title       : Signal Mediated Defense Mechanisms of Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0091236

Award Number: 0091236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462387             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Gustin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been a powerful model system for the
              study of many fundamental processes in cell biology. One important unsolved
              cell biology problem is how cells sense and defend themselves against chemical
              attack by other cells. To directly study this problem, this research will
              develop  a yeast-mouse macrophage co-culture system to uncover and analyze the
              signaling pathways and genomic responses of yeast to specific noxious
              chemicals, e.g., nitric oxide and superoxide anion, released
by macrophages.
              In previous results, it was demonstrated  that the osmostress sensing MAP
              kinase pathway called the HOG pathway also functions to sense and respond to
              oxidants.
The goals of this research are: 1.) a combination of two different
              approaches will be used to identify the yeast signaling pathways activated by
              macrophage-produced superoxide, nitric oxide, and non-oxidant attacking
              chemicals, respectively. First, genome-wide analysis of mRNA expression using
              hybridization to DNA microarrays will be used to define the different sets of
              yeast genes that are specifically induced by macrophages producing nitric oxide
              and not superoxide or producing superoxide and not nitric oxide, etc. Second,
              yeast strains with deletions of putative defense signaling pathway genes will
              be analyzed and compared to a wild type strain for changes in gene induction
              and survival in response to macrophage-produced superoxide, nitric oxide, and
              non-oxidant attacking chemicals, respectively.  2.) the transcription factor
              target of the HOG pathway involved in the oxidant response will be identified
              by three complementary approaches. The promoter sequences necessary for HOG
              pathway-dependent, oxidant-induced expression of the thioredoxin gene TRX2 will
              be identified by mutational analysis of a TRX2-lacZ reporter gene. The HOG
              pathway dependent, oxidant-induced set of yeast genes will be identified using
              hybridization to DNA microarrays. Finally, yeast strains with deletions of
              putative HOG pathway transcription factors will be analyzed and compared to a
              wild type strain for changes in oxidant-induced TRX2-lacZ expression and
              genome-wide changes in gene expression.
