Title       : Generation of Metachronal Motor Patterns in Segmented Nervous Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0091284

Award Number: 0091284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Mulloney bcmulloney@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Locomotion in vertebrates and arthropods is a complex behavior, and the
              neural mechanisms that coordinate their limbs during locomotion are not well
              understood.  The abdominal swimmeret system of the crayfish provides a
              relatively simple and accessible system to study the intersegmental
              coordination of movement.   Within each segment of the tail, the swimmeret
              paddles show an alternating power stroke and a return stroke, as in most
              locomotor appendages, and the strokes of adjacent segments show specific timing
              relationships.  There are small circuits of neurons (nerve cells) within each
              segment that have known identifiable single cells driving particular motor
              movements, and three types of interneurons that are involved in coordinating
              the movements.  It is particularly useful that the crayfish ventral nerve cord
              and swimmeret system can be isolated in vitro and still show the
              intersegmentally coordinated swimming pattern.  This project uses a combined
              physiological and computational modeling approach to define the dynamic
              circuitry for the pattern.  A cellular model of the nerve cell physiological
              properties and network connections is used to predict the phase patterns of
              bursts of nerve impulse activity of the relevant neurons in the system.  These
              predictions are compared with the activity patterns and connectivity in
              individual neurons recorded physiologically in the living circuit, including
              the small electrical potentials at synaptic connections between pairs of single
              neurons as well as the impulse traffic between segments.  The relative
              importance of local and intersegmental pathways are assessed by stimulating
              individual coordinating interneurons when the intersegmental pathways are
              intact and when they are blocked.  Intracellular dye fills anatomically confirm
              physiological connecting pathways.  Refinements of the model by the
              experimental findings will yield a thorough description of how the dynamics of
              the interneurons contribute to stable intersegmental coordination, and how the
              properties of the synapses contribute to normal locomotion.
     This work
              will have an impact beyond crustacean locomotion research, by leading to new
              insights about neural mechanisms that underlie the much more complex vertebrate
              circuits for locomotion.  The integration of computational modeling with
              physiology will also have an impact on needed multi-disciplinary training of
              students and postdoctoral researchers in neuroscience and physiology in
              general.

