Title       : RNA-Protein Interactions in Bacterial RNase P
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0091081

Award Number: 0091081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Gopalan gopalan.5@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1144,1158,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091081  Venkat Gopalan
The long term goal of this research is to understand
              RNA-protein interactions in Escherichia coli RNase P, an enzyme essential for
              the processing precursor tRNAs (ptRNAs) to their mature forms.  E. coli RNase
              P, a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex, consists of a catalytic RNA subunit (M1
              RNA) and a protein cofactor (C5 protein); both subunits  are essential for its
              catalytic activity in vivo.  The role of C5 protein in RNase P catalysis is
              distinct from other protein-facilitated RNA-catalyzed reactions in that it
              enhances the catalytic efficiency and versatility of a catalytic RNA which acts
              in trans on numerous substrates.  Recent studies have demonstrated that the
              protein not only enhances the affinity of the substrate for the catalytic RNA
              subunit but also increases the rate of the RNA-catalyzed cleavage reaction. 
              Several questions with regard to the mechanism of action of this unique
              catalytic RNP complex remain unanswered.  In this project, a combination of
              biochemical and biophysical approaches will be used to determine the role of C5
              protein in assembling a functional RNase P complex.  The first objective of
              this study will be to employ structure-based mutagenesis and a genetic
              complementation assay to identify amino acid residues in C5 protein that are
              essential for its function in vivo.  The second objective is to dissect the
              mechanisms by which the protein cofactor can exert effects on substrate
              recognition as well as catalysis.  Lastly, by rational design of C5 mutants
              bearing cysteine residues at various positions in the protein molecule and
              modifying the cysteine residues with thiol-specific crosslinking, footprinting
              and spectroscopic probes, low resolution information regarding contact sites
              between (i) C5 protein and M1 RNA, and (ii) C5 protein and ptRNA substrates,
              will be obtained and used to gain structural perspectives critical for
              elucidating the mechanism of action of RNase P.  RNA-protein interactions play
              an important role in numerous regulatory systems in vivo  (e.g., translational
              control of gene expression).  Results from this study will serve as a paradigm
              for understanding intermolecular interactions in other RNPs that control
              various prokaryotic and eukaryotic cellular processes.  Most of the experiments
              described above are in progress and will rapidly furnish valuable insights.  In
              addition to integrating laboratory research and education for several
              undergraduate and graduate students, this project has already helped renew and
              nurture several academic collaborations.
