Title       : Crystallographic Study of a Quinoprotein Electron Transfer System: Methylamine
               Dehydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0091084

Award Number: 0091084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. S. Mathews MATHEWS@BIOCHEM.WUSTL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mathews, F.S.
MCB-0091084


Electron transfer between biological
              macromolecules is fundamental to many biological processes. It usually occurs
              within a transient complex in which the participating redox centers and the
              intervening protein are optimally configured to promote and regulate electron
              flow between the centers. Such complexes are difficult to study structurally
              since they are intrinsically unstable and usually cannot be crystallized.
              Methylamine dehydrogenase (MADH), amicyanin and cytochrome c551i from
              Paracoccus denitrificans form one of the best characterized physiological
              electron transfer complexes and is the only complex of three soluble redox
              proteins for which a high resolution structure is available.  

MADH is an .2
              .2 heterodimer of 124 kDa and contains the unusual redox cofactor tryptophan
              tryptophylquinone (TTQ). Amicyanin is a blue copper protein of 12.5 kDa which
              interacts specifically with MADH. Cytochrome c551i is a 17.5 kDa protein which
              can accept electrons from amicyanin and transfer them via another cytochrome to
              a terminal oxidase.  Aromatic amine dehydrogenase (AADH) from Alcaligenes
              faecalis is similar to MADH in size and quaternary structure and also contains
              TTQ as it redox cofactor. However, its specific electron acceptor is an azurin
              and neither MADH nor AADH will efficiently reduce the alternative acceptor
              protein, azurin nor amicyanin, respectively.                                   
                                              
The aims of this proposal are (1) to refine
              the structures of oxidized and reduced amicyanin at both pH 5.5 and 8.0 at
              atomic resolution (1 .or below), (2) carry out structural studies of additional
              redox and pH variants and catalytic intermediates of the MADH/amicyanin and
              MADH/amicyanin/c551I complexes, (3) structurally characterize mutants of
              amicyanin and of MADH within these complexes, (4) further analyze redox and
              cation-bound states of MADH from Methylobacillus flagellatum KT and
              Methylobacterium extorquens AM1, and (5) complete the structure analysis of
              AADH and of the binary complex between AADH and azurin.

The proposed studies
              of the MADH and AADH enzyme systems will help identify structural features that
              are important for electron transfer, including those involved in partner
              recognition, control of electron transfer and determining paths for electron
              flow within the complexes. In addition, the structural studies of the mechanism
              of substrate oxidation by the TTQ cofactor will help shed light on how this
              cofactor functions in vivo and how it differs from other, more common redox
              cofactors. TTQ is unusual because it is obtained directly from the fusion of
              two amino acid side chains coded by genomic DNA rather than from a separate
              biosynthetic pathway. The MADH and AADH systems are well suited to provide an
              understanding of these important processes at the molecular level.

