Title       : Repair of DNA Double-Strand Breaks in Mouse Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0091231

Award Number: 0091231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Jasin m-jasin@ski.mskcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              DNA damage repair is essential for the maintenance of genetic integrity in all
              organisms.  Unrepaired or imprecisely repaired DNA can lead to DNA alterations,
              cell death, or transformation of cells.  DNA damage specifically in the form of
              chromosomal breaks can occur both from treatment of cells with DNA damaging
              agents, as well as from normal metabolic processes such as DNA replication.
              
Mammalian cells were initially thought to repair DSBs almost exclusively by a
              process in which the broken ends are joined using little or no sequence
              homology, i.e., by a process that does not recognize if the DNA sequence at the
              ends are highly related to each other.  However, recent studies have
              demonstrated that repair of chromosome breaks occurs frequently also by
              homologous recombination. In this process, an identical or nearly identical DNA
              molecule provides the sequence information for the repair of the broken DNA
              molecule. 
	Experiments that examin the repair of chromosome breaks in mouse
              cells in which two different chromosomes were involved has begun.  Repair
              events involving two chromosomes have the potential to cause genomic
              rearrangements, including translocations.  This project  is aimed at
              understanding break repair in terms of the role of different repair mechanisms
              in maintaining genomic stability. 


