Title       : Basic Mechanisms and Evolution of Acoustic Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0091993

Award Number: 0091993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332725             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Carl Gerhardt gerhardtc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              BASIC MECHANISMS AND EVOLUTION OF ACOUSTIC COMMUNICATION 

HOWARD CARL
              GERHARDT, JR., PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
(Name used as an author: H. Carl
              Gerhardt)

Communication affects the reproductive success of signalers and
              receivers. Thus, communication plays a critical role in evolution and
              speciation, and differences in signals are often reliable indicators of the
              status of populations that have diverged little, if at all, in their physical
              appearance. Mutual selective pressures exerted by senders and receivers might
              be expected to generate precise matching between signal properties and the
              selectivity of the sensory system. The reason is that senders that produce very
              different signals are unlikely to attract mates, and receivers that have very
              unique preferences may not find any male of their own species acceptable.
              However, some exceptional examples have been found in which receivers are more
              effectively stimulated by signals that are not produced by members of their own
              species (=conspecific males), but by those of closely related species
              (=heterospecific males). These novel preferences have been called "hidden
              preferences," and a phylogenetic analysis sometimes shows that the preference
              predates signals in evolutionary time and can hence such preferences can be
              considered "pre-existing biases." 

This project is a comparative study of
              the matching of signal properties and receiver preferences in a complex of nine
              closely related North American treefrogs. Male treefrogs produce simple,
              stereotyped sounds, and females respond to these sounds or to synthetic,
              computer-generated sounds by approaching a speaker that emits them. Playback
              experiments using synthetic calls will identify the key physical properties
              (=preference criteria) used by females to select among signals. These
              experiments will determine for each species whether females respond best to
              signals with properties typical of conspecific males or whether calls or
              call-elements of other species might be more attractive or might enhance the
              attractiveness of conspecific calls. It might be found that matching to
              conspecific call properties is good in all nine species, that mismatches are
              prevalent in all species, or that matching occurs in some species but not in
              others. Regardless of the results of these experiments, a phylogenetic analysis
              - which will rely on morphological and molecular characters of all nine species
              - will be used to suggest the order of evolution of preferences and signals.
              

This particular group of treefrogs also has two features that could help to
              explain a pattern in which matches occur in some species and mismatches in
              others. First, some species in the group routinely form mixed-species choruses
              with close relatives having similar calls. Here it might be expected that
              matching of senders and receivers will be strong in order to prevent mating
              between species. Other species in the group have been isolated from any other
              species with similar calls for long periods of time whereas others. These are
              the best candidates for finding mismatches ("hidden preferences" and
              "pre-existing biases") because these biases might be ancestral traits that can
              be expressed without the risk of mating with another species. Second, it has
              been found that some species in the group have twice the number of chromosomes
              of the other species and that changes in chromosome number affect call
              properties. Such a change in chromosome number might also affect female
              preferences in ways that could either track the changes in the calls or result
              in mismatches of senders and receivers. This hypothesis will be tested by
              studying the preferences of frogs with experimentally induced extra sets of
              chromosomes. 

