Title       : Hormone Control of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a0091504

Award Number: 0091504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Rider kborden@pittstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pittsburg State University
	      1701 South Broadway
	      Pittsburg, KS  667625856    316/231-7000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	Prior to implantation of the mammalian embryo, a sequence of changes takes
              place in the mother's uterus in response to the female sex hormones estrogen
              and progesterone. The actions of estrogen and progesterone are necessary for
              stimulating the maternal environment to become receptive for the implanting
              embryo.  Estrogen and progesterone elicit changes in the uterus by binding to
              specific receptor proteins, thereby altering the rates of transcription
              (synthesis) of target genes.  Although many of the target genes in the
              mammalian uterus have not been identified, evidence indicates that several of
              the candidates are involved in the control of cell proliferation and
              differentiation. Mammalian cells use a family of proteins called cyclin and
              cyclin dependent kinases to regulate cell proliferation. Cell proliferation
              involves an orderly sequence of events in which the cellular contents are
              duplicated and then the cell divides in two. This cycle of duplication and
              division is known as the cell cycle. Progression of cells through the cell
              cycle involves the temporal and sequential activation of cyclin genes, as well
              as the inactivation of a series of crucial checkpoints. Cellular
              differentiation requires cessation of cell cycle transit, cell cycle exit, and
              selection of the differentiation pathway. The integration of positive and
              negative regulators, and the means by which they control cell cycle
              progression, are the major challenges for understanding the sequence of
              molecular events linking cell cycle transit with cellular differentiation.
              Elucidating these hormone-dependent cell cycle regulatory interactions in the
              maternal cells of the uterus is the central objective of this research project.
               The first goal of this research is to determine the temporal and spatial
              expression patterns of the key cell cycle regulators during hormone-induced
              stromal cell proliferation in the rat uterus. Time course analysis of the
              appearance and cell-specific distribution of the key regulatory proteins will
              be mapped using immunohistochemical techniques. Transit through the cell cycle
              will be assessed in these same rat uterine samples by measuring the entry of
              cells into DNA replication (duplication) and mitosis (chromosomal division). 
              This information will be extended by studying the formation of active
              cyclin-cyclin dependent kinase complexes in cultured uterine stromal cells
              stimulated to synchronously re-enter the cell cycle by estrogen and
              progesterone. The function of cell cycle inhibitory proteins on cell cycle
              regulation will be determined by assessing the temporal appearance and changes
              in the amount of inhibitory proteins in hormonally stimulated stromal cells in
              both the uterus and in culture. These hormone-sensitive changes in cell cycle
              activators and inhibitors will identify the mechanistic actions of estrogen and
              progesterone on the formation and activation of protein complexes required to
              control cell cycle transit.  With this information in hand it will be possible
              to investigate the mechanisms by which differentiation signal transducers,
              acting in conjunction with estrogen and progesterone, alter the progression of
              stromal cells through the cell cycle and re-direct cellular transit into the
              differentiation pathway. Completion of this study is expected to increase the
              current knowledge about estrogen and progesterone action in target cells.  The
              results are also expected to provide important, new information about the
              endocrine control of cell proliferation and differentiation in the mammalian
              uterus, thereby impacting both domestic animal and wildlife reproduction.

