Title       : Rhodopsin Signaling in a Model Eucaryotic Microorganism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0091287

Award Number: 0091287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261001             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Spudich John.L.Spudich@uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oleg A. Sineshchekov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-5847

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii exhibits two distinct photomotility responses to
              light: phototaxis migration and the photophobic avoidance response. These are
              mediated by retinal-containing receptors ("rhodopsins").  Both behaviors may be
              governed by the same receptor or by two different receptors.  For both
              behaviors, photoactivation has been localized in the eyespot organelle of the
              cell and results in a cascade of transmembrane electrical currents, which
              ultimately alter calcium concentration in the flagella and induce alteration of
              their beating.  The generation of a photoreceptor current is the earliest event
              in this cascade, which is a combination of at least two kinetically distinct
              electrochemical processes in the photoreceptor membrane.  Using pulsed laser
              excitation to analyzed the electrical responses of the cells, it was
              demonstrated that the faster component is calcium-independent, is induced
              within three microseconds of photon absorption, and must be attributed
              therefore not to a secondary calcium flux but to an early photoreaction of a
              photoreceptor protein.  The objectives of this project are to identify the
              rhodopsin protein(s) and elucidate their signaling mechanism.  The approach is
              to identify and characterize Chlamydomonas gene(s) encoding the receptors and
              components of the photo-signaling pathway by insertional mutagenesis, selection
              for loss of each of the two responses by capillary selection techniques, and
              subsequent testing of the mutants for the presence of rhodopsin-mediated
              photocurrents.  In parallel, the two photoreceptor currents will be analyze to
              elucidate their ion dependencies and distinguish whether (1) they represent
              consecutive steps in the signal transduction chain mediated by a single
              photoreceptor; (2) there is parallel activation of the two currents by a single
              bi-functional photoreceptor; or (3) the two currents derive from multiple
              photoreceptors with different effects on transmembrane ion fluxes.  Two classes
              of rhodopsins are known: (1) visual pigments in animals and (2) archaeal
              rhodopsins, ion transport, and photosensory proteins studied primarily in
              halobacteria, and recently demonstrated as well in eukaryotes (fungi).  PCR and
              reduced-stringency Southern hybridization, and the Chlamydomonas genome project
              will augment the search for genes in Chlamydomonas encoding either of the two
              types.  The results will significantly expand our knowledge of mechanisms of
              photosensory transduction mediated by rhodopsin proteins, and also may clarify
              their evolution. 

