Title       : Non-Relational Implementation of a Class of Decision-Support Relational Queries:
               the For-loop Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a0091928

Award Number: 0091928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Badia abadia@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Advanced database applications like Decision-Support Systems (DSS) and data
              mining use existing database technology (relational databases and their query
              language, SQL) to extract high-level information from large amounts of data.
              Since SQL is a declarative language (it allows the user to specify what is
              needed, not how to obtain it), and most SQL queries can be implemented in
              different ways, a process of optimization is carried out which chooses the most
              efficient implementation known to the system for each query. However, as both
              the amount of data to be processed and the complexity of the queries used grow,
              optimization is becoming more difficult and more important. This project
              explores a novel approach to the optimization of complex SQL queries, called
              the For-loop approach, which goes beyond the relational framework to try to
              find more efficient implementations. The results of this project will provide
              insight into the strengths and limitations of optimizations for SQL. The new
              approach has the potential to provide significant performance improvements over
              current techniques for a restricted (but important) class of queries, including
              queries with subqueries where the FROM and WHERE clause of query and subquery
              exhibit significant overlap (these queries are not uncommon in DSS
              environments). The results of this research will be actively disseminated by
              the PI in order to attract collaboration with industry and with other
              researchers. 
