Title       : Heterochromatin-Mediated Repression in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0091898

Award Number: 0091898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Gross dgross@lsumc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71130    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091898  David Gross
Heterochromatin is a condensed form of chromatin found
              within all eukaryotic (nucleated) cells.  It is responsible for X-chromosome
              inactivation in mammalian females, position-effect variegation in the fruit
              fly, and cell-type determination in budding yeast.  While heterochromatin has
              long been associated with genetic inactivation, the precise mechanism by which
              it represses gene transcription is unclear.  To investigate this, a powerful
              model system has been developed.  In this system, a dynamically regulated,
              stress-inducible yeast gene (HSP82) has been placed under control of a
              heterochromatin-inducing protein complex termed SIR (Silent Information
              Regulator).  This model system will be used to address the following questions.
               First, which proteins bind to the promoter DNA of the SIR-repressed gene? 
              Using a powerful new technique, chromatin immunoprecipitation, the presence of
              both positive and negative regulatory proteins will be examined in living
              cells.  These include the sequence-specific activator, heat shock factor (HSF),
              components of the basic transcriptional machinery (including RNA polymerase),
              and the heterochromatin-binding proteins Sir2p and Sir3p.  Second, the question
              of whether silencing of HSP82 occurs in each cell in the population will be
              investigated.  Is silencing stably inherited from parent to daughter cell, or
              is heterochromatin-mediated repression variegated (seen in some cells of a
              population but not in others), as is the case in fruit fly?  Third, what are
              the collaborators of HSF which permit it, when activated by stress, to override
              the repressive heterochromatic structure established by SIR?  A gene knock-out
              approach will be taken to answer this question.  Finally, what is the mechanism
              of a second global repression system, mediated by the Ssn6-Tup1 protein
              complex?  A yeast strain will be genetically engineered so that the HSP82 gene
              promoter is targeted by the Ssn6-Tup1 protein complex.  Parallel expression,
              structural, and genetic analyses to those described above will then be carried
              out, allowing a direct comparison between the two repression systems.  Given
              the degree to which transcriptional mechanisms are evolutionarily conserved,
              these studies have the potential to unravel the means by which heterochromatin
              works not only in yeast but also in other eukaryotes, including human.
