Title       : Morphosyntactic Variation in Picard
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a0091687

Award Number: 0091687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Auger jauger@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal uses new and original data from Picard, a little-known regional
              language of France, in an effort to develop a "socially realistic linguistics".
              For this study, Vimeu, a region located in the western part of the Somme
              department of France, was selected as a focus of investigation. Over the past
              five years, an extensive corpus of oral and written data was gathered.
              Transcription of the corpus constitutes the first objective of this research
              proposal. The second objective consists in providing detailed analyses of many
              grammatical constructions of Picard. These analyses will be carried out using
              an approach which combines a sociolinguistic methodology and the analytical
              tools provided by generative grammar. This approach will shed new light on many
              longstanding issues within Romance and general linguistics (e.g., pronominal
              clitics, subject doubling, verbal negation), contribute crucial new data from
              language change in progress and grammaticalization processes (e.g., how
              demonstrative determiners turn into definite articles), and address new
              questions concerning constructions little known in the literature (e.g., why
              does Vimeu Picard have two subject neuter pronouns?). The third and fourth
              objectives concern variation, both crosslinguistic and language-internal.
              Comparison of Vimeu Picard features with those of other varieties of Picard,
              other Gallo-Romance languages, and varieties of French will contribute
              significantly to the search for a better understanding of the limits Universal
              Grammar imposes on crosslinguistic variation. Finally, the issue of
              language-internal variation will be considered using recent developments in two
              different areas of Optimality theory, namely the study of phonological
              variation and that of morphosyntax. The goal is to propose a model of grammar
              which generates variable morphosyntactic patterns and predicts relative
              frequencies of use for linguistic variants. This project will contribute to
              bridge the gap that currently exists between sociolinguistics and formal
              approaches to the study of language.
