Title       : Characterization of Negative Regulators of Arabidopsis Trichome Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0091052

Award Number: 0091052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Marks dmarks@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091052
Marks

The development of hairs, called trichomes, on the leaf
              surface of Arabidopsis plants is being used as a model to study the control of
              cell fate and differentiation. The model has both basic and practical
              attributes. Understanding the basic mechanisms that control cell fate and
              differentiation in multicellular organisms is a key goal in biological
              research. Given that the mechanisms that control the cell cycle are similar in
              plants and non-plants, it is possible that the information obtained in studying
              trichome development will lead to a better understanding of how other cell
              types differentiate. The model is of practical importance because the trichomes
              on many plants form the first line of defense against
hostile environmental
              factors. Many crop plants only have a sparse covering of hairs and the
              information obtained from this research could lead to new strategies to improve
              crop plants.  

In wild type Arabidopsis, leaf trichomes are uniformly spaced
              over the leaf surface; less than 0.5% of the trichomes develop adjacent to one
              another. Previous analyses have shown that trichome spacing is not controlled
              by chance but by a developmentally regulated spacing program.  Such analyses
              indicate that the spacing program involves cell to cell communication that
              prevents neighboring cells from becoming trichomes.

It has been found that
              the GL1 gene, which is required for trichome initiation, actually inhibits
              trichome initiation when overexpressed. This inhibition of initiation is not
              due to co-suppression, as it has been found that 35S::GL1 plants overexpress
              both GL1 mRNA and protein. It is proposed that overexpression of GL1 results in
              the production of a leaf-wide lateral inhibition program in which neighboring
              cells inhibit each other from becoming trichomes. To test this hypothesis, a
              mutational analysis is being used to identify mutations that can suppress the
              35S::GL1 phenotype and increase leaf trichome initiation. One such interesting
              mutant, called cot, has been extensively characterized. In 35S::GL1 cot plants,
              many of the cells that surround a trichome enter the trichome pathway. In
              addition to
35S::GL1 cot, other 35S::GL1 mutants have been identified that can
              suppress the 35S::GL1 phenotype. These new mutants will be characterized, and
              the most interesting genes will be targeted for positional cloning. Although
              the original 35S::GL1 mutant population was isolated from chemically
              mutagenized seed, to facilitate cloning of subsequently identified mutant
              genes, a new population of 35S::GL1 mutants is being induced by T-DNA
              tagging.

In addition to the above studies, another gene hypothesized to be a
              negative regulator will be characterized. This gene, called CPC-like 1 (CPL1),
              also appears to limit trichome initiation when expressed at high levels. It is
              predicted that the CPL1 mechanism of inhibition is distinct from the mechanism
              resulting from GL1 overexpression. This will be tested.  

Finally, it will
              be determined if microarray analysis using gene chips can detect genes that are
              differentially expressed in plants overexpressing either GL1 or CPL1.


