Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:Investigations of the Plant Photoreceptor Kinase Family
               of Phototropins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0091384

Award Number: 0091384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winslow R. Briggs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091384
Briggs
Plant photoreceptors mediate a broad spectrum of responses to
              light, ranging  from the physiological through to the biochemical and molecular
              levels, and are present throughout plant development from seed germination
              through virtually all phases of vegetative growth to flowering and senescence.
              Currently well-known photoreceptors are phytochromes, cryptochromes, and
              phototropins. Phototropins represent a new and previously uncharacterized class
              of photoreceptors. These dual chromophoric photoreceptors, binding two
              molecules of FMN, are unlike any of the known classes of photoreceptors , and
              operate through an initial photochemistry that is unique and leads to
              autophosphorylation. 

The present project is focused on the chromoprotein
              phototropin (nph1) and the various nph1-like proteins described to date. These
              proteins are expressed in heterologous systems as the chromophore-binding
              domains and as the full length proteins. The expressed proteins both the native
              constructs and those with site-specific mutations are in the photoactive form.
              We plan to undertake a limited biochemical and detailed biophysical
              characterization of the various isolated chromophore-binding domains and of the
              full-length protein. The biochemical studies will emphasize the use of mutant
              constructs to probe the initial photochemistry. The latter will focus on
              studies probing the molecular mechanism by which light activates the
              photochemistry and its consequences at the protein level. These studies will
              involve time-resolved optical and vibrational spectroscopy. The
              chromophore-binding domains are closely related to domains (so-called PAS
              domains) in a diverse range of proteins from archaea through mammals, and
              should provide a new dimension to our understanding of the functions of these
              domains. 

