Title       : Point Defects in Intermetallics using PAC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0091681

Award Number: 0091681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Collins collins@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0091681 
Collins

Point defects in intermetallic compounds are studied using
              perturbed angular correlation of gamma rays (PAC). Local environments of dilute
              indium probe atoms are resolved through measurement of characteristic
              quadrupole interactions. Two kinds of environment are studied: probe atoms as
              solutes on inequivalent lattice sites in a compound or mixture of phases, and
              probes bound in complexes with lattice vacancies. Research is in three areas
              that are natural extensions of recent work. Preferences of solute atoms for
              different lattice sites in compounds or in two-phase alloys are determined
              through measurement of fractions of probe atoms in the different sites.
              Sublattice sites are identified by comparing measured quadrupole interactions
              with those in a series of compounds having the same structure and with
              computations of quadrupole interactions. The goal is to develop a more
              systematic understanding of site preferences. The effect of applied pressure on
              the quadrupole interactions of probes bound in complexes with lattice vacancies
              are studied at room temperature using a diamond anvil cell. The expectation is
              that there will be large relaxations of atoms near vacancy complexes. Pressure
              dependencies will be correlated with temperature dependencies and with
              computations of the structures and electric-field gradients of the complexes.
              The goal is to understand how the shape and volume of vacancy clusters change
              under the influence of pressure and temperature. Four processes involving point
              defects will be studied: defect formation, binding of vacancies to probe atoms,
              conversion between different structural point defects in non-stoichiometric
              compounds, and vacancy migration. Activation volumes for the first three
              processes will be determined through measurement of site fractions of
              probe-vacancy complexes. The activation volume for vacancy migration will be
              determined from the pressure dependence of signal relaxation caused by
              stochastic jumping of vacancies near probe atoms. 
%%%
These measurements
              will provide fundamental information about point defect processes. These will
              be the first high pressure PAC studies carried out using a diamond anvil cell
              and the first at high temperature. Results in this area should be useful to
              researchers studying increasingly complex systems using PAC and similar
              methods.
***

