Title       : CONFERENCE: 8th International Symposium on Nitrogen Fixation with Non-Legumes,
               3-7 December 2000, Sydney, Australia: Travel Funds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0091844

Award Number: 0091844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina K. Kennedy ckennedy@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The 8th International Symposium on Nitrogen Fixation with Non-Legumes will bring
              scientists throughout the world to Sydney, Australia, for five days of
              discussion about the potential to use nitrogen fixing bacteria for supplying
              the essential element, nitrogen, to non-leguminous plants.  While the legume
              plants such as peas and beans are known to gain significant amounts of N from
              association with nitrogen-fixing bacteria called Rhizobia, much less is known
              about symbiotic nitrogen fixation in different families of plants.  Recent
              developments have now made it more likely that the some nitrogen-fixing
              bacteria might play a role in making the growth of grass species (and cereal
              production) less dependent on chemical fertilizer which is expensive and a
              major pollutant of agricultural run-off water.  These bacteria are called
              endophytes because they live inside (endo) plants (phyte), not in a
              differentiated structure like legume root nodues but within the intercellular
              spaces and vascular system of their plant host.  Scientists in the USA, Brazil,
              Australia, Argentina, Germany, Israel, India, and The Phillipines are studying
              different aspects of endophytes.

Also to be reviewed and discussed is the
              idea of transferring nitrogen fixation genes from bacteria into plants such
              that plants could themselves fix nitrogen one day, by-passing the need for
              bacterial symbionts or endophytes.  Recent work from the UK on the transfer of
              a few nitrogen fixation genes (from among the 22 or so needed) into a primitive
              plant called Chlamydomonas represents a step in this direction.  At the
              conclusion of the Symposium, a summing up of the state of the art will be
              disseminated to the public as well as to the scientific community.  The grant
              from the National Science Foundation will support the travel of 8 USA
              scientists to Sydney.  All of them are invited plenary or session speakers or
              are young scientists (post-docs) for whom attending a symposium such as this
              will help advance their careers.


