Title       : Symposium on Ecological Developmental Biology; January 6 - 10, 2002, Anaheim,
               California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0091725

Award Number: 0091725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott F. Gilbert sgilber1@swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091725
Gilbert

 The Division of Developmental and Cell Biology and the
              Division of Evolutionary Developmental Biology of the Society for Integrative
              and Comparative Biology will convene a Symposium on Ecological Developmental
              Biology: Developmental Biology Meets the Real World. The symposium would be
              conducted during the annual meeting of that society on January 6-10, 2002, in
              Anaheim, California.  The goal of this symposium is to resurrect interest in an
              important area of developmental biology that has been ignored by developmental
              biologists until very recently: ecological developmental biology. This field
              includes such diverse areas as larval ecology, environmental sex determination,
              predator-induced polyphenisms, dietary polyphenisms, social insect caste
              determination, egg ecology, proximate causation for phenotypic plasticity, and
              teratogenesis. The work in the intersection of developmental biology and
              ecology is important for several reasons. First, conservation biology needs to
              know about the survival and development of the embryonic and larval stages of
              development as much as it does about the adult stage. (This point was made very
              clear when it was shown that turtle conservation biology programs had been
              incubating embryos at temperatures that only produced only one sex of
              offspring). Second, environmental chemicals which we had been thought harmless
              (at least to adults) may be dangerous to the developmental stages of organisms
              and may threaten the fertility of adults. Third, the discipline of
              developmental biology has centered around model systems that had been selected
              for their independence from environmental conditions. This has supported the
              genetic approach to development and has fostered the thinking that all
              development is regulated from inside the egg (or even from inside the nucleus).
              The studies of ecological developmental biology show how important the
              environment is to the production of particular phenotypes.  Fourth, we think
              that in the emerging field of evolutionary developmental biology, the
              ecological component is necessary. If the first SICB symposium on evolutionary
              developmental biology focused on the phylogenetic, non-adaptive and
              macroevolutionary questions of "evo-devo," then this symposium would highlight
              the ecological, adaptive, and microevolutionary issues of evolutionary
              developmental biology. 
      

