Title       : SBIR Phase II: Auto-Tracking Using Trailing Templates and Skeletal Guides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0091510

Award Number: 0091510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Mostert pmostert@mostertgroup.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mostert Group
	      3298 Roxburg Drive
	      Lexington, KY  405033432    606/223-1490

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6840,9139,9150,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project continues
              research and development aimed at demonstrating the feasibility for automatic
              video tracking of the motion of animals and humans in unconstrained
              environments.  The Phase I study succeeded by designing low-level intelligence
              into predictive search algorithms that were able to confine their search for
              the correct position in a succeeding image to specific, small regions predicted
              by the system.  The objective is to create a software system, easily operable
              by an unsophisticated user that can quickly and accurately track multiple
              points or regions of a moving animal or human through a sequence of video
              images. This tracking can be done despite background clutter and intermittent
              occlusion, and without attaching any distinguishing markers to the subject.  In
              Phase I, a user interface was designed that allowed the user to choose a
              'skeletal template' to be tracked with a pointing device (a mouse) by selecting
              vertices of closed polygons and connected rotation points.  By sensing the
              direction and speed of motion of the system, the model-based tracking algorithm
              told the search mechanism where it should look in the next image to match a
              'trailing template' derived from previous locations and orientations of the
              template.  In Phase II, more sophisticated modeling and prediction algorithms,
              including supervised learning of constructed models, and a pyramided
              coarse-to-fine scale-space, constructed at video load time, will be brought to
              bear that will increase speed and efficiency of the tracking algorithm and
              improve the robustness of the model-based approach.  At the same time, the user
              interface will be redefined to improve the 'look and feel' and give it a more
              intuitive structure.  

Applications for this software have a ready market
              demand.  Present commercial tracking technology of biological motion requires
              the placement of intrusive control targets at critical positions on the
              subject.  The commercial need for tracking and characterizing general
              biological motion will be exploited, including tools for animal behavior
              analysis, and predicting and improving motion efficiency in athletes.  In
              addition, this technology has applications in diagnostics and medicine/health
              applications, surveillance, and other uses ranging from NASA's space research,
              to ergonomic design, to the fingering of musical instruments.
