Title       : Absolute Kinetic Studies of Carbene Fragmentation and Related Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0091368

Award Number: 0091368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Moss moss@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              continues its support for the work of Dr. Robert A. Moss of the Department of
              Chemistry at Rutgers University New Brunswick campus in New Jersey.   The
              research involves fundamental studies of carbenes and related reactive
              intermediates generated by laser flash photolysis, and followed by UV and IR
              absorption.   Of particular interest is the study of the fragmentation
              reactions of alkoxyhalocarbenes (ROCX), where the rates and pathways are
              expected to depend on the natures of the R group and the halogen X.   Quantum
              mechanical tunneling in intramolecular rearrangements will be studied using the
              cyclopropylmethyl carbenes C3H5CH2CCl and C3H5CD2CCl.   High level
              computational studies carried out in collaboration with theoreticians will
              accompany the experimental work.

This ongoing research involves fundamental
              studies of carbenes - short-lived and reactive intermediates with only two
              groups attached to carbon rather than the usual four -  which can be generated
              in solution by very short laser flashes.   The concentrations of the
              intermediates can then be followed by their absorption of ultraviolet or
              infrared light.   This is classical physical organic chemistry, and is expected
              to provide excellent training for the students and colleagues involved, through
              the rigorous scientific approach used and the variety of strategies and
              techniques involved.
