Title       : Regulation of CNS Ion Channels by Lipid Signaling Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0091964

Award Number: 0091964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald D. Denson ddenson@emory.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Eaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger T. Worrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Denson
0091964


Small electrical signals are critical to normal brain
              function.  The signals arise because of the movement of electrically charged
              particles called ions into and out of nerve cells (the most common ions are
              sodium, potassium, and chloride).   Ion movement into and out of nerve cells is
              controlled by special proteins on the surface of nerve cells that act as
              switches and are called ion channels.  We can measure the ion charges that move
              through one ion channel at a time using sensitive recording methods.  One ion
              channel type switches on movement of potassium ions: a function that is
              important for rhythmic activity of repetitively firing nerve cells.  Such cells
              control repetitive activities like breathing, heart rate, and wakefulness. This
              project will  investigate two ways by which these potassium ion channel
              switches are turned on and off.  First, some lipids activate the channels while
              some do not; we hope to find out why.  Second, molecular biological methods
              have shown that potassium channel switches appear to vary slightly among
              different types of nerve cells, but the difference is enough to allow for the 
              interaction of some potassium channels but not others with other cellular
              proteins that make turning on the ion channel switches easier.  We hope to
              investigate the differences and the way that the extra proteins affect
              potassium channels.

This work is important for two reasons.  First, this
              research will provide an understanding of how fats and other lipids could alter
              brain function.  Second, this research will describe how some potassium
              channels are controlled and, therefore, provide an idea of how rhythmic
              activity in the brain (and its consequences) are regulated.

