Title       : MAPK Function in the Ilyanassa Organizer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0091392

Award Number: 0091392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Nagy lnagy@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091392
Nagy

The mud snail Ilyanassa obsoleta has long been a model for the
              study of developmental mechanisms because it provides a spectacular example of
              localization of cytoplasmic determinants. Ilyanassa has a distinctive pattern
              of cell division known as spiral cleavage, which it shares with several other
              phyla.  In addition, it extrudes a cytoplasmic bulb - the polar lobe- during
              its first two cleavages.  When the polar lobe is removed, the embryo lacks a
              dorsal-ventral axis and has a radial symmetry.  Not only are the direct
              physical descendants of the polar lobe - the D quadrant cells - missing in
              polar lobe ablated embryos, but lobeless embryos lack structures known to
              descend from other quadrants.  Thus, through a process of cytoplasmic
              localization, the polar lobe provides one or more cells in the D quadrant with
              the ability to induce the fates of non-D cells. The localization of polar lobe
              determinants thus specifies the D quadrant as the organizer of the Ilyanassa
              dorsal-ventral axis.  Although it has been nearly 100 years since the discovery
              of the effects of the polar lobe, (Crampton, 1896) the molecular mechanisms
              underlying the localization of the organizing activity to the D quadrant, as
              well as the nature of the organizing activity itself, remain unknown.  Dr. Nagy
              and her lab have identified the first known component of the molluscan
              organizer:  a localized activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
              that spreads from the 3D macromere to all cells that require the D quadrant
              signal for normal development. Based on their results, they propose that the
              activation of MAPK in 3D results from inheriting polar lobe determinants, and
              that MAPK is a component of a signaling pathway that transduces the inductive
              signal from 3D to specify cell fate in other lineages.  The aims of this grant
              are to probe the mechanisms by which MAPK is activated in the 3D macromere, the
              mechanisms by which the D quadrant signals to the rest of the embryo and the
              mechanism by which MAPK specifies cell fates in  other lineages. 



