Title       : STTR Phase II: Development of an Automated Instrument Platform for Facilitating
               Submitochondrial Particle (SMP) Toxicity Assays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0091595

Award Number: 0091595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492166             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Gustavson kgustavson@harvardbioscience.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry Read  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard Bioscience, Inc.
	      84 October Hill Road
	      Holliston, MA  017461371    608/276-9820

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop and
              optimize a novel bioassay tool for routine low-cost biomonitoring of water
              quality.  Submitochondrial particle (SMP) toxicity bioassays, based on the in
              vitro responses to toxicants of the integrated enzyme functions in oxidative
              phosphorylation, are good predictors of conventional whole organism tests, yet
              can be completed in minutes. Phase I research proved the concept that SMP
              technology could be streamlined and semi-automated, enhancing their convenience
              and commercial potential.  In Phase II, prototypes of two dedicated instruments
              will be developed to accommodate both the cuvette and 96-well microplate-based
              formats. Accessory liquid and cuvette handling tools will be developed to
              increase sample throughput.  Features will be added to computer software
              developed in Phase I for running the tests, including support for other
              protocols; better error detection; statistical treatments and graphical
              presentation of data.  SMP production methods and quality control procedures
              will be improved and standardized.  The software and instrument prototypes will
              be tested at four independent laboratories to establish assay variability and
              to gain additional information on appropriate applications of the tests. 

If
              successful, this project will provide affordable tools that will allow for
              screening of water quality and wastewater discharges by industry and
              municipalities.

