Title       : Natural History and Functional Evolutionary Studies of A-to-I pre-mRNA Editing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0091142

Award Number: 0091142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Reenan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091142  Robert Reenan
Adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) pre-mRNA editing
              hydrolytically deaminates A-to-I in target messenger RNA through the action of
              adenosine deaminases that act on RNA (ADARs).  Inosine is interpreted as
              guanosine during translation, and the resulting non-templated recoding of the
              genetic information can introduce single amino acid changes that have dramatic
              effects on protein function.  The process of A-to-I pre-mRNA editing itself has
              been demonstrated in both invertebrates and vertebrates, primarily in
              transcripts encoding voltage- and ligand-gated ion channels and receptors of
              the nervous system.  It is the goal of this project to utilize Drosophila and
              other insect genera to create a natural history of RNA editing.  Such a record
              will be used to directly address three important areas of this evolutionarily
              conserved but mysterious process.  First, DNA sequence data from different
              species will be compared to identify the most highly conserved sequence
              elements necessary to form an ADAR substrate in a pre-mRNA and to determine the
              distribution of editing sites among species.  Secondly, because each editing
              site is modified at a different frequency, levels of editing for given sites
              between species will be quantitated, and editing efficiency will be correlated
              with structural elements.  Lastly, these data will be employed to genetically
              modify editing of particular sites or subsets of sites in vivo.  Such
              experiments will address how the modification of individual editing sites
              affects organismal behavior and nervous system function.  The project
              summarized here will not only provide molecular systematic data of a novel
              kind, but promises to deliver a deeper understanding of the process and purpose
              of RNA editing.  Also, a detailed phylogenetic study of RNA editing such as
              this may also provide ammunition for new population genetic and molecular
              biogeographic studies into the distribution of variation in the editing
              process.  Moreover, such advances will serve to assist in developing methods
              that would apply not only to Drosophila, but also in identifying and studying
              RNA editing sites in humans.
