Title       : SBIR Phase II: Novel Multi-Wavelength Time-Resolved Laser Induced Fluorescence
               Detector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0091507

Award Number: 0091507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Engebretson dengebretson@dakotatechnologies.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Dvorak  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Dakota Technologies, Inc.
	      2201A 12th Street North
	      Fargo, ND  581021808    701/237-4908

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1317,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will lead to a
              breakthrough in the use of laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) for chromatographic
              detection. Commercial standalone LIF detectors are based on CW lasers and
              collect data at a fixed wavelength. Consequently, they add minimal capability
              for resolving complex mixtures beyond that inherent in the chromatographic
              separation itself. On-the-fly fluorescence lifetime measurements at a single
              emission wavelength have been proposed as a better way to resolve the signals
              of co-eluting species. Our approach is far more powerful because it provides
              lifetimes on-the-fly and at several wavelengths simultaneously. A new prism
              flow cell fiber optically coupled to the emission spectrograph was introduced
              in Phase I. In addition, two different algorithms strategies for analyzing the
              multi-dimensional fluorescence data were developed and demonstrated. In Phase
              II a diode-pumped laser will replace the flashlamp pumped excitation laser,
              thereby providing 100 times higher pulse repetition frequency, 10 times shorter
              pulse duration, and 10 times better shot-to-shot stability. New digitizer
              technology will be incorporated to accommodate the laser's high repetition
              frequency. Important Phase II activities include fluorescence methods
              development to extend the range of applications to drugs and drug metabolites
              and elaboration of the chemometric algorithms.

The instrumental approach to
              be realized through the Phase II research will have a profound impact on QA/QC
              assessments of drug purity, bioequivalence and pharmacokinetic studies, and
              research investigations in humans and animals. Sales of several hundred units
              per year to pharmaceutical manufacturers, contract research organizations, and
              universities are anticipated.  The technology will later be adapted for faster
              and more accurate DNA sequencing.

