Title       : Alabama Research Infrastructure Improvement Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0091853

Award Number: 0091853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Lawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Griffin rgriffin@coe.eng.ua.edu  (Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the Alabama EPSCoR initiative is to create three
              multi-campus
Centers of Excellence reflecting research programs in biological
              and
environmental sciences, materials science and technology, and
              information
science and technology. The Centers include: (1) the Alabama
              Structural
Biology Consortium (ASBC) which will create a critical mass of
              scientists in
structural biology from the University of Alabama, Huntsville
              (UAH), the
University of South Alabama (USA), and the University of Alabama,
              Birmingham
(UAB); (2) Integrated Micro-Electromechanical Systems (IMEMS)
              Center will
combine the efforts at University of Alabama, Huntsville, the
              University of
Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Auburn University and Tuskegee University
              to develop the
infrastructure required to integrate optical elements and
              nanostructures within
Micro-Electromechanical (MEMS) devices. The IMEMS Center
              will offer
continued growth of information technology and development of novel
              computer
and telecommunications devices. (3) Large Scale Electromechanical
              Systems
(LEMS), a consortium of composed of the University of Alabama,
              Tuscaloosa,
Auburn University, University of Tulsa, Shelton State Community
              College, and
the Alabama School of Mathematics and Science along with six
              industrial and
two federal partners. The LEMs Consortium will focus on system
              integration in
conjunction with improving performance, reliability, and
              efficiency while
decreasing costs and environmental hazards through use of
              electromechanical
systems.
Infrastructure support of the Centers will include
              numerous education and
outreach activities that will broaden the reach and
              impact of the proposed project.
In addition, An Internet2 initiative will
              further develop the state's information
technology infrastructure. The
              initiative will provide the interconnective high
speed networking
              infrastructure necessary for communication and collaboration
of all the
              universities operating as cohesive Centers.

