Title       : Protein-Protein and Protein-DNA Interfaces of the Nucleosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0091736

Award Number: 0091736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evangelos N. Moudrianakis vanm@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Moudrianakis
0091736
The goal of the this research is to elucidate the
              properties that govern the relations between the structure of the nucleosome
              and the functional remodeling (transitions between assembly and disassembly)
              that occurs during the cell cycle.  The approach is based on integrated
              applications of classical biochemistry and biophysical chemistry with those of
              molecular genetics. This approach addresses the basic properties of both
              nucleosomal DNA and the octameric histone core within a dynamic structure. New
              evidence from the PI's laboratory (based on molecular dynamics calculations)
              suggests that the nucleosome is very dynamic, exhibiting large "breathing"
              motions in the nanosecond time scale and that the contact  interfaces between
              the protein subunits show time-dependent fluctuations. The protein core is an
              "articulated endoskeleton" around which the DNA wraps in a "generic, non
              base-specific way" for most of its length, with relatively few site-specific
              contacts.  Such a "fragile" arrangement serves the needs of regulation well; it
              is mediated to a large extent by the subunit contacts within the core histone
              octamer.  These studies are examining a range of conditions that affect the
              intrinsic (molecular types) and extrinsic (microenvironment) parameters of
              native heterodimers and their assembly potential. This is important because a
              thorough understanding of the functional transitions of the
              nucleosome/chromatin entailed during chromatin remodeling, replication and
              transcription depends on the exact knowledge of the energetics and
              specificities of these interfacial contacts. Techniques to be employed are:
              analytical ultracentrifugation, high-resolution multi-angle light scattering
              and microcalorimetry as well as contemporary methods of analytical chemistry.
              

