Title       : Organosilicon Molecular Assembly, Synthesis, and Electron Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0091162

Award Number: 0091162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Lambert lambert@casbah.acns.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes several problems that involve organic molecules
              containing silicon, the atom just below carbon in the periodic table. The
              presence of silicon offers several advantages and, in fact, is the key
              component of all these problems. First, the high strength of the silicon-oxygen
              bond enables complex molecules to be self-assembled. Large rings with
              nanometer-sized cavities are designed to serve as hosts. Molecular recognition
              of the Si-O bond will demonstrate that organic-silicon compounds can have an
              interesting and useful aqueous chemistry. A new family of reagents will exert
              control on reactivity so that a single mirror image product is favored
              (enantioselectivity). Second, silicon is used to construct new molecular
              spherical and hemispherical cavities. Cyclodextrins and calixarenes will be
              attached to an organosilicate network to prepare microporous structures capable
              of binding with small molecules. An entirely new cavity-containing system that
              derives from a central silicon atom will be prepared. Third, electron transfer
              will be characterized along an all-silicon molecular backbone, that is, a
              silicon wire. This study will be the first attempt to characterize a
              molecular-sized wire based on an entirely non-carbon pathway. Fourth, new
              systems will be prepared in which silicon is positively charged and attached to
              only three other groups (silylium cations). And, fifth, silicon reagents will
              be used to prepare, at room temperature, new systems containing positively
              charged carbon (carbocations).

With this renewal award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Joseph B.
              Lambert of the Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University. Professor
              Lambert will focus his work on incorporating silicon into normal analogues of
              carbon compounds or into novel structures to create molecules with potentially
              important properties. The properties may be of theoretical interest or they may
              offer new practical applications. The scope of the project is increased by
              exploiting one of the reactions to devise a new method to add the
              silicon-hydrogen bond to carbon-carbon double bonds (hydrosilylation) in a
              process that is catalytic but avoids the use of precious metals necessary in
              the current process.

