Title       : Early Empathic Development: Investigations into the Roles of Gender and Culture
               in the U.S.A.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0091430

Award Number: 0091430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259960             (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnn L. Robinson JoAnn.Robinson@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This investigation is to examine a series of related questions concerning young
              children's development of empathy, utilizing data from three independently
              conducted studies.  Broadly stated, these questions consider: 1) the role that
              gender and gender-specific parenting practices may play in the development of
              empathy in young children, and 2) the differences and similarities that may be
              observed in empathic development among children living in low income families
              across three subcultures within the U. S., namely European-American,
              Mexican-American, and African-American.  The objective is to enable data
              analyses that elucidate the developmental pathways of males and females in
              relation to earlier emotional development, parenting experiences, family
              ecology, and ethnicity by scoring videotaped responses of children to distress
              simulations that were identically conducted in the two of the three studies. 
              This project extends knowledge of operant processes in emotional development of
              males and females including socialization of empathy. It will provide new
              insights into cross-ethnic similarities and differences in early emotional
              development.  Each study makes a unique contribution to the investigation of
              empathic development.
The three studies are longitudinal, beginning
              observational assessments of children's emotion regulation as young as age six
              months and assessing mothers' attitudes and the ecology of her living
              circumstances as early as pregnancy.  Observation of empathy began as early as
              18 months. Two studies are part of a program of research on the impact of early
              nurse home visitation on family development. The first study, the New Mothers
              Study was conducted in Memphis, TN, where the enrolled sample of 739 women was
              almost entirely African-American.  The second study, Home Visitation 2000
              (HV2000) was conducted in Denver, CO where two-thirds of the 735 enrolled women
              were either Mexican-American or African-American.  All women in both samples
              had low incomes at the time of enrollment, during pregnancy, and were randomly
              assigned to treatment and control conditions.  
Observations of the Memphis
              children were gathered when they completed kindergarten; their responses to
              story beginnings that permitted the incorporation of empathic themes were
              videotaped.  In Memphis, questions concerning the antecedents of empathy will
              focus on the role of gender in the experience of African-American children in
              relation to early and concurrent contextual risk, empathic maternal attitudes,
              and maternal reports of temperament and behavior problems. 
Observations of
              the HV2000 children's response to empathy-eliciting distress simulations
              occurred at 21, 24, and 48 months of age.  Observations of the children's
              reactivity to laboratory-based emotion challenges were conducted at 6, 15, and
              24 months of age. Questions concerning antecedents of empathic development in
              HV2000 will concentrate on the role of gender and ethnicity in continuities in
              early emotion regulation styles with later empathic responses.  In addition,
              questions will be addressed concerning early antecedents in contextual risk
              factors, mother-child relationship, and maternal report of temperament and
              behavior problems.
The third study includes a low-income sample of 309
              children enrolled before their first birthday in a study of Early Head Start
              (EHS) interventions.  The ethnic sample distribution is similar to that of
              HV2000. Observations of empathic responses to distress simulations were
              conducted at 18, 30, and 36 months of age. Observed emotion regulation began
              when children were eight months old utilizing similar procedures as in the
              HV2000 study and were repeated at 18 and 30 months.  A unique opportunity of
              this study is to replicate findings from the HV2000 sample and examine the role
              of two additional features: 1) the role of family routines and 2) early
              language skills.  In all three studies, treatment status will be incorporated
              into analytic models and retained as a factor as needed.
The products of the
              proposed investigations will include a series of peer-reviewed papers that
              consider findings from each of these samples independently and a final
              monograph in which the material is synthesized across studies.


