Title       : Regulation of SCF Complex Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0091317

Award Number: 0091317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark G. Goebl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In yeast, a family of protein complexes termed the SCFs (Skp1-Cullin-F-Box) are
              required for the degradation of cell cycle regulatory proteins, including the
              cyclins Cln1, Cln2, and Cln3 and the CDK inhibitor Sic1.  The inability to
              degrade either the Cln's or Sic1 alters the normal progression of cells through
              the cell cycle.  SCF complexes also regulate the choice of carbon, nitrogen,
              and sulfur source of a yeast cell by targeting specific transcription factors
              for degradation in yeast.  SCF complexes act as ubiquitin ligases for the
              ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Cdc34.  Each SCF complex contains Skp1, Cdc53, and
              Rbx1.  The substrate specificity of each SCF complex is derived from the F-box
              protein present.  SCF associated F-Box proteins include Cdc4, Met30, and Grr1. 
              A major hypothesis of this research is that changes in the abundance of a
              specific SCF complex lead to changes in the rate of degradation of specific
              protein substrates.  That is, substrates of SCFCdc4 will be more stable under
              conditions where SCFCdc4 is less abundant.  This hypothesis will be tested by
              determining the in vivo level of SCFCdc4 vs SCFMet30 under conditions requiring
              specific SCFs.  Determinations of the half-life of proteins degraded by the
              SCFs under different growth conditions will also be made.  Mutants that are
              sensitive to changes in the levels of SCF components will be examined to
              determine whether they are defective in switching from one SCF to another. 
              Finally, SCF composition will be tested for changes under different growth
              conditions.  The implications of understanding how SCF complexes are regulated
              are wide ranging.  SCF homologs exist in higher eukaryotes and are critical for
              the degradation of proteins regulating development, cell proliferation, and the
              stress response.  The central hypothesis of this research is that differences
              in specific SCF levels will occur under repressing and derepressing conditions
              for amino acids or sulfur.  A second hypothesis is that different nutritional
              conditions will change the level of a specific SCF activity leading to changes
              in the stability of its substrates.
