Title       : MRPG: Solo Status and Self-Construals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0091833

Award Number: 0091833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise J. Sekaquaptewa dsekaqua@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Standardized test scores and grade point averages indicate that, on average,
              racial minority students do not perform as well as White students. Although
              factors such as socioeconomic status and quality of education are often
              suggested as explanations for this difference, laboratory research in social
              psychology suggests that individuals who are highly distinctive in their social
              environments tend to show weaker memory and problem solving skills. Thus,
              minority college students may be hindered in their performance because in most
              college environments they experience high social distinctiveness. This research
              planning grant will investigate the process by which racial distinctiveness
              negatively affects academic performance among minority, but not majority, group
              members. It is proposed that being the only member of one's race present in the
              environment (an experience termed "solo status") may change one's perception of
              the self (i.e., one's "self-construal"). This is expected to happen differently
              for African-Americans and Whites. It is predicted that when an African-American
              is the only Black person in a testing situation, being Black becomes a greater
              part of that person's self-construal, and the person feels more representative
              of and more accountable to members of their racial group. Whites, on the other
              hand, are not predicted to adopt this group-based self-construal. A White
              person may perceive the self in individualistic terms, and not feel
              representative of or accountable to other Whites as solos. Two experiments will
              be conducted in a laboratory setting, using appropriate comparison groups, to
              test 1) whether solo status induces a more group-based self-construal for
              African-Americans than for Whites; 2) whether African-Americans in solo status
              perform more poorly than a control group because of the added pressure of
              representing their race; and 3) whether African-Americans in solo status avoid
              highly challenging tasks compared to a control group, to avoid the potential of
              being a poor representative of their race. This research will help us
              understand why Whites and Blacks perform differently in school even though they
              may have comparable educational preparation. This research will be useful in
              designing programs to stop the negative effects of solo status for racial
              minorities in the classroom, and will have implications for job performance in
              business settings as well.

