Title       : STTR Phase II: High Speed Instrumentation for Real Time Biological Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0091549

Award Number: 0091549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Minne Steve@nanodevices.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Calvin Quate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NanoDevices, Inc
	      516 E. Gutierrez, Suite E
	      Santa Barbara, CA  931033253    805/884-0240

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to develop a
              new type of atomic force microscope that can image nanometer scale features, in
              real time, in the physiological environment. In all of its forms, the
              microscope is probably the most widely used tool in the investigation of
              biological structure and function. The introduction of the atomic force
              microscope (AFM) to biology created much excitement because the AFM fills a gap
              in the capabilities of the microscopes that are available to biologists. The
              study of living and moving biological systems, on time scales of seconds, with
              nanometer scale resolution, is becoming increasingly important in biological
              research. Self-assembled monolayers, proteins, and cellular processes all fall
              into this category. Existing AFMs fall short of the requirements for these
              applications because of speed and sensitivity limitations in fluid operation.
              The project is based on the AFM, for nanometer scale imaging of biological
              samples that is orders of magnitude faster than current AFMs. Additionally, the
              new system will be optimized for fluid operation in order to give researchers
              active control over imaging dynamics. This composite system will allow
              researchers to probe nanometer scale biological phenomena at speeds never
              before accessible.

The technology could dramatically increase biological
              imaging in two ways:  (1) faster imaging and (2) higher resolution in fluid. 
              The increase in speed and resolution will help facilitate projects to provide
              faster results to researchers.

