Title       : Neuronal Precurser Gene Function in the Regulation of Cell Proliferation and
               Neuronal Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0091425

Award Number: 0091425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325085             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harald Vaessin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tsonwin Hai  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During development of multicellular organisms, regulatory systems governing cell
              proliferation and developmental programs regulating the formation of specific
              organs, tissues or cell types, have to interface to ensure that an appropriate
              number of cells are generated for every tissue and organ. Equally important is
              the regulated termination of cell proliferation and initiation of lineage
              appropriate differentiation. A substantial body of work has provided a rather
              detailed picture of the regulatory systems controlling cell proliferation and
              cell cycle arrest. In contrast rather little is known, how tissue or lineage
              specific  developmental programs functionally interact with cell cycle
              regulatory system. In the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the pan-neural
              expressed neuronal precursor gene prospero (pros) is critical for proper
              termination of cell proliferation and initiation of neuronal differentiation
              during embryonic neurogenesis. In this role, pros activity is required for the
              proper transcriptional regulation of multiple key cell cycle regulatory genes,
              including the cyclin dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitor gene dacapo, the cdc25
              gene string, E2F and cyclin E. Two additional pan-neural neuronal precursor
              genes, deadpan (dpn) and asense (ase), have been shown to be critical for cell
              proliferation during larval optic lobe development and proper expression of the
              cdk inhibitor gene dacapo. This group of pan-neural transcription factor
              encoding genes represent, or are part of, a critical regulatory link between
              neuronal lineage specific developmental programs and cell proliferation and/or
              neuronal differentiation. Experiments conducted under this project will firstly
              determine, using a range of developmental-genetic approaches, the regulatory
              capacity and genetic interactions of Pros in the regulation of cell
              proliferation and differentiation during embryonic and larval neurogenesis.
              Secondly, functional in vivo and in vitro analysis of transcriptional
              regulatory regions of dacapo, string and cyclinE will be performed to determine
              the specific sequence motifs involved in the pros mediated transcriptional
              regulation of these genes. To this end reporter gene constructs will be used to
              map and functionally define Pros response elements in transgenic flies. In
              vitro DNA binding analysis and in vitro mutagenesis experiments will complement
              the in vivo approaches. These experiments will provide an initial understanding
              of the functional mode and interactions of this newly emerging regulatory
              system. As all genes involved in this study are evolutionarily conserved from
              Drosophila to humans, the information gained from this analysis should have
              direct relevance for the understanding of similar developmental processes in a
              number of other organisms.
