Title       : SBIR Phase II: Intelligent World Wide Web (WWW) Access for the Visually Impaired
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a0091590

Award Number: 0091590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus J. Huber marcush@marcush.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IRS
	      4976 Lassen Drive
	      Oceanside, CA  920565440    760/806-1497

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
              screen reading software (used by the visually disabled to access computers)
              that responds to changes in task context.  The proposed software will allow
              screen readers to automatically generate task-specific scripts--sophisticated
              macros that determine the behavior of the screen reader in response to the
              current state of an application--based on an analysis of the user's actions
              while performing a specific task.  The end result of this project will be a
              functioning prototype screen reader (based on Henter-Joyce's JAWS (Job Access
              With Speech) screen reader) with the ability to observe the user's actions,
              identify the user's goal based on those actions (referred to as plan
              recognition), and then either create a script that automates the task of
              achieving that same goal in the future or remind the user that such a script
              already exists.  Throughout the course of the project, feedback will be sought
              from members of the visually impaired community through user trials, focus
              groups, and formal experimentation.  While investigators will work exclusively
              with the JAWS screen reader during Phase II, many of the algorithms developed
              during this project will be applicable to other screen readers.  The software
              developed will be licensed to others to improve the performance of existing and
              new screen readers.

The enhanced screen reading software will provide a
              number of significant benefits.  First and foremost, the visually impaired will
              have significantly improved access to computers for both personal and
              job-related activities.  They will be able to use computers for tasks that were
              previously impossible or impractical, and they will be able to perform their
              current activities faster and more effectively.  Second, employers will be more
              open to employing the visually impaired because of the reduced cost in time and
              effort of job training and the increased level of productivity; visually
              impaired employees will be able to do more jobs, will be able to learn jobs
              faster, and will be able to do their jobs better than before.

