Title       : CAREER: Spectroelectrochemical Studies of the Novel PutA Flavoprotein and its
               Macromolecular Associations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0091664

Award Number: 0091664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Becker chedbeck@jinx.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1154,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091664
Becker
The intriguing flavoprotein, PutA, performs two mutually
              exclusive functions in Escherichia coli.  First, in the cytoplasm, PutA
              autorepresses transcription of the putA and putP (a proline transporter) genes
              of the proline utilization (put) regulon.  Secondly, PutA associates
              peripherally with the cytoplasmic membrane where it performs the two-step
              oxidation of proline to glutamate.  The overall goal of this research is to
              define the mechanism by which PutA switches from a transcriptional regulator to
              a membrane-associated proline dehydrogenase.  The working hypothesis is that
              the flavin redox state governs PutA macromolecular associations and thus the
              intracellular location and function of PutA.  The objective of this project is
              to establish the relationship between the flavin redox state and the
              macromolecular associations of PutA.  The first two aims are to investigate the
              influence of the flavin redox state on the transcriptional regulatory function
              of PutA and PutA-membrane interactions.  The final aim is to correlate
              conformational changes in PutA with flavin reduction and establish primary
              structure-function relationships.  Experimental approaches will combine
              spectroelectrochemistry and biophysical methods to provide unique and critical
              insights into the regulation of PutA.  This project will clearly define the
              influence of the flavin redox state on PutA functions and contribute pivotal
              understanding into the regulatory mechanism of the multifunctional PutA
              protein.  Studies of proteins that have multiple functions such as PutA are
              important because they will provide knowledge of a how a particular structural
              scaffold is used for different purposes.  The overall educational goal is to
              establish an interdisciplinary biochemistry degree program at the University of
              Missouri-St. Louis.  The first step toward this goal is to augment biochemistry
              curriculum with advanced courses and new laboratory techniques and to broaden
              research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.  The study of
              PutA will promote incorporation of research discoveries and applications into
              the curriculum.
