Title       : Binding and Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0091001

Award Number: 0091001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Tidor tidor@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091001
Tidor
An important goal of molecular biochemistry is a detailed
              understanding of how enzymes bind their ligands with correct affinity and
              specificity to catalyze appropriate reactions while not accelerating
              inappropriate ones.  While there is clearly a key role for affinity in many
              molecular binding and recognition events, specificity is also essential in many
              biochemical contexts.  For example, enzymes often must  discriminate between
              correct substrates and closely related molecules.  Likewise, there is a
              compelling literature implicating  differential binding of transition state
              over substrate as a fundamental principle of enzyme function.  While tremendous
              progress has been made in advancing our understanding of the molecular
              determinants of affinity and specificity, the current state of the art is still
              significantly incomplete.  While rationalization of relative affinities and
              specificities is possible given high-resolution structural information, the
              knowledge obtained from such studies has been insufficient to allow for routine
              rational ligand design or enzyme engineering.  New approaches are needed to
              expand our fundamental understanding in this crucial area.  The project
              involves the study of two tRNA synthetases, the glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase
              (GlnRS) from Escherichia coli and the aspartyl-tRNA synthetase (AspRS) from the
              hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus kodakaraensis.  Research activities
              include the application of current and novel approaches using theoretical and
              computational techniques to understand more thoroughly the molecular basis for
              ligand binding affinity and specificity by these highly evolved enzymes. 
              Molecular mechanics, molecular dynamics, and continuum electrostatics will be
              used to analyze determinants of binding in the enzyme active sites and in the
              ligands.  The research will expand our fundamental understanding of binding
              affinity and specificity by two tRNA-synthetase enzymes.  The principles
              learned are expected to have broad applicability to enzymes and other molecular
              catalysts.  They will contribute to the growing foundation that is essential to
              produce enabling technologies in the key areas of molecular design and enzyme
              engineering.
