Title       : Gordon-Conference: Temperature Stress in Plants, Ventura, California, on January
               28 to February 1, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a0091177

Award Number: 0091177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. Sharkey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Temperature controls plant growth and development and is ultimately one of
the
              most significant factors limiting crop productivity.  As temperature
goes
              above or below a plant's optimal range plant growth is affected.  The
effects
              of temperature and methods for reducing damage by both high and
              low
temperature has been the topic of a Gordon Research Conference every
              other
year for a little over 10 years.  In 2001 this conference will be
              held
again so that researchers can share the latest research in this field. 
              The
topics to be covered in the conference were selected from topics
              suggested
by previous participants and past chairs of this conference.  In
              addition,
the co-chairs searched recently published papers to see where
              interesting
work was being reported.  Two general themes emerged.  Past
              participants
wanted to hear about genomic approaches to studying temperature
              stress and
they wanted to hear about industry efforts.  One of the most
              important
outcomes from a Gordon Conference is the interaction between early
              career
and more established scientists.  This is of benefit both to the
              early
career scientists, who become known in the field, and to the
              established
scientists, who hear new ideas and innovative research that might
              otherwise
have trouble getting noticed.  At this conference one session will
              be set
aside for presentations from early career scientists.  Speakers for
              this
session will be selected from among those applying to present
              posters.
Winners will receive funding from this grant to allow them to attend
              this
conference.  The winners will be announced at least three weeks ahead
              of
the meeting giving winners time to prepare talks.  The competition will
              be
announced on the meeting web site and in an email message to everyone
              who
attended the last two conferences.  The conference vice chair will
              be
responsible for selecting the winners and working with the winners to
              help
make the most of this opportunity. 

