Title       : The Origin and Structure of Centrosomes in Embryos derived from Haplodiploid
               Parthenogenetic Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0091265

Award Number: 0091265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Sullivan sullivan@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
In most animal cells, the centrosomes, or microtubule organizing centers
              (MTOC), play akey role in chromosome segregation during nuclear division. They
              consist of a pair of centrioles
encompassed by a complex protein matrix. In
              most organisms, the centrioles are paternally
derived from the sperm basal
              body and the surrounding components are primarily derived from
the maternal
              cytoplasm. Organisms that undergo parthenogenetic development provide
              an
opportunity to study natural variants in centrosome formation and
              structure. The insect order
Hymenoptera (this includes ants, bees, and wasps)
              is characterized by haplodiploid
parthenogenesis, whereby unfertilized eggs
              develop as males and fertilized eggs develop as
females. Although the
              genetics, behavior, and ecology of species within this order have
              been
intensively studied, surprisingly few studies have directly focused on
              issues pertaining to the
centrosome. Preliminary results for one species
              within this order, the jewel wasp Nasonia
vitripennis, demonstrate that
              centrosomes form despite the lack of a sperm-derived basal body.
Numerous
              cytoplasmic asters form in both fertilized and unfertilized eggs after the
              completion of
meiosis. In unfertilized eggs, two of these cytoplasmic asters
              are captured by the female
pronucleus and these function as the zygotic
              centrosomes while the unassociated asters
disappear. In fertilized embryos,
              the sperm derived centrosomes function as the zygotic
centrosomes and the
              cytoplasmic asters disappear. Because unfertilized eggs develop into males
and
              fertilized eggs into females, this is the first system described in which
              centrosomes are
reciprocally inherited. This project seeks to further
              characterize centrosome inheritance and
structure in Nasonia. These studies
              are likely to yield novel mechanisms of organizing
MTOCs and also provide new
              insights concerning the evolution and developmental consequences
of
              parthenogenesis. The three specific aims of this project are:
1. To further
              characterize the behavior of the cytoplasmic asters in fertilized and
              unfertilized
embryos through live fluorescent microscopy.
2. To characterize
              the centrosome inheritance pattern in Nasonia strains in which development
of
              unfertilized or fertilized eggs is specifically disrupted.
3. To characterize
              the composition and structure of the asters and centrosomes in fertilized
              and
unfertilized embryos through immunofluorescent analysis and thick section
              electron
microscopy.


