Title       : Collaborative Research: Magnetic Photonic Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0091648

Award Number: 0091648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel Levy mlevy@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project between Michigan Technological University (MTU) and
              Southwest
Texas State University (SWT) focuses on the fabrication and testing
              of photonic crystals in magnetic
oxides for novel integrated photonic device
              prototyping. The project responds to the growing interest in
photonic crystals
              for device applications based on their unique optical band gap properties.
              While various
novel optical band-gap structures have been fabricated in
              non-magnetic dielectric media for highly efficient
waveguiding, filtering and
              resonator applications, very little work has been done on photonic crystals
              in
magnetic systems. One-dimensional structures have received some attention,
              although this work is still
very limited and remains mostly theoretical.
              Higher dimensional systems have not been investigated at all.
Given the
              novelty of the field of magnetic systems in photonic crystal applications, the
              proposed project
will consist of a one-year exploratory effort to assess the
              applicability of magnetic materials in photonic
band-gap structures.

The
              non-reciprocal properties of magnetic oxides, such as yttrium iron garnet
              (YIG), make these
materials a unique choice for optical isolator and
              circulator fabrication. Optical fiber telecommunications
have developed to the
              point where the monolithic integration of different optical components is a
              serious
issue to reduce costs in local area networks and long-distance data
              transmittal. In particular, noise
suppression at the source is an important
              driver for the development of on-chip optical isolators. However,
conventional
              systems utilizing non-planar geometries are both bulky and expensive. Photonic
              crystal
structures provide a novel alternative to address this problem since
              they can significantly enhance the Kerr
and Faraday response, making it
              possible to build smaller and cheaper isolators and circulators

A program to
              develop photonic crystal devices based on magnetic systems is a high-risk
              high-
payoff undertaking. It is high-risk because the use of photonic crystals
              in magnetic systems is a completely
new and virgin field. Most of the work
              developed thus far has been theoretical, although a few
experimental successes
              have been reported. Certain aspects of the sputtering work required for
              the
fabrication of one-dimensional magnetic photonic crystals remain partly
              unexplored and may require
particularly careful fine-tuning of the sputtering
              conditions. In particular, special attention must be paid to
the formation of
              highly smooth interfaces in the magnetic photonic crystal stack given the large
              number of
layers that make up these structures.

The essence of the
              innovation presented by the use of photonic crystals in magneto-optic
              isolators
is that of a tremendous reduction in length in the polarization
              rotator afforded by a corresponding
enhancement in Faraday rotation. However,
              the impact of this program, if successful, would not be just the
development
              of ultra-short isolators but the enabling of actual on-chip commercial
              integration of magneto-
optic isolators. This is because the integration of
              these devices onto planar structures has been hindered by
the presence of
              linear birefringence in optical waveguides. The difficulty arises because
              waveguide
dimensions comparable to the optical wavelength induce a phase
              mismatch between transverse-electric
(TE) and transverse-magnetic (TM) modes,
              degrading the isolation efficiency. The qualitative reduction in
device length
              envisaged by the use of photonic crystal structures promises to eliminate the
              phase matching
stumbling block to the integration of isolators into photonic
              circuits. In that sense, this program has the
potential to revolutionize
              optical communications technology, by allowing the on-chip fabrication of
              a
critical component for communications systems.
