Title       : The Motion-Picture Production Complex of Hollywood: Agglomeration, Industrial
               Dualism, and the Global Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0091921

Award Number: 0091921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen J. Scott ajscott@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves an investigation of the spatial and functional logic of
              the motion-picture industry in Los Angeles.  Particular attention will be paid
              to locational agglomeration and dispersal tendencies in the industry, to the
              organization of production as a dualistic system of majors and independents,
              and to the role of distribution in sustaining the economic vibrancy of the
              entire motion-picture production system.  The goals of the project are not only
              to understand the complexities of this particular case, but to contribute more
              generally to the our knowledge of cultural industries and their basis in
              globalizing urban-based production systems.  Three major lines of inquiry will
              be pursued: (1) How is the motion-picture industry of Los Angeles organized in
              terms of the changing social division of labor?  What are the geographical
              forces that keep the industry locked in to the central agglomeration of
              Hollywood?  Conversely, what is the current level of runaway production from
              Hollywood, and what factors encourage this phenomenon?  (2) What are the roles
              of majors and independents, their relations, and their impacts on the economic
              and locational dynamics of the industry?  (3) How is the distribution of the
              products of Hollywood's motion-picture agglomeration organized and how does the
              distribution system help to consolidate (or undermine) the competitive
              supremacy of this agglomeration?  The project will conduct a mail and email
              survey of over 1200 motion-picture companies, followed by interviews of
              selected company representatives.

This research will provide a comprehensive
              and reasoned description of one of America's largest and most enigmatic
              industrial agglomerations.  It will show, in particular, how the dynamics of a
              major industrial cluster are shaped by global markets, and conversely, how
              global markets themselves can be contested on the basis of competitive
              advantages residing for the most part in localized clusters of production. 

