Title       : SBIR Phase II: Smart Instrument Controls with Feel Display
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0091589

Award Number: 0091589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499995             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Anastas janastas@immersion.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Hasser  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Immersion Corporation
	      801 Fox Lane
	      San Jose, CA  951311601    408/467-1900

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will build on
              Phase I results to take advantage of an exciting opportunity to revolutionize
              the way people interact with the machines they encounter in everyday life. 
              Visual displays have progressed remarkably in past decades.  Aircraft cockpits
              that used to have hundreds of gauges and dials now have just a few color
              displays that provide rich visual information that changes depending on the
              situation.  Yet physical interfaces--knobs, buttons, sliders, etc.--remain as
              primitive as ever.  Regardless of context, these interfaces always feel the
              same and can serve only a limited number of functions.  Phase I results
              demonstrated the potential human factors benefits of Smart Instrument Controls
              with programmable feels-- operator performance improved, especially when visual
              attention was critical, such as during a driving simulation task.  These
              systems also could simplify interfaces by reducing the number of separate
              controls.  One control could operate several functions, each function having a
              distinctly separate "feel".  Phase II will continue human factors studies and
              expand to include research into novel sensor and actuator technologies for
              Smart Instrument Controls in order to develop a technology that simplifies
              elaborate system interfaces while improving or maintaining operator
              performance.

Immersion Corporation proffers a man-machine interface
              technology that enhances an operator's experience and in many cases can improve
              performance by leveraging the underutilized sense of touch.  These benefits
              have attracted companies
