Title       : Bringing Information Technology to Infrastructure: A Workshop to Develop a
               Research Agenda to be held in Washington, DC, in the Fall of 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0091482

Award Number: 0091482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72106              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rae Zimmerman rae.zimmerman@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Information technologies continue to grow at an enormous rate and are used for
              civil infrastructure systems to an increasing extent to plan these systems and
              manage operations. Areas of research need to be identified that integrate
              information technologies and civil infrastructure systems to ensure these
              systems are designed for the services they provide. This project is a workshop
              to develop a research agenda for integrating the areas of information
              technology and infrastructure.

The workshop will be conducted by the
              Institute for Civil Infrastructure Systems (ICIS) at New York University's
              Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service. ICIS is a multidisciplinary
              partnership of four universities that focuses on infrastructure services for
              communities, users, and infrastructure managers. The workshop will be held in
              the fall of 2000 over a 2-5 day period. A draft white paper will be prepared to
              focus the workshop discussion. It will bring together professionals in various
              fields who will prepare summary papers prior to the workshop. The location will
              be in Washington, DC in order to maximize attendance by observers from
              government agencies and organizations that are national to scope. Final results
              will be disseminated in the form of a paper and electronic report to help shape
              research agendas that link infrastructure and information technology.



