Title       : An Integrated Theoretical and Experimental Study of a Free Radical
               Polymerization and Polymer Reaction Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0091460

Award Number: 0091460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Turro turro@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ben O'Shaughnessy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An integrated program of experiment and theory is proposed whose objective is
              fundamental progress in the closely coupled fields of Free Radical
              Polymerization (FRP) and Polymer Reactions Kinetics. Physics and chemistry play
              equally central roles in these phenomena. Correspondingly, the program unites
              and coordinates the efforts of an experimental photochemist (NJT) and a
              theoretical polymer physicist (BOS) with extensive experience in reacting
              polymer systems. In the accomplished research during the previous funding
              period, experiment. theory, chemistry and physics have been inseparable. The
              complex processes in FRP involve many fundamental aspects of polymer science
              and radical chemistry. A crucial role is played by reactions between growing
              polymers carrying radical end groups, known as "living chains" or
              "macroradicals." For this reason, FRP and the general field of polymer reaction
              kinetics are deeply intertwined.

Since the living chains in a FRP have short
              lifetimes, their molecular weight distributions (MWD) have never been measured.
              In the previous funding period a method was developed to measure FRP living
              MWDs for the first time. Laser photolysis is used to "photocopy" the transient
              living population into a fluorescence-labeled dead chain population, which can
              be analyzed by standard methods. In the proposed research, living MWDs of
              linear FRP will be photocopied in pre-prepared dead chain backgrounds of known
              length and concentration. Photocopies and other spectroscopic measurements will
              be made of steady state FRP, and of non-steady state FRPs evolving from highly
              novel initial conditions created by flash photolysis. Theory will attempt to
              predict the outcome of these experiments, extending the theory developed in the
              first funding period dealing with very dilute dead backgrounds. The experiments
              enable direct examination of fundamental unresolved issues in a way, which has
              not been possible until now. For example, photocopying in entangled and
              unentangled dead matrices, respectively, will provide a unique examination of
              the role of entanglements in FRP and the nature of the celebrated gel effect. A
              second family of projects will address fundamentals of polymer reaction
              kinetics. If successful, these measurements will have significant impact on the
              field of reacting polymer systems and polymer physics in general since
              virtually all theoretical predictions on k and k(t) have never been
              tested.

With this award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              supporting the research of Professors Nicholas J. Turro and Ben O'Shaughnessy
              of the Department of Chemistry at Columbia University. This research is unique
              in that it provides an opportunity to apply theoretical and experimental
              efforts to understanding the mechanism of free radical polymerizations. FRP is
              of enormous technological importance in the polymer industry, used to
              synthesize a great number of polymeric materials. The expertise of an
              experimental photochemist will combine with that of a theoretical polymer
              physicist to provide an interdisciplinary environment where the students
              involved will be trained in both aspects of the research.


