Title       : SBIR Phase II: Computational Tool for Plasma Equipment Design Using a
               Non-Statistical Boltzmann Solver
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0091572

Award Number: 0091572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499884             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Kolobov jls@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    256/726-4800

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 1266,9150,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
              develop, validate and demonstrate a Computer-Aided Design (CAD) tool for plasma
              equipment/processes using a non-statistical Boltzmann solver for the analysis
              of charged particle kinetics. Phase I implemented a new Boltzmann module and
              clearly demonstrated the feasibility of coupling a Bolzmann solver to the
              company's plasma simulator for efficient kinetic description of low-pressure
              plasma reactors used in semiconductor manufacturing. The Phase II project will
              focus on:  (1) the development of elliptic representation of the velocity
              distribution function (VDF) valid for arbitrary anisotropy of the VDF;  (2)
              full integration of the Boltzmann solver with a commercial software;  (3)
              kinetic simulations for industrial plasma systems; and (4) interfacing the
              Boltzmann module with plasma simulation codes developed by different research
              groups. Using an elliptic representation will extend the applicability of the
              Boltzmann solver to problems with arbitrary VDF anisotropy such as electron
              beams, ion kinetics, etc. The goal of Phase II will be to validate the new CAD
              tool for wide variety of plasma technologies  and expand the software usage to
              new industries. 

The total commercial markets of plasma etch and Chemical
              Vapor Deposition (CVD) equipment is currently in excess of $2 billion per annum
              with strong projections for growth. Commercial application of the proposed
              software tool will allow optimization of the performance of all hardware
              equipment of this market and to "smartly" design new equipment. It is projected
              to "save" millions of dollars of equipment and process development costs to
              Plasma Equipment Manufacturers and to semiconductor chip producing companies.
              

