Title       : Acquisition of an Atomic Force Bioscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0091716

Award Number: 0091716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85691              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katrina J. Edwards kedwards@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0091716
Edwards

This grant provides partial support of the costs of
              acquiring an Atomic Force Bioscope (AFB) for the P.I.'s laboratory at the Woods
              Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI).  Numerous other researchers in the Woods
              Hole area, at WHOI or affiliated with the Marine Biological Laboratories (MBL),
              will also have access to this equipment.  This AFB will represent the highest
              resolution imaging tool available to researchers in the Woods Hole area.  It
              will be mounted on, and used in conjunction with for many studies, the P.I.'s
              existing Zeiss Axiovert 100 inverted fluorescent microscope.  This will allow
              simultaneous and in-line fluorescent and atomic force images to be collected.
              

Uses for the AFB will be quite varied; it will be used both as an
              analytical tool and an imaging system.  In the P.I.'s laboratory, the AFB will
              be used primarily for quantitative determinations of interfacial forces between
              microbial cells and mineral surfaces, microbial mineral dissolution studies,
              and simultaneous in-situ phylogenetic identification of microorganisms combined
              with morphological and structural analysis of naturally occurring microbial
              populations.  Other researchers will use the instrument to analyze the physical
              and chemical properties of surfaces that dictate frictional strength of rocks,
              determine cytoskeletal structures and function in non-mammalian vertebrates,
              analyze structural interactions of ion channels with large high-affinity
              peptide neurotoxins, and spatially map plasma membranes while making
              concomitant electrochemical measurements.  Support for this grant is shared
              between Divisions of Earth and Ocean Sciences.

***

