Title       : Studies of the Cyanide-resistant Alternative Oxidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0091080

Award Number: 0091080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339009             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Siedow jsiedow@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann Umbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1141,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant mitochondria possess a cyanide-resistant alternative oxidase pathway in
              addition to the cytochrome c oxidase pathway.  During respiration, the
              alternative oxidase reduces oxygen to water, but releases the generated energy
              as heat, rather than storing it.  The pathway is widespread among plants,
              leading to a search for the role of the alternative oxidase in plant
              metabolism. The plant enzyme is dimeric, consisting of two identical subunits,
              and is inactivated if the subunits are united by a disulfide bond.  If this
              regulatory bond is reduced, the enzyme can then be fully activated by small
              metabolites, a-keto acids.  An alternative oxidase is also present in fungal
              mitochondria, but is monomeric and is activated by purine nucleotides rather
              than alpha-keto acids.  One goal of this project is to determine which regions
              of the plant and fungal proteins are responsible for their different structural
              and regulatory features.  To accomplish this, chimeric proteins will be created
              using recombinant DNA technology and their properties examined.  The second
              goal of the project is to address whether the regulatory properties
              demonstrated in isolated mitochondria are important for the function of the
              alternative oxidase in vivo.   In one approach, the behavior of the protein's
              regulatory disulfide bond in an isolated membrane system under experimental
              conditions will be observed and compared to its behavior in more complex
              environments (mitochondria, cells, and leaves).  A second approach will use
              transgenic Arabidopsis plants that express either very high or low levels of
              normal alternative oxidase, or high levels of a mutated alternative oxidase
              that is permanently activated.  These plants will be examined for their
              responses to a variety of environmental variables to determine conditions under
              which the presence or absence of the alternative oxidase and its regulatory
              features is beneficial or detrimental.  The outcome should increase
              understanding of how important the regulatory features are to its function in
              vivo and of the alternative oxidase's involvement in plant responses to the
              environment.  Because the alternative oxidase wastes energy in mitochondria,
              which are major energy-producers in the cell, it had been thought that this
              enzyme's activity could lead to reduced plant productivity.  Increasing 
              evidence, however,  indicates that the oxidase may instead be important for the
              plant's  ability to survive a wide range of biotic and abiotic stresses.  The
              project described here will add to this knowledge through its investigation of
              the nature and role of alternative oxidase regulation in plant metabolism. 
