Title       : The Roles DNA Polymerase Epsilon in DNA Replication, Repair and Cell Cycle
               Checkpoints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  2002  
File        : a0091211

Award Number: 0091211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curt Wittenberg curtw@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Maintenance of genomic integrity is of utmost importance to living organisms. An
              intricate system of enzymes has evolved to deal with the tremendous task of
              replicating chromosomes once and only once per cell division cycle while
              maintaining genetic information with great accuracy. Among those enzymes are a
              group of DNA polymerases which catalyze the polymerization of nucleotides
              during the replication process. However, those enzymes are associated with a
              large complex of accessory protein known collectively as " the replication
              complex". The components of that complex are required not only for DNA
              replication, but also for editing errors, organizing topology, and regulating
              progression through the cell division cycle. The mechanisms that restrict cell
              cycle progression, including mitosis, when DNA is incompletely or improperly
              replicated are known as checkpoints.  DNA polymerase epsilon (Pol epsilon), one
              of the three major replicative polymerases, appears to play roles in all of
              these processes. Defects in those processes can lead to an increased mutation
              rate and genomic instability.

This project is directed at understanding the
              roles of Pol epsilon. This enzyme is involved in DNA replication, repair,
              checkpoint regulation of cell cycle progression and in cell viability. It is
              not unexpected that, as a major replicative polymerase, Pol epsilon is
              essential. Yet, surprisingly, recent evidence has shown that the essential
              function of this enzyme does not require its enzymatic activity but instead
              involves regions of the protein of unknown function. This project will extend
              those studies to elucidate the essential function of this domain of the protein
              and, thereby, the essential function of DNA Pol epsilon.  The experiments
              employ a wide array of molecular, genetic, and cell biological techniques
              including recombinant DNA technology, protein biochemistry, mass spectrometry,
              flow cytometry, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and targeted proteolysis, among
              others. The project will employ both postdoctoral trainees and graduate
              students, training them in eukaryotic microbial genetics, biochemistry and
              modern molecular and cell biology.  It is anticipated that the discoveries made
              in the context of this research will contribute to the general population in
              the form of improved understanding of a basic biological process, DNA
              replication. 
