Title       : Mechanisms and Control of Ion Transport in the Gut of Larval Yellow Fever
               Mosquito (Aedes aegypti)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a0091208

Award Number: 0091208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221765             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Moffett dmoffett@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stacia B. Moffett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In contrast to the acid stomach of vertebrates, the anterior stomach of mosquito
              larvae is very alkaline (pH10).  More acidic conditions are restored in the
              posterior stomach.  These observations suggest that, while the animal is
              feeding, the stomach epithelium continuously recycles alkali between the gut of
              the animal and its physiological interior. Disturbance that causes the animal
              to stop feeding and initiate escape behavior interrupts gut alkalinization,
              suggesting a tight neural and/or endocrine control of the process. It is
              already clear that some transport proteins characteristic of other well-studied
              acid or alkali secreting cells are present in the cells of the mosquito larval
              stomach. Although this group of researchers has identified a vacuolar-type H+
              ATPase and at least one anion exchanger, other transporters involved in this
              system are not known. The gut is innervated by axons that express
              immunoreactivity to the neurotransmitter serotonin and to nitric oxide
              synthase, the enzyme responsible for synthesis of the transmitter nitric oxide.
               The gut epithelium contains endocrine cells that show immunoreactivity to
              peptide hormones belonging to the FMRFamide family.  The effects of serotonin
              on the anterior stomach have been partly described, and it appears that it,
              plus an additional messenger or messengers, constitute a sufficient stimulatory
              signal for gut alkalinization.  It is probable that there are also inhibitory
              signals that come from the CNS and/or the gut itself.  The major questions of
              the project are aimed at the cellular mechanisms that drive alkalinization of
              the anterior gut, reacidification in the posterior stomach, and the identity of
              the neural and endocrine control pathways. Development of isolated, perfused
              preparations of the stomach by this team of investigators was a critical basis
              for the projected studies, because they allow experiments that would be
              impossible in the whole animal: electrophysiological characterization of
              transport mechanisms by measurement of the transepithelial voltage of the
              tissue, the intracellular voltages and ionic concentrations using ion-specific
              intracellular microelectrodes, and the transepithelial ionic fluxes using
              isotopes. The perfused preparations also will be used to assay the activities
              of candidate control neuropeptides. In a parallel experimental approach, the
              presence and cellular locations of known transport proteins will be determined
              by fluorescence immunohistochemistry, a technique in which antibodies generated
              against defined molecular targets are localized by fluorescently tagged
              secondary antibodies. Mosquitoes are by far the world's most medically
              significant insects. They are potential vectors for approximately 100
              arboviruses that cause human disease, including yellow fever, dengue and a
              number of forms of encephalitis.  They also transmit nematodes that cause
              elephantiasis, and plasmodia that cause malaria. The larval mosquito is an
              aquatic form that feeds on detritus. Although the larval form does not transmit
              disease, it may be more vulnerable to 3rd generation control measures than
              adults, because larvae are generally concentrated in aquatic breeding sites
              whereas the winged adults disperse widely. Gut alkalinization is believed to
              protect the animal from infection by killing ingested microbes and viruses. 
              Weakening of this mechanism by a specific attack on the cellular processes, or
              their control signals, could make the larvae more susceptible to endemic or
              applied microbial pathogens.  This project could provide the knowledge base for
              such an approach.
