Title       : Workshop on Endangered Language Data Preservation: The Need for Standards, June
               21-24, 2001, Santa Barbara, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2000   
File        : a0091713

Award Number: 0091713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40165              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Aristar aristar@linguistlist.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha S. Ratliff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Members of the linguistics profession are faced with two urgent situations: the
              number of languages in the world is rapidly diminishing while the number of
              initiatives to digitize language data is rapidly multiplying as a result of the
              increasing availability and sophistication of web technology. The latter might
              seem to be an unalloyed good in the face of the former, but there are two ways
              things may go wrong without adequate collaboration among archivists, field
              linguists, and language engineers. First, a common standard for the
              digitization of linguistic data may never be agreed upon; and the resulting
              variation in archiving practices and language representation would seriously
              inhibit data access, searching, and cross-linguistic comparison. Second,
              standards may be set without guidance from the people who best know the range
              of structural possibilities in human language-descriptive linguists who have
              done fieldwork on poorly described languages. Metalanguage or metadata
              guidelines which are designed on the basis of well-known western languages will
              not be adequate to the urgent task of archiving as much linguistic data as
              possible in the face of widespread language attrition and loss.

If
              linguistic archives are to offer the widest possible access to the data and
              provide it in a maximally useful form, consensus must be reached about certain
              aspects of archive infrastructure. This is the proposed topic of a 3-day
              workshop which will be held in conjunction with the Linguistic Society of
              America 2001 Summer Institute and will involve experienced field linguists,
              computational linguists, and language archivists. The objective of the workshop
              is to bring field linguists and computational linguists together with two
              primary goals: (1) to educate one other about the very different challenges
              field linguists and computational linguists anticipate in the establishment of
              an archive for endangered language data, and (2) to solicit recommendations
              about two essential elements of archive infrastructure: text markup and
              metadata.
