Title       : Increasing Compliance by Reducing Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0091867

Award Number: 0091867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Knowles eknowles@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research adopts an approach-avoidance model of attitude position and change
              and focuses on the avoidance gradient. In many cases, a request, an offer, or a
              suggestion creates two opposing reactions. The recipient of an offer wants to
              agree, wants to enjoy, wants to participate in fulfilling the request, but at
              the same time the recipient may be resistant to the expense, to the effort,
              and/or to the commitment that comes with fulfilling the request. The dynamics
              of this approach-avoidance conflict may be changed either by augmenting the
              approach forces or by diminishing the avoidance tendencies. Many theories of
              social influence focus on the approach side of this conflict, and suggest ways
              of adding to the number or quality of reasons for taking action. This research
              focuses on ways to reduce resistance to persuasion as a means of increasing
              compliance. Two related programs of research are included, one investigating
              how resistance can be disrupted, the other investigating how resistance can be
              depleted by use. The first program of research focuses on disrupting
              resistance. The investigator's Disrupt-then-Reframe method of social influence
              uses a subtle disruption to lessen resistance to reasons for accepting the
              offer. A slight unexpected element in an offer, such as stating the price of
              note-cards in pennies rather than dollars or reversing the normal order of two
              words, makes more persuasive the subsequent reasons or reframes for accepting
              the offer. Three studies investigate whether a disrupting phrase increases
              evaluative scrutiny, disrupts elaborative thinking, or interferes with
              evaluative consideration. The second program investigates whether resistance is
              a consumable resource. Four studies investigate whether resisting an offer will
              diminish one's capacity to resist future offers. Together these studies clarify
              the role of resistance in compliance and attitude change and establish several
              new strategies for persuasion.


