Title       : Nebraska EPSCoR Infrastructure Improvement Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0091900

Award Number: 0091900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Martha L. James                         
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Royce E. Ballinger   (Principal Investigator current)
              F. Fred Choobineh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Nebraska
	      Dept of Biological Sciences
	      Lincoln, NE  685880118    /   -

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nebraska EPSCoR, in cooperation and collaboration with research universities
              in
the state of Nebraska, seeks to build research infrastructures in several
              areas of
informatics. The effort will be directed at three primary areas that
              are consistent
with the Nebraska EPSCoR Strategic plan as well as plans and
              strategic
directions of the participating universities including: (1)
              development of wired and
wireless network technologies that will more
              effectively link ongoing inter-campus
efforts within a secure distributed
              information infrastructure, (2) development of a
test-bed to research next
              generation Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
systems architectures that are
              viable and efficient for e-commerce through
collaboration with the private
              sector, (3) development of inter-campus capabilities
in newly emerging
              research areas of bio-informatics and computational biology.
The proposed
              infrastructure initiative in informatics complements the
              developing
information technology industry in the state, involves scientists
              and engineers
from four university campuses (University of Nebraska, Lincoln
              (UNL), University
of Nebraska Medical Center, University of Nebraska, Omaha
              (UNO), and
Creighton University. It provides for an integrated plan to
              accomplish goals that
are considered crucial for establishing competitiveness
              in computational-based
informatics research within the state of Nebraska. In
              addition to the major
development effort for the interdisciplinary informatics
              infrastructures, the
proposed project will greatly enhance the computational
              capabilities available to
a broad range of fields of research and
              instruction.
Additional components of the project will support educational
              activities and
research experiences for underrepresented groups, internships
              for science and
technology students to work in private industry, a small
              grants program for faculty
early in their careers, technical assistance and
              faculty travel, and outreach to
other Nebraska colleges and universities.

