Title       : Gordon Research Conference on RNA Editing to be held January 21-26, 2001, in
               Ventura, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0091286

Award Number: 0091286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald B. Emeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1144,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091286  Ronald B. Emeson and Carlyle B. Storm
A Gordon Research Conference on
              RNA Editing is planned for January 21-26, 2001 at the Doubletree Hotel in
              Ventura, California.  RNA editing is the co- or post-transcriptional
              modification of RNA which results in the insertion, deletion or substitution of
              nucleotides.  RNA editing can therefore correct, extend or diversify the
              information encoded within the corresponding genomic sequence and can
              dramatically alter the function of the modified RNAs.  For example, editing
              events within the mammalian central nervous system can increase the diversity
              of neurotransmitter receptor expression and serve to effectively modulate
              neuronal signaling pathways.  Equally significant is the cellular regulation of
              many of the RNA editing processes which provides for developmental,
              tissue-specific and metabolic fine tuning of protein function and biochemical
              pathways.  The understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying RNA editing and
              their biological occurrence has reached a critical stage where
              cross-fertilization of hypotheses and experimental approaches is essential for
              focus in the next decade of research. The biological significance of RNA
              editing is a recurring theme throughout all aspects of the conference.  There
              are many common questions and experimental goals among investigators of RNA
              editing despite the diversity of organisms wherein editing occurs, and the
              apparent dissimilarities in sequences which are modified.  Important to the
              understanding of every editing system is a basic description of the RNA
              substrates that are modified by these processes.  Similarly, questions of
              general interest concerning the mechanism, specificity, fidelity and
              processivity of RNA editing can be addressed with a combination of biochemical
              and molecular biological techniques coupled with the development of in vitro
              editing systems.  The cellular and molecular aspects of RNA editing regulation
              are also broadly being pursued at the level of evolution as well as the
              occurrence of editing activities in different tissues and during development.
              Finally, information about other forms of RNA processing is likely to have
              implications for understanding RNA editing mechanisms, and vice versa. 
