Title       : A Crosslinguistic Study of Spatial Categorization from the Preverbal State to
               Adulthood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0091493

Award Number: 0091493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Soonja Choi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Choi, Soonja
BCS-0091493

The relation between semantics and cognition: a
              crosslinguistic study of spatial categorization from the preverbal stage to
              adulthood


This project investigates the relation between language-specific
              word meanings and conceptual classifications of spatial relations in English
              and Korean, from infancy to adulthood. The two languages differ significantly
              in the way they divide up spatial relations for purposes of language.  For
              example, whereas English has words such as IN and ON to distinguish between
              containment (e.g., putting an apple IN a bowl) and support (e.g., putting a cup
              ON a table), Korean does not have such terms.  Instead, Korean has words that
              distinguish between loose fit (e.g., apple in a bowl) and tight fit (e.g.,
              video cassette in its case; ring on a finger) regardless of containment and
              support.  
The research explores two interrelated questions that arise from
              this finding:  (1) How do children learn such language-specific word meanings
              so early?, and  (2) how do these early-acquired word meanings influence spatial
              concepts at later stages?   These questions will be studied by investigating
              the ways in which children and adults distinguish various types of spatial
              relations.  More specifically, the studies ask whether infants who do not yet
              talk initially begin learning language with a more extensive set of spatial
              categories than is needed for the language they are learning, and whether older
              children and adults maintain sensitivity to the same extensive set of spatial
              categories or, as preliminary work suggests, they channel their attention
              primarily to distinctions they learned in acquiring their first
              language.
Preliminary experiments suggest that preverbal infants (9, 11, and
              14 months) are able to distinguish a wide range of spatial features, including
              those not relevant for the language being learned, but that over time, the
              language channels their attention to a more limited set of linguistically
              relevant features.  The proposed work examines this possibility further with a
              set of spatial features involving containment and support.  The studies employ
              a preferential looking design that measures the amount of time the participant
              looks at a particular scene, given a choice between two scenes.  This method
              can be used with both young children (starting from 9 months) and adults, thus
              allowing systematic comparisons of the two populations.  In addition, adult
              participants are asked to perform a classification task which requires that
              they verbally explain their decisions.  
This research will provide insight
              into the mechanisms that enable children to acquire language-specific
              word-meaning systems at a very young age, and the kinds of interactions that
              take place between language and concept formation in infants, children and
              adults.

