Title       : Analysis of the Apoplast Sub-Proteome During Tomato Fruit Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0091019

Award Number: 0091019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jocelyn K. Rose jr286@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The plant primary cell wall is a highly dynamic and complex structure that plays
              a critical role in numerous examples of plant growth and development. Despite
              its importance in regulating cell expansion and differentiation, many aspects
              of wall synthesis, assembly and disassembly remain poorly understood. For
              example, wall restructuring during cell expansion is highly regulated and while
              a number of divergent families of wall-modifying proteins have been identified,
              the mechanism by which they act in concert to achieve wall loosening in a
              controlled manner is unknown. Furthermore, many new classes of wall-modifying
              proteins remain to be identified, or cannot currently be assigned a biochemical
              function. To understand the process of wall reorganization, an important
              objective is therefore to identify all of the enzymes involved. The need for a
              systematic approach to the identification and characterization of cell wall
              protein populations has recently become a realistic consideration in the form
              of the developing field of proteomics, or the study of the protein complement
              of the genome. The research outlined in this proposal describes a proteomics
              approach to the characterization of protein populations in the cell wall and
              surrounding apoplast, or cell wall continuum, during tomato fruit development.
              This will provide valuable insight into biochemical processes occurring in the
              apoplast/cell wall, including the regulation of wall modification during rapid
              fruit expansion and ripening. Broad questions to be addressed include:
1) What
              are the qualitative and quantitative characteristics of the protein populations
              present in the tomato fruit cell wall?
2) How do the patterns of apoplastic
              protein expression change qualitatively and quantitatively during fruit
              ontogeny?
Cell wall protein populations will be separated by high-resolution
              2-D gel electrophoresis and individual polypeptides analyzed by mass
              spectrometry, leading to the identification of the corresponding genes. The
              proposed research will: (i) provide detailed and unprecedented insight into the
              patterns of expression and regulation of apoplastic/cell wall proteins; (ii)
              facilitate the identification of groups of proteins that are required for cell
              expansion or fruit softening (iii) complement existing research initiatives at
              Cornell, allowing parallel studies of gene expression at the mRNA and protein
              levels; (iv) demonstrate the utility of proteomics as a tool to study the
              biology of the cell wall and apoplast; (v) identify new cell wall proteins with
              potential practical applications for plant biotechnology.

