Title       : Analysis of Meiotic Telomere Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0091095

Award Number: 0091095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry W. Bass bass@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sexual reproduction in most organisms requires two major processes that change
              the number of chromosome sets (ploidy level), meiosis and fertilization. 
              Meiosis converts diploid somatic cells into haploid gamete cells, the sperm or
              egg cells.  At fertilization, the union of chromosomes from the sperm and egg
              nuclei restores the diploid state.  Not only is meiosis therefore essential for
              genome maintenance through reproduction, but it is also the stage at which
              chromosome shuffling and recombination occurs, producing genetic diversity. 
              Although the role of meiosis in establishing the rules of inheritance is well
              understood and conserved across most higher organisms, relatively little is
              known about the molecular processes that govern the shuffling and assortment of
              genetic material during meiosis.  The specialized ends of linear chromosomes,
              the telomeres, cluster together on the nuclear envelope at meiosis in an
              arrangement now referred to as the bouquet.  The work summarized here uses
              maize (Zea mays, corn) as a model system to investigate the role of telomeres
              in meiosis.  Genetic mutants are being screened by telomere-staining microscopy
              to permit examination of the relationship between telomere clustering and
              chromosome segregation during meiosis.  This project will result in the
              identification and characterization of telomere-binding proteins from maize. 
              These telomeric proteins are likely to mediate some aspects of meiotic
              chromosome behavior.  The genes encoding maize telomeric proteins will be
              molecularly cloned and analyzed for information related to their possible
              function at meiosis.  The proteins encoded by these cloned DNA segments will be
              tested for their ability to bind specifically to double-stranded telomeric DNA.
               This work will advance knowledge of the basic mechanisms of meiosis and the
              biological function of telomeres.
