Title       : Neuroanatomical Analysis of a Direct Optic Pathway to the Brainstem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0091660

Award Number: 0091660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine V. Fite kfite@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An expanding research and clinical literature indicates that a strong
              association exists between light stimulation and a variety of affective,
              behavioral, and cognitive functions.  At present, little is known about the
              neural circuitry whereby environmental light stimulation may influence the
              serotonin system, one of the oldest and most widespread neurochemical systems
              in the brain.  Recently, the existence of a direct retinalpathway to the large,
              serotonergic dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) of the brainstem has been described in
              a number of different vertebrate species.  The DRN has widespread projections
              to the forebrain and contains the greatest proportion of serotonergic neurons
              in the brainstem.  Several neuroanatomical studies conduct by the PI indicate
              that the retinal-DRN project is substantially large in diurnal than in
              nocturnal species.  At present, the functional correlates of this direct optic
              pathway to the DRN are unknown.

Several exploratory studies are proposed to
              investigate the functional correlates of optic input to the DRN and
              serotonergic system using Mongolian gerbils, a highly visual diurnal rodent
              with a well-developed retinal-DRN projection.  Major research objectives
              include the following: (1) Experiments utilizing the 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG)
              metabolic technique should reveal whether visual stimulation alters 2-DG uptake
              in the DRN, and if so, where the greatest uptake occurs.  Several kinds of
              visual stimulation will be presented: (a) exposure to a sustained,
              high-intensity stimulus, (b) exposure to a flashing light presented at
              different flash frequencies, (c) exposure to a large-field, random-dot moving
              pattern presented at different velocities.  Experimental animals will be
              compared with controls exposed only to dim illumination.  The effects of
              electrical stimulation of the optic nerve on 2-DG uptake in the DRN also will
              be investigated.  (2) A second set of experiments will involve application of
              5-HT microdialysis techniques in the gerbil DRN to determine whether
              extracellular 5-HT varies in the DRN over the 24-hour, light:dark cycle.  In
              addition, experiments will be conducted to determine whether a 30-minute
              presentation of high intensity light stimulation presented at different times
              of the 24-hour light:dark cycle will alter baseline, extracellular 5-HT levels,
              particularly in regions of the DRN where optic terminal occur with highest
              density.

These studies should contribute substantially advances in
              fundamental knowledge about this direct optic pathway to the serotonin system
              and facilitate a variety of future experiments to determine the effects of DRN
              stimulation on efferent target structure such as the intergeniculate leaflet,
              superior colliculus, and visual cortex, all of which receive serotonergic
              projections from DRN.


