Title       : SBIR Phase II: Integrated Reactor Scale and Topography Feature Scale Simulator
               for Plasma Enhanced Semiconductor Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0091528

Award Number: 0091528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499965             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Cole jvc@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    256/726-4800

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will provide
              a commercial software tool that integrates reactor scale, (pre)sheath
              transport, and feature scale models for comprehensive analysis of thermal
              chemical vapor deposition and low pressure plasma processes in integrated
              circuit fabrication.  Phase II will focus on development of (pre)sheath models,
              a feature scale simulation tool, a charging model, and the supporting
              infrastructure in proprietary software, called CFD-ACE+,  to integrate these
              models.  (Pre)sheath models from Phase I will be enhanced to address additional
              common plasma reactor operating conditions.  A feature scale simulator, based
              on the multi-physics models of the existing proprietary software and embedded
              in the reactor model, will be developed.  The model for surface charging will
              be integrated with the (pre)sheath and sheath models for ion transport and the
              feature scale models.  The software infrastructure will be extended to simplify
              the model definition steps common to all feature scale simulators. 

This
              tool will provide engineers in the semiconductor industry with a means to
              predict the effect of both reactor designs and process conditions on the size,
              shape, and quality of the device components they are producing.  It will extend
              the CFD-ACE+ commercial reactor scale modeling software to interface properly
              with feature scale simulators.


