Title       : Evolution, Function and Regulation of Teleost Hox Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0091101

Award Number: 0091101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria E. Prince vprince@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091101
Prince

The Hox genes set up pattern along the anteroposterior axis
              of developing metazoan embryos.  Hox cluster duplication events accompanied
              vertebrate origins and provided additional patterning information, likely
              allowing for more complex body plans to arise.  Recent work from the P.I. and
              others has established that in the teleost lineage an additional genome
              duplication event has led to significant differences between the Hox
              organization and complement of tetrapods and teleosts.  This study will focus
              on zebrafish hox genes in the anteriorly expressed paralogue group (PG) 1 as a
              paradigm to compare and contrast gene function and regulation in different
              vertebrate groups and hence to investigate Hox gene modification during
              evolution.

Preliminary studies have shown that the zebrafish PG1 hox genes
              are significantly different in terms of organization, expression, and potential
              function, from those of the tetrapod vertebrates such as mouse.  Thus,
              zebrafish hoxa1a is expressed in a completely different manner to the
              orthologous mouse Hoxa-1 gene, having a novel anterior expression domain in the
              ventral midbrain.  Furthermore, midbrain expression is shared by medaka, a
              distantly related teleost species.  This study will take a broader comparative
              approach to determine when in vertebrate evolution this anterior expression
              arose. Conversely, the zebrafish hoxb1b gene has an expression pattern
              remarkably similar to that of the non-orthologous mouse Hoxa-1 gene. 
              Preliminary experiments have established that mis-expression of PG1 genes
              causes a classic posteriorizing homeotic transformation of the hindbrain. 
              Together these data suggest the hypothesis that zebrafish hoxb1b is
              functionally equivalent to mouse Hoxa-1;  this hypothesis will be tested
              directly using a novel loss-of-function approach based on antisense morpholino
              RNAs.  A similar approach will be used to test redundancy or synergy of
              function with the duplicate gene hoxb1a.  

