Title       : SBIR Phase II: Reconfigurable and Scalable Fiber-Optic Ultra-High-Speed
               Multi-Media Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0091601

Award Number: 0091601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Behzad Moslehi bm@ifos.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Fiber Optic Sy
	      650 Vaqueros Avenue, A
	      Sunnyvale, CA  940853543    408/328-8610

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
              next generation data networks which will require terabit information handling
              capability.  Future networks must be reconfigurable, highly secure and easily
              upgraded in both bit rate and number of nodes.  The company will apply its
              extensive fiber optic expertise and its proprietary wavelength-division
              multiplexed (WDM) technology to the development of a reconfigurable high-speed
              fiber-optic backbone structure that supports the transmission of multiple data
              protocols between multiple network stations. The approach is based on the
              company's all-fiber, static and dynamic WDM network access designs which offer
              high efficiency, compactness and low cost. In Phase I a three-node,
              two-wavelength system was constructed with static access modules to demonstrate
              the feasibility of simultaneously transmitting different protocols such as ATM
              and Ethernet. Phase I formed a basis for Phase II engineering development where
              the reseacher will employ dynamic access modules and expand the network to 8
              nodes and 4 wavelengths to demonstrate network reconfigurability and
              scalability.

The market for fiber-optic networks is growing at a rate of
              over 20% per year and is expected to exceed $18 billion in 2001. 
              Multi-protocol fiber backbones have applications in commercial platforms, such
              as enterprise networks, ships, airliners, automobiles, and integrated
              manufacturing equipment.  Each optical fiber can replace hundreds of wires
              resulting in substantial drop in costs, component weight, and an increase in
              performance. The project will integrate well with the Internet-II, and SuperNet
              programs for the government-wide Next Generation Internet (NGI).

