Title       : 2001 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on Learning & Memory, Cold Srping
               Harbor, NY, April 23-20, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0091140

Award Number: 0091140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10588              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              GRODZICKER


This intense four-day international conference will address
              current studies into the biological basis of how both animals and humans learn
              and remember.  Rapid advances are being made in this field of neurobiology,
              revealing underlying mechanisms of learning and memory shared across much of
              the animal kingdom. Research into learning and memory is being carried out in
              many laboratories around the world, at many levels (molecules, cells, networks
              of cells, brain regions, as well as at the level of the whole brain), and in a
              variety of human and animal systems. Ongoing research is providing new insights
              into how the brain acquires and processes novel information, and how that newly
              acquired information is stored and retrieved in the form of memory. Repeatedly,
              scientists are finding common neurobiological themes emerging across a wide
              range of organisms; progress gained in a variety of systems, and using a
              plethora of differing techniques, is rapidly becoming integrated into a
              comprehensive view of how information acquisition and storage are handled in
              the brain.  This conference seeks to bring together both established and young
              scientists working in this broad field, and to provide a forum for integrating
              traditionally separate areas of research.  For example, scientists who study
              this problem in invertebrates such as flies and worms, using classical
              neurobiological and genetic techniques, will meet together with scientists
              working with human subjects, using non-invasive imaging techniques such as
              functional MRI.  These interactions will benefit scientists working at every
              level in this field.

