Title       : VIGRE-Department of Statistics, Iowa State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0091953

Award Number: 0091953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2278764            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Kaiser mskaiser@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean L. Isaacson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
	The VIGRE program of the Department of Statistics at Iowa State University is
              designed to benefit the statistical sciences by bringing together working
              groups consisting of undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral
              fellows, and faculty.  The structure of the program will provide students with
              the opportunity to incorporate esearch and interdisciplinary problem solving
              into their educational experience at an early stage in the process.  It will
              provide postdoctoral fellows experience and professional practice.  And, it is
              designed to increase the level of interdisciplinary research opportunities for
              faculty, both across areas of research in statistics and mathematics, and
              across boundaries of the mathematical and applied sciences.

	The core of the
              VIGRE program consists of work groups that focus on areas of statistical
              investigation and application.  Work groups exist in the areas of
              Bioinformatics, Environmental and Ecological Statistics, Engineering
              Statistics, Probability and Mathematical Statistics, Sampling Methodology, and
              Statistics in the Social Sciences.  Each work group will conduct research and
              write proposals for external funding of their activities, participate in the
              VIGRE workshop, work with others to plan undergraduate summer research
              experiences, and present research results at meetings and through publication
              outlets in both statistics and subject-oriented scientific journals.  Many
              departments at Iowa State University have supported the VIGRE concept in the
              Department of Statistics, and involvement of researchers from a broad range of
              scientific disciplines in work group activities is expected to further increase
              the historical strength of applications and methodological development in
              statistics at Iowa State.

