Title       : Spatial & Temporal Dynamics of Prion Disease in Wildlife: Responses to Changing
               Land Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0091961

Award Number: 0091961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2166687            (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Thompson Hobbs nthobbs@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7242,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Chronic wasting disease (CWD) of the deer family is a member of a group of
              infectious diseases caused by transmissible proteins called prions.  Similar
              diseases include scrapie in sheep and goats, bovine spongiform encephalopathy
              in cattle ("mad cow disease"), and Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease in humans. The
              only place in the world where these diseases are known to occur in free-ranging
              wildlife is in northeastern Colorado and southeastern Wyoming, where an
              epidemic of CWD has been ongoing in populations of mule deer and elk for at
              least two decades.  Our project will study this epidemic to better understand
              how CWD is transmitted, to develop mathematical models predicting its spread,
              and to evaluate ways to contain the disease. 

Chronic wasting disease poses
              a potentially catastrophic threat to members of the deer family throughout
              Western North America.  Expansion of the current epidemic could reduce the
              abundance and distribution of deer and elk throughout the region and, in so
              doing, could cause enduring harm to recreation-based economies of the West. 
              Moreover, although direct threats of this disease to human health have not been
              established, they have not be ruled out.  CWD is currently localized, but
              similar diseases affect animals and people worldwide.  It follows that limiting
              the spread of CWD represents a fundamentally important challenge for protecting
              the health of natural and human dominated ecosystems throughout the region,
              and, in the fullness of time, throughout the world.  

