Title       : Attitudes and Stereotypes as Socially Situated Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0091807

Award Number: 0091807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eliot R. Smith esmith@psych.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This program of research builds on the concept of "situated cognition", which
              includes the ideas that cognition evolved to direct adaptive behavior, and that
              motivation and emotion are properly considered a part of cognition. Integration
              of this novel viewpoint with the sophisticated theoretical and empirical
              knowledge of mainstream social psychology leads to two projects addressing
              different substantive areas. The projects use multiple methods, including
              computer simulations of connectionist networks, and empirical laboratory-based
              studies with human participants. One project works toward increasing
              understanding of the mental representation of attitudes and stereotypes. One
              set of studies uses computer simulations to investigate how the functional
              properties of attitudes (their role in the guidance of action) relate to their
              representational properties such as evaluative priming, a link that has not
              previously been drawn. Empirical studies with human participants will test the
              hypothesis (flowing from the situated cognition approach) that attitude
              representations link attitude objects to the self. Additional studies will test
              the hypothesis that representations of social groups emphasize not the groups'
              intrinsic qualities (such as personality traits), but rather their relationship
              to the perceiver's own in-groups. A second project is aimed at understanding
              interrelationships of individual mental representations and communication
              processes. The situated cognition perspective holds that cognition occurs not
              just in an isolated individual mind, but through social interaction and
              communication. These studies specifically address the role of language in
              implicitly communicating aspects of mental representations from one person to
              another. The broader goals of this research program are to contribute to the
              integration of the situated cognition perspective with mainstream social
              psychology, and, to enhance scientific understanding of such socially important
              phenomena as attitudes, stereotypes, interpersonal communication, and social
              influence.

