Title       : Retinoic Acid: A Link Between Body Plan and Neural Sexual Dimorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0091120

Award Number: 0091120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo Rosa-Molinar ed@hpcf.upr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1228,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Many vertebrate animals develop differences in body structure between males
              and females, known as sexual dimorphism, which traditionally is considered to
              be regulated by the hormones estrogen and testosterone.  Some recent evidence
              shows that molecular analogs of vitamin A called retinoids, including the
              metabolite retinoic acid, also play a role in many endocrine pathways. 
              Retinoic acid exerts its effects by binding to molecular receptor molecules in
              the cell nucleus.  This binding activates complex programs including
              development, cell differentiation and cell death, and is thought to control
              sequential expression of the homeobox genes which are crucial in the timing of
              patterns of development.  A central question is how amounts of retinoic acid
              are spatially and temporally controlled during development.  This project uses
              as a model a teleost fish species with prominent post-embryonic development of
              a sexual dimorphism in skeletal structure and spinal cord.  The hypotheses are
              first, that retinoic acid is differentially synthesized and catabolized in the
              spinal cord of the nervous system, and second, that the consequent gradients of
              retinoic acid establish coordinates for developmental control of genes
              producing the sex-specific pattern of particular vertebrae, spinal ganglia and
              motor neurons within the spinal cord.  Biochemical and molecular approaches are
              used to determine when, where and how two specific enzymes control the
              synthesis (retinaldehyde dehydrogenase, RALDH) and degradation (retinoic acid
              hydroxylase, CYP26) of retinoic acid, thus allowing retinoic acid to be
              manipulated to study its effects.
   Results are expected to establish for the
              first time a link between retinoic acid and sexually dimorphic post-embryonic
              development and differentiation of the body plan and nervous system.  The
              findings will have an impact beyond neuroendocrinology to developmental biology
              and physiology.  Additional impacts come from promoting the career of a young
              scientist from an underrepresented group, and training students also largely
              from underrepresented groups, in a state institution eligible for the
              Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)


