Title       : Study of Coronal Type III Solar Radio Bursts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0091887

Award Number: 0091887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-Sheng Wu ching@idsonline.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will fully assess their newly developed concept regarding the
              mechanism that generates "type III" radio emission in the solar corona. The
              main effort is to produce a detailed ray tracing analysis of the
              Bernstein-to-fast wave mode-conversion process, as well as a concrete
              demonstration of the pitch-angle scattering process of energetic electrons, the
              relation between the level of intrinsic hydromagnetic turbulence and the degree
              of pitch-angle scattering. The analysis will also consider other crucial
              observational aspects related to type III emissions such as the low-frequency
              cutoff problem and the relevance of the mechanism to type V emissions. The
              scientific objective of the research program is to investigate the radio
              emission process, particularly the type III bursts in the solar corona, in
              terms of an instability mechanism excited by a beam of energetic electrons
              propagating along the ambient magnetic field in the presence of intrinsic
              hydromagnetic waves. This mechanism involves the excitation of thermal electron
              cyclotron harmonic modes, known as the Bernstein modes in the literature. The
              excitation of these waves occurs at the expense of free energy in the electrons
              whose momentum distribution function possesses positive perpendicular slope.
              Such a feature results from the pitch-angle scattering of streaming electrons
              by low-frequency hydromagnetic turbulence, as they traverse along the open
              magnetic field line. The excited Bernstein waves are then mode-converted into
              free-space X and O modes, and observed as the fundamental and harmonic type III
              bursts. This model is very different from the standard emission mechanism for
              type III bursts, which rely on beam-generated Langmuir waves, which are
              nonlinearly converted to electromagnetic waves. There are many difficulties
              with the standard emission mechanism, especially when applied near the corona.
              The new mechanism appears to be promising with respect to many of these
              problems.
