Title       : CRIF: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0091603

Award Number: 0091603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse M. Nicholson jnicholson@fac.howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Hudrlik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Pollack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shawn M. Abernathy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Folahan O. Ayorinde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1938,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program will assist the Department of Chemistry at Howard University to acquire
              a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. This equipment will
              enhance research in a number of areas such as the following: (1) organic
              synthetic method development, (2) studies of guest-host, coordination and
              charge-transfer complexes, (3) studies of new synthetic polymers and
              surfactants, (4) studies of relaxation behavior in paramagnetic systems, and
              (5) the study of novel biomaterials. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
              spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the
              elucidation of the structure of molecules. In addition to serving the needs of
              researchers at Howard University, the instrument will also be used for
              collaborative efforts with researchers at Morgan State University in Baltimore
              MD and at George Washington University. The instrument will be made available
              for solid-state and/or high field NMR studies to as many as 4 other
              universities in the Washington DC area without these capabilities.

Howard
              University continues to be the largest of the Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities (HBCUs) that possesses a Research Level I certification. The
              Chemistry Department is one of the largest producers of African American Ph.D.s
              in Chemistry in the world. The acquisition of this instrument will insure that
              training for all of its students is up to today's academic and industrial
              standards. Students involved in the new NSF sponsored Howard University Science
              Engineering and Mathematics Program (HUSEM) will utilize the instrument as part
              of the undergraduate experience. The HUSEM program is designed to increase
              retention in undergraduate training and to increase the number of African
              American students going on to graduate training.

