Title       : SGER: Real-Time Spatio-Temporal Databases in Support of Human Motor Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0091843

Award Number: 0091843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahram Ghandeharizadeh shahram@pollux.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to investigate human motor skills and their
              representation in a spatio-temporal database management system. The challenges
              involved are multi-faceted. First, the captured data is continuous media and
              must be rendered in a timely manner in order to simulate a movement. If a
              system delivers the data at a slower rate than its pre-specified rate without
              special precautions (e.g., prefetching), the user might observe logical errors
              that result in undesirable behavior, e.g., with chop-sticks, either one or both
              sticks might fall out of place. Second, the movement of a limb -- say a hand --
              when performing the same activity is slightly different across multiple
              repetitions of that activity. The approach to the first challenge is to explore
              design and implementation of real-time spatio-temporal database management
              systems that represent an activity as a multi-level presentation. The approach
              to the second problem is to investigate "Envelope of Limits" (EoL) to capture
              the essence of a movement. In addition, this research strives to develop a
              framework that detects spatio-temporal patterns that represent hypotheses about
              the physical constraints that govern movements. The results of this project
              will advance real-time spatio-temporal databases in support of haptic devices.
              This is a high-risk research, because it spans multiple fields, with a
              potential to emerge as a new discipline. If successful, a high payoff can be
              expected, as the results will have an impact on applications in broad areas
              such as health-care, education, and entertainment. 


