Title       : Excited-State Reaction Dynamics of Bacteriochlorophyll Dimers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0091210

Award Number: 0091210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren F. Beck beck@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Beck, Warren F.
MCB-0091210

Photosynthesis is responsible for most of the
              biological energy and oxygen on this planet. The first event in photosynthesis
              is primary charge separation at the reaction center chlorophyll pair. This
              research program will employ femtosecond coherent Raman spectroscopy to study
              the excited-state vibrational motions of bacteriochlorophyll dimers. The
              experimental focus is on the pair of bacteriochlorophylls in the B820 subunit
              of the purple bacterial light-harvesting protein LH1. B820 shares many of the
              structural features of the primary electron donor P of the purple bacterial
              reaction center. The research plan is designed to test the hypothesis that
              bacteriochlorophyll dimers undergo a nearly barrierless adiabatic surface
              crossing to a charge-transfer state following excitation of the lower exciton
              state. The main idea is that certain normal modes of vibration of the
              bacteriochlorophyll monomer and possibly collective modes of the
              bacteriochlorophyll dimer serve to mix electronic charge-transfer states with
              the neutral dimer exciton states. Femtosecond coherent Raman spectroscopy will
              be conducted with impulsive pump-probe and transient grating methods to detect
              the vibrational modes that mix the neutral and charge-transfer excited states
              of the bacteriochlorophyll dimer. The Raman spectra that are obtained with the
              B820 system will be compared with those that are observed in B777, the
              monomeric species that is prepared by splitting B820 into single
              bacteriochlorophyll-polypeptide complexes. In addition, synthetic alpha and
              beta polypeptides will be used to prepare pure systems containing alpha, beta
              and beta2 hosts for bacteriochlorophyll dimers. The research program will
              address how photosynthesis involves paired chlorophyll structures. In broader
              terms the work will address the role of vibrational coherence in fast chemical
              reactions in proteins.
