Title       : GOALI: Integrated Modeling and Statistical Hierarchical Optimization for
               Improved Filmbuild and Defect Reduction of Automotive Polymeric Topcoats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0091398

Award Number: 0091398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yinlun Huang yhuang@wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herman Yee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitre F. Filev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Yinlun Huang 
Institution: Wayne State University
Proposal
              Number: 0091398

Automotive coating operations involve paint applications of
              several thin layers.  The topcoat, including basecoat and clearcoat, is most
              critical to the durability and appearance of vehicle coatings.  In operation,
              very thin defect-free topcoats should be uniformly applied, layer by layer on
              the entire vehicle surface.  In practice film uniformity is often poor and
              various defects may appear in the coatings, due to improper paint spray, drying
              and curing.  It is unclear how paint spray parameters, spray booth air
              condition, paint rheological properties, and oven radiative and convective
              parameters are related to film topology, solvent evaporation, crosslinking
              reaction and defect generation.  Process control is essentially open loop to
              coating quality; and, energy efficiency and paint material consumption are
              often higher than expected.  This research is therefore the development of a
              systematic methodology for planning and controlling paint application for such
              systems.

The main focus will be on (i) the establishment of cause/effect
              relationships between process and performance parameters, and (ii) the
              development of system optimization strategies that can determine the optimal
              settings of spray, drying and curing parameters as a function of operational
              mode.  The PI plans to develop integrated, plant wide models using various
              modeling technologies, and a two-layered hierarchical optimization strategy
              using large-scale systems theory.  The work will be done in collaboration with
              the Ford Motor Company and DuPont Automotive Company.  The experimental tests
              will be performed in their simulation labs and then a Ford plant.  The end
              product should be a systematic methodology and a computer-aided tool for
              process analysis and operation improvement that may be applicable to other than
              automotive-coating processes.

Wayne State University has the largest
              minority population among all non-HBCU's in the U.S.  This project will provide
              valuable training for some of these students with exposure to local industries
              and thus potential future professional job opportunities.

