Title       : Characterization of GC ABA Receptor Coupled to KAT1 Expressed in Xenopus Oocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0091295

Award Number: 0091295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308441             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fedora Sutton Fedora_Sutton@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1228,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Urbanization, flooding, drought and salinization of soil are diminishing
              landmass needed to supply food for an expanding world population. Together with
              contined global efforts to safeguard agricultural land for future food
              production, it is important to understand how plants function so that they can
              be bred or modified to survive the harsher environments. A critical aspect of
              plant function is ion, water and nutrient movement across membranes. This
              research focuses on receptors, ion channels, transporters and the mechanism(s)
              by which they are regulated. The Xenopus oocyte system is used for functional
              expression of plant mRNA. The source of mRNA is guard cells because they play a
              critical role in controlling water loss and gaseous exchange. V. faba is the
              experimental plant choice because research on ion channel and signal
              transduction of V. faba guard cells is extensive. The two electrode voltage
              clamp (TEVC) technique is used for the assay. Preliminary results have shown
              that oocytes injected with V. faba guard cell mRNA (GC mRNA) express a GC
              specific ABA receptor that inhibits activity of the inward rectifying K +
              channel, KAT1. This research will test the hypothesis that: ABA modulation of
              KAT1 is via an extra-cellular facing plasma membrane receptor. A cDNA clone for
              this receptor will be isolated. The identification of a GC-specific ABA
              receptor will lead to the identification of one sub-type of the ABA receptor.
              It may be possible by conservation of homology among receptors to isolate the
              other subtypes. Sequencing information from the isolated clones will allow use
              of bioinformatics to identify other proteins in the databases with related
              functions. The long-term goal of this research is to understand how ABA
              controls ion uptake during the exchange of water and carbon dioxide in
              photosynthesis. The research outlined will permit student training in molecular
              biology, electrophysiology and bioinformatics. The identified plant genes will
              provide targets for genetic modification and herbicide or chemical manipulation
              of plant function, thus allowing plants to survive in inhospitable
              environmental conditions.

