Title       : SGER: Biochemical Genomics of Rubber Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0091088

Award Number: 0091088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60791              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyung-Hwan Han hanky@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donatien P. Kamdem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:  MCB-0091088    Han and Kamdem 
Rubber (cis-1,4-polyisoprene) is
              produced in varying quantities and qualities by about 2,000 plant species. This
              isoprenoid polymer has no identified physiological function in plants, but it
              has many important industrial uses due to its elasticity, flexibility, and
              resilience. Although natural rubber is present in many species, only that from
              the tree Hevea brasiliensis is used commercially. This is due to its
              combination of high quality, high yield, and ease of harvest.  Rubber
              biosynthesis in plants presents three interesting questions: 1) Why do plants
              make this metabolically expensive polymer? 2) How is rubber synthesized? 3)
              What determines the chain length of rubber molecules? The answers to these
              questions are of keen commercial and scientific interest, but our ability to
              answer them hinges on the cloning of the rubber polymerase gene(s). Several
              groups have tried unsuccessfully to clone the gene using conventionally
              available methods.  The recent advances in genomics, however, offer a new
              opportunity.  This project uses a simple but innovative concept to clone the
              gene(s) encoding rubber polymerase. The investigators will first generate about
              1,000 EST's from a subtracted cDNA library that is enriched for latex genes.
              These will represent a catalog of the genes abundantly expressed in the
              rubber-producing tissue of H. brasiliensis. The EST's will then be compared
              with annotated public databases and will be assigned putative functional
              identifications if possible. The EST's with homology to any genes that are
              known to function in processes unrelated to the rubber biosynthetic pathway
              (i.e., the isoprenoid pathway) will be eliminated from further experiments. The
              remaining cDNA clones will be introduced into an array of yeast strains, each
              of which will then bear a plasmid expressing a latex cDNA.  Yeast already have
              all the components of the isoprenoid pathway leading to rubber biosynthesis
              except for the gene(s) encoding the rubber polymerase itself.  Ectopic
              expression of the rubber polymerase gene(s) from Hevea trees may enable the
              yeast cells to produce natural rubber. The investigators will  use two
              approaches to determine this.  In one they will directly test each transformed
              yeast strain for the ability to synthesize rubber.  If, however, yeast require
              more than one H.brasiliensis gene product for rubber biosynthesis, this
              approach will not work.  Because of that possibility, they will also prepare
              pools of extracts of the yeast strains, with each pool containing extracts from
              numerous strains.  These pools will then be assayed for in vitro rubber
              biosynthesis. The investigators will progressively narrow down any pool(s)
              showing positive results until they identify the individual strain(s)
              expressing the polymerase gene(s). This  pooling elevates yeast complementation
              to a genomic scale.

Natural rubber is an extremely important product with a
              vast range of uses. It is superior to synthetic, petroleum-based versions for
              many applications.    Unfortunately, its ready availability could be endangered
              by numerous events such as crop failure or political turmoil.   If successful,
              this novel project will provide society with an efficient and simple
              alternative:  natural rubber harvested from yeast cultures.   It will also
              enable scientists to learn more about natural polymerization and to engineer
              rubber compounds with special chemical features. 

