Title       : Star Porphyrazines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0091364

Award Number: 0091364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Hoffman bmh@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony GM Barrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Division
              of Chemistry, National Science Foundation, supports the work of Dr. Brian
              Hoffman (as the PI) of the Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University,
              and Anthony Barrett (as co-PI) of Imperial College, London UK, for their
              collaborative work on star porphyrazines (pzs). Specifically, they will (i)
              investigate multi-metallic pzs and pz multimers that will exhibit
              macrocycle-mediated spin coupling among the localized moments in the metal
              ions; (ii) examine porphyrazine assemblies and metal-linked pz ribbons that
              incorporate redox-switchable conduction and/or spin coupling; (iii) explore
              metal-porphyrazine systems as contrast agents in optical tumor imaging; (iv)
              examine charged pzs containing an active central metal ion (e.g. Fe or Mn) as
              possible catalysts for peroxynitrite decomposition; and (v) explore the
              usefulness of porphyrazines with peripheral substituents designed to bind
              redox-active metals in applications as sol-gel incorporated optical sensors
              and/or as dual opto/electrochemical metal-ion sensors.

The work supported by
              this award will have significant impact on a variety of scientific and
              technological applications. The class of compounds known as star porphyrazines
              will be highly useful as contrast agents in bio-imaging of tumors, and in such
              applications as sol-gel incorporated optical sensors and/or as dual
              opto/electrochemical metal-ion sensors. Students and post-doctoral associates
              will gain fundamental and diverse skills not only in syntheses and physical
              characterization of these compounds, but also in exploring the potential
              application of the resulting products in catalysis, bio-imaging, and sensors.

