Title       : Towards High Selectivity MFI Molecular Sieve Membranes through Microstructural
               Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0091406

Award Number: 0091406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Tsapatsis tsapatsi@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              



Proposal No.:		CTS-0091406
Proposal Type:		Investigator
              Initiated
Principal Investigators: 	Michael
              Tsapatsis	
Institution:		University of Massachusetts Amherst 


Towards
              High Selectivity Molecular Sieve Membranes through
              Microstructural
Optimization

The objective of this project is to relate the
              microstructure of polycrystalline zeolite films to membrane separation
              performance.  The project involves the study of two classes of films of the
              same zeolite (high-silica MFI) with distinctly different microstructure,
              stability and separation performance.  These films are prepared by the
              secondary growth technique.  Optical and electron microscopy are combined with
              X-ray diffraction to unravel the microstructural differences of these films at
              the nanometer level. The structural information is used to relate these
              differences to membrane properties like
selectivity and susceptibility to
              membrane cracking. Approaches for avoiding crack
formation and methods for
              selective crack sealing are being  investigated.

Zeolites and related
              molecular sieves are crystalline materials with microporous frameworks capable
              of filtering molecules at the subnanometer level. The formation of crystalline
              molecular sieve membranes enables separations of molecules with similar
              physicochemical properties that are difficult to separate by other methods. As
              a result,
efforts towards zeolite membrane preparation are receiving
              increasing attention worldwide. Recent advances have resulted in
              commercialization efforts and suggest new opportunities for applications in
              gas, liquid and vapor separations. Potential applications include separations
              of specialty chemicals, hydrocarbon isomers, and permanent gases as well as
              water/alcohol solutions by pervaporation.  In order to sustain the initial
              success of first-generation zeolite membranes, and to find uses in new
              processing strategies unattainable with the current membrane technology  (e.g.,
              isomerization membrane reactors, chiral separations, etc.), research efforts
              are required that will combine synthetic innovation with fundamental
              understanding of the synthesis-microstructure-performance
interrelationships. 
              This work emphasizes the microstructure-performance issues. Its outcome will
              contribute to the development of rational rather than trial-and-error
              strategies for the formation of high performance molecular-sieve membranes
              tailored to specific separation applications.


