Title       : SBIR Phase II: Monochromatic Micro X-ray Fluorescence Analysis Using Toroidal
               Crystal Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0091570

Award Number: 0091570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zewu Chen zchen@xos.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : X-Ray Optical Systems, Inc
	      15 Tech Valley Drive
	      East Greenbush, NY  12061    518/880-1500

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will meet the
              demand from the microelectronics industry for an improved micro x-ray
              fluorescence instrument for thin film measurements.  A new technique,
              monochromatic micro x-ray fluorescence (MMXRF) analysis using doubly
curved
              crystal optics can meet this significant market need.  A toroidal crystal can
              focus characteristic x-rays from a microfocus x-ray source based upon
              diffraction. The focused beam is monochromatic and the beam size is expected to
              be significantly smaller than that of current MXRF systems.  This technique
              will provide high sensitivity and enhance excitation of low Z elements with the
              selection of beam energy. In addition, this technique will significantly
              increase the speed of high-energy x-ray measurements.  A prototype MMXRF system
              will be developed that incorporates a modular dual beam system to probe samples
              with two energies simultaneously.

The initial application of the technology
              is in the area of semiconductor manufacturing. As semiconductor manufacturing
              moves to larger wafers and higher levels of integration, a single wafer may
              require hundreds of steps.  These wafers are expensive to produce and very
              difficult to repair.  The instrument under development would provide elemental
              and thickness analysis to identify defective thin film deposition at the
              earliest opportunity, avoiding the considerable loss associated with rejections
              at the end of the production line.


