Title       : SBIR Phase II: Smart Fiber Composite System Capable of Early Detection of
               Material Failure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a0091576

Award Number: 0091576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk C. Newton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Triton Systems Inc
	      109 East Scenic Drive
	      Pass Christian, MS  395714446    601/452-7211

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will build on
              results of Phase I research to fully demonstrate an early warning system for
              potential failure of ceramic matrix composite (CMC) materials.  In Phase I, a
              novel detection technique called Composite Failure Onset Response Test (ComFORT
              (TM)) was demonstrated for use with high temperature CMCs.  ComFORT (TM) is a
              composite failure detection technique whereby proprietary thermally stable
              electrically conductive ceramic fibers are selectively placed, together with
              regular reinforcing fibers, and are then processed into a dense ceramic
              composite. Once in place, existing hardware is used to monitor the condition
              and the health of the electrical signal, while an especially designed algorithm
              minimizes false negatives during use. As the ceramic composite begins to fail,
              the failure of the fiber reinforcement is preceded by the failure of the
              conductive coating, which is recognized through a weakening or loss of
              electrical conductivity. This novel technique lends itself to a powerful early
              warning system, whereby the conductive fiber can be designed to fail before
              catastrophic failure of the composite itself. Proper placement of these
              conductive fibers enables tracking of even minute levels of breach within the
              composite. Moreover, through a novel design, it may be possible to extend the
              performance to detect matrix cracking. The lack of reliability and little to no
              warning before catastrophic failure has prevented a more widespread use of
              CMC's. The smart fiber system to be developed in this project will allow the
              use of CMC's in more demanding applications with greater certainty of
              success.
 
The successful commercialization of the proposed technology will
              lead to the insertion of continuous fiber reinforced composites into power
              generation, energy, air, space and missile applications, where high
              temperature, lightweight, and mechanically reliable materials are needed, and
              the cost of part failures is high. Ceramic composites can be used in a larger
              number of these applications, if part reliability can be assured. Substantial
              benefits in operating efficiency of gas turbine, automotive and rocket systems
              can be realized with increased operating temperatures. 

