Title       : Ca2+ Regulation of Phototrasduction in Retinal Cone Photoreceptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0091271

Award Number: 0091271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84387              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatiana Rebrik trebrik@phy.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Rod and cone photoreceptors in the vertebrate retina provide the organism with
              two complementary signaling cells that support the full behavioral range of the
              visual system.  In general, the response of rods defines night vision: the
              cells are slow in their response to light, extremely sensitive and adapt over a
              restricted range of intensities.  Cones, in contrast, are faster in response,
              less sensitive to light and adapt over a much wider range of intensities: they
              serve day vision.  The long-term objective of this research is to understand
              the molecular mechanisms that explain transduction in retinal photoreceptors
              and to understand the functional differences between rods and
              cones.
Phototransduction arises from the activation of a linear sequence of
              enzymatic reactions, whose end-point is the lowering of cytoplasmic cGMP and
              closure of cGMP-gated ion channels.  In parallel with the changes in cGMP,
              cytoplasmic Ca2+ is also lowered.  This Ca2+ change imposes regulation of the
              enzyme cascade and, therefore, controls the features of transduction: its
              speed, sensitivity and adaptation.  Some of the functional differences between
              rods and cones, we now know, arise from differences in the light-dependent
              changes in Ca2+.  The specific aim of the research proposed here is to
              investigate the features of Ca2+ modulation of the transduction cascade in
              cones, a process expected to differ from that in rods and about which very
              little is known.
The results of this research will answer fundamental question
              on the molecular events that underlie the normal function of retinal
              photoreceptors.  The research, however, also has a potential clinical impact:
              cones and rods are the principal cells to degenerate and die in a host of human
              retinal degenerative diseases, some genetic (i.e. retinitis pigmentosa) some
              not (i.e macular degeneneration).  It now is know that this is a collective of
              molecular diseases, each generally associated with a defect in one of the many
              enzymes in the transduction cascade.  Further investigation and discoveries on
              the function of these enzymes will help answer the riddle of retinal
              degenerations.
The research will support, in part, graduate student
              traineeships.  An identified candidate at this time is a woman graduate
              student.  Also, UCSF, hosts a number of summer training programs aimed
              specifically at increasing access of under-represented minorities and women in
              basic biomedical sciences.  This research program will be among those that
              available to this pool of graduate students.


