Title       : Adenosine Deaminase-Related Growth Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0091348

Award Number: 0091348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Bryant pjbryant@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5930,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091348
Bryant

This project concerns a novel family of polypeptide growth
              factors (Adenosine Deaminase-related Growth Factors or ADGFs) recently
              discovered as a component of conditioned medium from insect cells, and as
              products of the larval salivary gland in several insects.  They show strong
              sequence similarity to the enzyme Adenosine Deaminase and are predicted to be
              secreted, but have several alterations leading to the prediction that they may
              not be deaminases but have a different catalytic or non-catalytic function.  A
              human family member has been implicated in the genetic disease Cat-Eye
              Syndrome.  We have identified five members of the family in Drosophila by
              genomic and cDNA sequence analysis, and shown that one of them, ADGF-A, which
              is strongly expressed in the embryonic mesoderm, promotes progression through
              the S phase of the cell cycle in imaginal disc cells.  ADGF-A is expressed
              throughout development, and data in the literature suggest that the main source
              may be the salivary gland.  Other family members are also expressed at most
              developmental stages, but more weakly than ADGF-A.  We will complete our
              analysis of the expression patterns of these genes in vivo, test whether their
              expression is regulated by nutrition, and determine whether any Drosophila cell
              lines produce ADGFs during medium conditioning.  The mode of action of the
              ADGFs will be investigated using cultured imaginal disc cells, including tests
              for binding to candidate cell-surface receptors, identification of the signal
              transduction pathways that are activated, and an investigation of how
              cell-cycle parameters are controlled by these and other growth factors.  The
              possible catalytic activity of these proteins on adenosine will be tested
              biochemically, and a collaborative study will be launched to analyze the
              three-dimensional structure of ADGF-A.  The project will contribute to our
              basic understanding of growth regulation, and to the underlying mechanisms
              leading to human genetic disease.




