Title       : Divide and Conquer: How Perceived Reference Axes Help Maintain Memory for
               Locations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0091757

Award Number: 0091757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303698             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Spencer john-spencer@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              To interact successfully in the environment, people must remember the locations
              of important objects accurately enough to find these objects when they are no
              longer in view.  Otherwise, keys, shoes, and hats would be lost forever in the
              clutter of the typical home or office.  The majority of research investigating
              the characteristics of location memory has focused on WHAT people represent in
              memory.  For instance, do people represent that a set of keys is two inches to
              the left of a computer, or do they represent that the keys are one arms-length
              away?  Although what is represented is a fundamental question, this research
              will examine a different, but equally important question:  HOW do people
              maintain location information in memory?  This question is timely because
              recent studies with non-human primates have identified several brain regions
              that contribute to the maintenance of location information in memory.  Thus,
              there is a growing understanding of how the brain keeps location information
              active in memory.  Nevertheless, few studies with humans have interfaced with
              this emerging knowledge base.  This research will establish a link between
              behavioral studies of how humans remember locations and the literature on brain
              function.  Central to this research is how people use perceptual cues from
              second-to-second to help maintain information in memory.  Evidence from a
              variety of studies suggests that people rely on visible reference axes, e.g.,
              the edges of a table, the edges of a computer screen, to help them remember the
              locations of target objects.  Use of such perceptual cues can help keep
              remembered information in the right ballpark (the keys are near the left edge
              of the table and not over by the computer).  Nevertheless, there is a cost, in
              that memory is systematically distorted near reference axes.  Specifically,
              when people are asked to reproduce the location of a hidden object, they
              exaggerate the distance between the reference axis and the actual location of
              the object.  These memory errors are particularly informative because they
              increase in magnitude as memory delays increase.  Thus, errors away from
              reference axes provide a window into the second-to-second processes that serve
              to maintain location information in memory.  This research will test a
              mathematical model of these maintenance processes, a model that specifies how a
              network of neurons can give rise to the types of memory errors humans make. 
              Nine experiments will test this model of how location memory works. The first
              five experiments will test specific predictions of the model.  These
              experiments will establish whether people make the particular types of memory
              errors predicted by the model, and whether these errors do, in fact, result
              from the use of reference axes.  The final four experiments will examine the
              generality of the model to novel situations.  For instance, do adults make the
              same types of memory errors when they are forced to attend to non-target
              locations during a memory delay?  When completed, this project will provide the
              first formal model of the processes that maintain location information in
              memory over short-term delays.  This model and the associated empirical data
              may have broad implications.  For instance, the model will provide insights
              into what cues most effectively maintain information in memory. This could lead
              to an informed re-structuring of the environment for people who have difficulty
              maintaining information in working memory, such as elderly participants and
              patients suffering from Alzheimer's Disease.  The model could also predict what
              patterns of error are most likely when people are unskilled (e.g., early in
              development), and what processes might be most severely disrupted under
              conditions of stress or strain (e.g., sleep deprivation, impaired visual
              processing, brain injury).
