Title       : VIGRE at UT-Austin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0091946

Award Number: 0091946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3897047            (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Saltman saltman@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan W. Reid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Tinsley Oden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis A. Caffarelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thaleia Zariphopoulou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Saltman
This VIGRE project showcases a rapidly expanding commitment
              by the Department of Mathematics to foster multidisciplinary education and
              research activities, as a natural part of our dedication to excellence in
              mathematics. This commitment is behind the ever increasing partnership between
              the Department of Mathematics of the University of Texas at Austin (UT) and the
              Texas Institute for Computational and Applied Mathematics (TICAM), an
              independent unit with participation from a large number of engineering and
              science departments.  The VIGRE project's central goal is to improve the
              quality of training that future mathematical scientists, from undergraduate
              mathematics majors to postdoctoral researchers, experience at UT. In keeping
              with the department's commitment, many of the UT VIGRE activities have a
              pronounced multidisciplinary flavor. By placing greater emphasis on how
              mathematics interacts with the larger intellectual, scientific, and public
              communities, we hope not only to provide aspiring mathematical scientists with
              a firm grounding in the subject's core, as we have always done, but also to
              give them a glimpse of (and better prepare them for) the multitude of career
              opportunities that now present themselves to members of the work force
              commanding highly developed mathematical skills. With the aid of VIGRE funding,
              the department will stimulate the formation of a local educational landscape in
              which activities that successfully exploit the combined talents of
              undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty
              members are striking features.  Running the gamut from new courses and seminars
              to research experiences, the program will aggressively promote increased
              cooperation on the UT campus between mathematics and other disciplines. 
UT is
              a comprehensive research institution whose charter contains the explicit
              constitutional mandate to be "a university of the first class." Superimposed
              upon that mandate is UT's stated mission of serving all the citizens of an
              enormous state with an extremely diverse population. In its continuing endeavor
              to contribute to this mission, the Department of Mathematics has assembled a
              world-class team of scholars and teachers. To a large extent, this faculty
              represent in their research interests the traditional core areas of
              mathematics, where the strength of the department has historically resided. On
              the other hand, recent faculty appointments reflect our decision to dedicate a
              significant portion of the department's resources to the interdisciplinary side
              of mathematics.  Developments in this direction received a major boost from the
              creation of TICAM, in whose operation the department is deeply involved. But
              the department's commitment to interdisciplinary mathematics goes beyond the
              founding strengths of TICAM, to embrace financial mathematics, computational
              and mathematical biology.
Training of students, both graduate and
              undergraduate, are the focal points of this VIGRE project.  The framework in
              which such training takes place should be a set of programs geared to move
              students as effectively as possible toward their degrees.  A prime objective of
              the UT VIGRE Graduate Traineeship component is to lower our average time to the
              doctorate to five years. Given the high quality of our recent students, we
              believe that we can achieve this end by the obvious means; namely, by freeing
              more of our Ph.D. students from hour-consuming teaching duties. At the same
              time-and it requires a delicate balancing act to get the desired results here
              without upsetting the five-year-to-the-Ph.D. applecart-we have engineered
              certain VIGRE activities to increase opportunities for graduate students to
              explore realms of the mathematical sciences that extend well beyond their areas
              of specialization. Some of the specific activities that will be initiated to
              add scientific and professional value to the UT graduate experience of VIGRE
              trainees are the following: participation in a "junior" research seminar, where
              graduate students, undergraduates, and postdocs will give presentations under
              the supervision of a senior faculty member; participation in a
              multidisciplinary research proseminar directed at first-year graduate students
              that will provide them with an informal overview of the variety of mathematical
              research that is being done locally by faculty, postdocs, and advanced graduate
              students; serving as the member of a vertically integrated team supervising an
              individual VIGRE undergraduate research project;  serving as a "facilitator" in
              the VIGRE summer REU program, in which our sister schools in the UT system have
              been invited to participate; involvement in a VIGRE computational finance
              research program (which will also have undergraduate and postdoctoral
              components).
The department's baccalaureate degree programs have in great
              measure been shaped by the dictates of the educational agenda at a major state
              university (e.g., we are expected to train a large number of mathematics
              teachers for Texas's elementary and secondary schools).  We now have in place a
              strong core curriculum designed to give our majors a command of mathematics at
              a level that allows them either to pursue graduate degrees in the mathematical
              sciences or to secure mathematics related employment. VIGRE funding will enable
              us to enrich and enliven the undergraduate experience with research
              opportunities of various types: wide scale involvement in individual research
              projects; participation in research-oriented seminars, including a new
              multidisciplinary research proseminar that will be a clearing house for
              undergraduate research projects; participation in the multidisciplinary summer
              REU program cited in the previous paragraph; improved access to the Dean's
              Scholars Program, a nationally recognized interdisciplinary honors program in
              the College of Natural Sciences. Each of these activities will be encased in a
              vertically integrated structure. The VIGRE summer REU programs, in particular,
              are geared to expand the mathematical horizons of students. The topics slated
              to  be treated in these programs over the life of the award are: wavelets and
              signal processing, mathematical biology, mathematical finance, computational
              number theory and cryptography.
Although UT is presently one of the largest
              universities in the country, the size of the department's tenured or
              tenure-track faculty is quite modest, numbering fifty-two in Fall 2000. The UT
              Administration, not wishing to see the research activity of a small but
              distinguished faculty totally overwhelmed by instructional duties, compensates
              for this disproportion in size by giving the department a generous supply of
              postdoctoral positions. Each year our faculty includes roughly two dozen new or
              very recent Ph.D. recipients who are appointed to Postdoctoral Instructorships
              or Research Lectureships, with teaching loads the same as those of regular
              faculty members (i.e., at most two classes per semester). Most of the postdocs
              who have held these positions over the years have departed from UT with
              well-established research programs and highly developed teaching skills.
              Through the use of VIGRE funds, we will improve the UT postdoctoral experience
              by decreasing teaching loads for selected instructors, thereby releasing more
              time for them to devote to research, and by creating opportunities for all
              postdocs to participate in a rich array of vertically integrated professional
              development activities.  For example, virtually all of the graduate and
              undergraduate VIGRE activities indicated earlier will find VIGRE postdocs
              involved in an integral way.
Our goal, and the goal of this VIGRE project, is
              to help our postdocs, as well as graduate and undergraduate students, grow
              intellectually and mathematically in a way that allows them to take advantage
              of a mathematical world enriched and energized by its connections to the larger
              world of science, engineering, and society. 



