Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Plant Peroxisomal Biogenesis: Sorting/Function of Membrane
               Proteins and Peroxins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0091826

Award Number: 0091826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Trelease TRELEASE.DICK@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


Title: "Arabidopsis 2010: Plant Peroxisomal Biogenesis - Sorting/Function
              of Membrane Proteins and Peroxins". 

Peroxisomes are ubiquitous subcellular
              organelles that possess a diverse array of enzymes and other protein contents
              that vary with developmental stage, and in response to environmental cues. The
              overall goal of this project is to identify Arabidopsis genes coding for
              peroxisomal membrane proteins (PMPs) involved in the biogenesis and functioning
              of peroxisomes, and then determine the specific function of the gene products.
              "Peroxin" genes code for a set of proteins (peroxins) that participate
              specifically in peroxisomal biogenesis (organelle replication and
              differentiation). Most peroxins are PMPs. To date, 15 Arabidopsis orthologs of
              23 eukaryotic peroxin genes have been identified, but a function has been
              determined for only 4 of these 15 orthologs. Public access to this information
              will be available at (<A
              HREF="http://lsweb.la.asu.edu/rtrelease">http://lsweb.la.asu.edu/rtreleaseq</A>). The function(s) of these PMPs will be determined experimentally through a multi-pronged approach, i.e., elucidation of their subcellular  localization, intracellular sorting pathways, and molecular sorting signals in suspension cells from wild type and mutant plants, and developmentally through interactions of RNAs with increasingly available ESTs on microarrays. Also, phenotypic and functional complementation results obtained with available T-DNA knockouts will be examined. Experimental results will be presented by students and postdoctoral persons attending local and national meetings, and will be published in refereed journal articles. The research is expected to elucidate the function of at least 10 genes related to the biogenesis and functioning of peroxisomes in Arabidopsis; this is consistent with the Objectives of the 2010 Project. Since peroxisomal mutations are lethal in humans, and peroxisomes are essential for seedling establishment and photo-autotrophic growth of oilseed and other crop plants, the knowledge obtained for functions of Arabidopsis peroxisomal genes can and very likely will be applied to biotechnological improvements of agriculturally-important crop plants, and to possibly speed therapeutic resolution of peroxisomal biogenetic diseases in human infants.




