Title       : Chemical Dynamics of NO Hemoglobin Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a0091228

Award Number: 0091228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Singel rchds@gemini.oscs.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Singel
MCB 0091228

The discovery by Furchgott of an endothelium-derived
              relaxing factor (EDRF) and its
subsequent identification with NO raise an
              intriguing problem: in regulating vascular tension
and blood flow, how does NO
              avoid being hoarded or destroyed by well-known reactions with
hemoglobin (Hb)
              to form Hb-heme-iron(II) nitrosyl complexes or nitrate? The recent
discovery,
              by Stamler and co-workers, of an S-nitrosylated derivative of hemoglobin
              (SNO-Hb)
in vivo, and the ongoing elucidation of its biological activities,
              suggest a means to
evade both such fates. Evidently, the previously
              unsuspected NO/Hb reaction channel - S-nitrosylation
- can effectively compete
              with the Hb-Fe(II)-NO and nitrate forming reactions.
Moreover, these studies
              suggest a dynamical cycle in which the NO-group is alternatively
              largely
sequestered (Hb-Fe(II)-NO) or made available for delivery (Hb-SNO), in
              response to the cyclic
variation in oxygen tension during the arterial/venous
              transit. The implicated iron-to-sulfur NO-group
transfer chemistry appears to
              be linked to the cooperative oxygen delivery function of
Hb. The broad aim of
              this project is to generate experimental results that test these ideas,
              and
provide critical observations for further development of the model.

A
              direct competition (competitive kinetics) method recently introduced by Gow et
              al.
will be utilized to characterize the relative rates of the reactions that
              occur upon exposure of
oxygenated Hb to NO and its congeners. The experiments
              are designed to detect the dependence
of the relative kinetic behavior on the
              oxygen-saturation of Hb, and to probe the link between
this behavior and the
              allosteric state of Hb. The reaction competition is assessed by detection
              of
the heme-iron(II) nitrosyl-Hb, SNO-Hb, Fe(III)-metHb, and nitrate products
              through EPR
(electron paramagnetic resonance) spectroscopy, UV/VIS
              spectroscopy, and chemiluminescence
techniques. The chemical behavior will be
              characterized over a range of conditions -temperature,
pH, CO2 tension,
              organic phosphate concentration - that: 1) focus on the standard
physiological
              conditions relevant to testing the biological significance of the NO/Hb
              chemical
pathways; but also 2) embrace non-physiological conditions that have
              assumed a standard role in
studies of Hb allostery.

Experiments designed to
              demonstrate that iron(II)-nitrosyl complexes in Hb can serve as
a labile,
              accessible reservoir, rather than a sink of NO-groups (alpha-heme-iron(II)
              nitrosyls) will
also be undertaken. EPR and chemiluminescence methods will be
              utilized to monitor the
migration of the NO-group during variation of
              hemoglobin ligation state (oxy, deoxy, met). This
reactive behavior will also
              be studied under conditions of physiological significance and under
conditions
              known to affect the allosteric behavior of Hb.
