Title       : Ethylene and Pathogen Infection Responses in Tomato and Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0091064

Award Number: 0091064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry J. Klee hjklee@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The interactions of plants and disease-causing pathogens generally fall into
              two types: compatible and incompatible. Incompatibility leads to resistance
              while compatibility leads to disease. In the absence of a resistant response,
              disease symptoms can spread, leading to severe damage or death of the plant.
              Analysis of mutants unable to synthesize ethylene, salicylic acid (SA) or
              jasmonic acid (JA), defined a multistage sequence of disease symptom
              development during a compatible tomato:pathogen interaction. Synthesis of all
              three phytohormones is essential for complete symptom development. The spread
              of disease is associated with an ethylene-dependent accumulation of SA. The
              position of JA within this cascade of events has yet to be determined. We
              intend to elucidate how these three hormones control symptom development.
              Experiments will define at a molecular genetic level the roles of ethylene, SA
              and JA in symptom development in tomato. Through a combination of hormone
              quantitation and add-backs, the order of action of the three hormones relative
              to one another will be determined. Microarray analyses will be performed to
              identify components of the progression from infection to cell death. These
              experiments will be complemented by work involving Arabidopsis:Xanthomonas
              interactions. In Arabidopsis, there is differential attenuation of disease
              symptoms with ethylene insensitive mutants in the various hormone receptors.
              This result suggests distinct functions for the five ethylene receptors.
              Molecular and genetic approaches will be used to define the differential
              responses. These experiments have the potential to identify unique functions
              for what has heretofore been considered a redundant receptor family.

