Title       : Chemo-Hydrodynamic Signal Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0091358

Award Number: 0091358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jelle Atema atema@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rainer Voigt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Odor plumes are generated by turbulent mixing of odor from a source of release
              with "clean" air or water. The result is a series of "flavored" eddies
              intermingled with non-flavored eddies. The spatial distribution of these
              flavored eddies contains a statistically reliable gradient of information that
              animals may use to locate distant odor sources. Therefore, they need sensors
              whose filtering capabilities enhance those signal parameters that provide the
              best spatial gradients. Both chemical and hydrodynamic dispersal patterns must
              be considered.

Previous NSF funding supported experiments from which it was
              determined that for chemical gradients the concentration slopes of odor patches
              provide good directional information. Neither the equivalent hydrodynamic
              information nor to which degree these two signal features are actually used by
              animals and under which circumstances are known. The primary sensory processes
              of chemo-hydrodynamic signal detection will be studied. The lobster and its
              well-studied lateral antennule will be used as the model of choice for linking
              primary sensory information in both modalities.

Electrophysiological
              recording of action potentials from the antennular nerve, which carries
              chemical and mechanical information to the brain, will be used.  The excised
              antennule will be exposed to independently controlled chemical and hydrodynamic
              stimuli with high-resolution measurement of both. The chemical response
              properties of the antennule are relatively well known. Its hydrodynamic
              responsiveness now will be determined and the possibility of peripheral
              bi-modal signal processing will be explored. Any form of bi-modal
              chemo-hydrodynamic interaction would have consequences for the detection of
              "flavored eddies". Invertebrates often appear to have hard-wired sensory
              filters in their peripheral sensory systems.

The results of this work may
              find application in the design of sensors and algorithms for automated odor
              plume tracing in such tasks as detection and localization of sources of
              chemical pollution, both under water and in air.

