Title       : Intracellular Signaling During Midline Guidance in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0091478

Award Number: 0091478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark VanBerkum mvanberk@biology.biosci.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0091478

During development, neurons extend axons along very specific pathways
              to their target cells.  Steering decisions are made as surface receptors at the
              tip of the axon (the growth cone) detect molecular guidance cues and convert
              them into intracellular signals that regulate growth cone movement.  The
              long-term goal of this work is to understand how intracellular signaling
              pathways orchestrate the motile response underlying guidance decisions.  The
              development of the embryonic nerve cord of Drosophila provides a unique
              opportunity to identify these intracellular signaling pathways.  The
              ladder-like axon scaffold of the fly embryo is formed as axons decipher
              attractive and repulsive cues that dictate which axons may cross the midline. 
              Several of the genes involved in this decision have been identified including
              three key intracellular signaling molecules: Calmodulin, Son-of-Sevenless (Sos)
              and Profilin.  Interestingly, each of these molecules regulates key aspects of
              actin and myosin dynamics underlying motility.  Thus it is hypothesized that a
              growth cone's response to midline guidance cues is tightly linked to its
              ability to regulate actin and myosin dynamics.  To test this hypothesis, Dr.
              Van Berkum will define the role of downstream targets of both Calmodulin and 
              Sos which may regulate actin and/or myosin processes during a midline guidance
              decision.  Specifically, Dr. Van Berkums's work will focus on Myosin Light
              Chain Kinase, a target of Calmodulin, and three monomeric GTPases (Rac, Rho and
              Cdc42) known to function downstream of Sos.  To investigate the role of
              Profilin, each of the three functional domains of Profilin will be neutralized
              by selected point mutations in order to determine which domain of Profilin is
              required to cross talk with Calmodulin dependent processes during axon
              guidance.  In all cases, proteins are expressed in the developing embryo and
              midline guidance choices assayed by antibody staining.  Given the essential
              role of Profilin, Sos and CaM as regulators of actin and myosin dynamics, this
              work will provide insight into how axon pathways, and thus nerve connections,
              are formed.  Similar mechanisms will undoubtedly be used to regulate cell
              motility and/or contraction in a variety of other cell types. 

