Title       : SGER: Exploratory Research on Manufacturing of Advanced 3-D Micro-Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0091939

Award Number: 0091939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick F. Ling fredling@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Bryant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,1468,9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This exploratory research grant provides the support for studies, with respect
              to fundamental facets as well as practical facets, of manufacturing processes
              of three-dimensional components in the micro-scale.  Moreover, the study will
              include factors required to have components, so fabricated, to work together as
              three-dimensional micro-actuators.  Letting  a length-measure to represent the
              size of component, it is known that the volume of the component is proportional
              to the cube of the length-measure, and the surface of the component is
              proportional to the square of the length-measure.  Given this fact, as one move
              from the much better understood macro world of manufacturing  to the relatively
              unknown world of manufacturing in the micro world, surface dictated behavior as
              a part of the component would be much more important than the volume dictated
              behavior of the component.  As such this research will place special emphasis
              on surfaces along with the material whose surfaces are be studied.  As these
              components are expected to work together reliably when assembled to form
              actuators, materials as a factor also looms large  in the studies.  Other
              factor to be studied are method of measurement, handling, storage, among
              others, of micro-scale components. 

If successful, the results of this
              exploratory research will improve the fundamental understanding of processes of
              manufacturing three-dimensional components in the micro-scale as well as
              factors which need to be taken into account when these components are assembled
              to form micro-actuators.  A dominant factors in the fundamental understanding,
              which will be the bases for successful application, is reliability.  The hope
              is that the aforementioned knowledge will lead to requisite methodologies for
              manufacturing in the micro-scale, especially in the truly three-dimensional
              world.  

