Title       : Risk-Based Decision-Making in Water Resources IX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0091627

Award Number: 0091627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yacov Y. Haimes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Haimes
0091627

The proposed ninth Engineering Foundation Conference on
              risk-based decision-making represents the natural growth of the field and the
              culmination of the theory, methodology, and applications in risk assessment and
              management of water resources and natural and man-made hazards.  The most
              striking observations is that the objection and goals set forth for the first
              conference in September 1980 in Asilomar, California, and the issues raised in
              the preface of the 1980 proceedings are as relevant and as timely today as they
              were then.

Our past conferences continued to reinforce the Socratic culture
              that has evolved over the last decade-and-a-half in these meetings.  Although
              some of the papers covered topics presented previously, the discussions were
              more substantive and in greater depth.  Methodologies were more closely related
              to theory, and at the same time the relevance of their applications to emerging
              natural and man-made hazards became stronger and more convincing.  Such topics
              as uncertainties in data, models, and forecasts and their influence oin risk
              analysis have, in some sense, an eternal life of their own; yet, the level of
              discussion epitomized the growth and maturity in the field.

The eighth
              (last) Engineering Foundation Conference on Risk-Based Decision-Making, held
              October 12-17, 1997 in Santa Barbara, California, augmented the technical
              discussion with policy issues and the implications of recent legislation
              initiatives in risk assessment.  This conference attempted to address the
              connectedness among emerging trends and ideas as the management of our
              environment, physical infrastructure, response to possible climate change, the
              desire to embrace the concept of sustainable development  in its broader sense,
              and the explosion of communications opportunities and their impact on informed
              decision making.

