Title       : Indirect Genetic Effects of Parental Care Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0309532

Award Number: 0309532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia M. Rauter crauter@mail.unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2286

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1174,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Indirect Genetic Effects of Parental Care Behavior

Claudia M. Rauter and
              Charles W. Fox

Numerous studies have shown that parental care can affect
              expression of traits in offspring. From the point of view of offspring,
              parental care is an environmental factor like food or air temperature. For the
              parents, however, parental care is a trait like any other trait; it is
              determined by parental genes and the environment to which the parent is
              exposed. Through their effects on the offspring environment, both parental
              genes and the parental environment can affect offspring traits such as growth
              and developmental time. These effects of parental genes and environment on
              trait expression in offspring are called indirect genetic effects and indirect
              environmental effects, respectively. The indirect genetic effects are of
              special interest, because they can influence rate and direction of response of
              traits to natural selection.
This study will investigate how parental care
              affects trait evolution. The specific objectives are to 1) determine the amount
              of variation in progeny traits that is due to indirect genetic effects in an
              insect species with parental care, 2) investigate whether the influence of
              indirect genetic effects depends on the developmental stage in which the trait
              is expressed as has been observed in many mammals, and 3) examine the relative
              influence of indirect genetic effects in individuals reared with and without
              parental care.
The results of this research will significantly increase our
              understanding of trait evolution in animals with parental care. The comparison
              between an insect with parental care with mammals and birds will give us
              insights about the generality of the evolutionary models including parental
              effects. These models have been developed primarily based on observations in
              domesticated mammals. The comparison of parental effects in animals reared with
              and without parental care will provide invaluable information about how
              parental care affects trait evolution.

