Title       : US-Japan Workshop on Tools and Metrology in Nanotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0309262

Award Number: 0309262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Tiwari st222@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN) and Cornell University propose
              to organize an international symposium of leading scientists and engineers in
              the field of nanotechnology from US and Japan. The meeting will be held at
              Cornell University in Jan. 2003. Operating in a workshop environment, key
              issues in the development of tools and metrology for nanotechnology will be
              explored in an interdisciplinary environment that will be guided by the major
              research successes of this field.

Many interesting new nanoscale phenomena
              have been discovered in recent years, with significant promise for impact on
              society. This promise has lead to increased funding for
nanotechnology
              including the National Nanotechnology Initiative here in the US. However, the
              transition from a discovery to a practical or even potentially practical device
              or process is a long one. Appropriate tools and methods are critical to this
              transition. This includes tools for fabrication, visualization, and
              characterization, as well as methods and standards to assure repeatability and
              accuracy of fabrication and analysis. Few of these tools and methods exist
              today.

Research Impact
The field of nanotechnology is unique among the
              scientific frontiers in its breadth and its extensive interdisciplinary
              content. This symposium will bring together leaders in the varied fields to
              explore common phenomena, common requirements, and common techniques with the
              intent of expanding innovation in nanotechnology tools and methods.

Broader
              Impact of Program:
While primarily intended to explore the development of
              tools and techniques for nanotechnology, a significant component will be to
              increase interaction and collaboration between scientists and engineers in the
              US and Japan. Scientists from Japan and the United States are among the
              research leaders in the field of nanotechnology. Similarly, both countries lead
              the world in the development of instrumentation for fabrication and
              characterization at all scales. There is thus much potential for the
              development of new tools and new methodologies to be gained by an international
              interdisciplinary workshop in this area.

Tremendous developments in
              nanotechnology have occurred in both the US and Japan in the last 5 years. This
              workshop is an opportunity to share some of those developments and to explore
              the subsequent requirements for improved tools and metrology in
              nanotechnology.

