Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Experimental Investigations of the Role of Mycorrhizal
               Fungi in Woody Plant Encroachment in Califorina Grasslands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0309152

Award Number: 0309152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne P. Sousa wpsousa@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. Bruns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Experimental Investigations of the Role of
              Mycorrhizal Fungi in Woody Plant Encroachment in California
              Grasslands
Sousa
DEB-0309152

A growing number of studies suggest that
              mycorrhizal fungi may play an important role in determining plant
              distributions, and the forest-grassland ecotone is a model system to
              investigate this question. This research investigates the role of mycorrhizal
              fungi in woody plant encroachment into California grasslands.  It examines how
              mycorrhizal assemblages change across the forest-grassland ecotone and the
              mechanism by which these fungi facilitate woody plant encroachment.  The P.I.
              will use a combination of manipulative field and greenhouse experiments as well
              as molecular techniques to assess the importance of mycorrhizal fungi in woody
              plant encroachment.  The use of molecular techniques along with field-based
              manipulative experiments will provide a unique opportunity to experimentally
              determine the importance of mycorrhizal fungi.  This research will make a
              significant contribution towards our current understanding of the factors
              affecting plant distributions and the growing literature of forest-grassland
              ecotone dynamics.  Woody plant encroachment is a widespread phenomenon that has
              considerable concerns for rangeland management.  By examining a potentially key
              factor affecting woody plant establishment, this research on mycorrhizal fungi
              will make an important contribution to effective management strategies.

