Title       : WORKSHOP: Technological Challenges for Flexible, Light-weight, Low-cost and
               Scalable Organic Electronics and Photonics being held in Arlington, VA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0309192

Award Number: 0309192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ananth Dodabalapur ananth@mer.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The field of organic and polymeric electronics and photonics has progressed
              enormously in recent years as a result of worldwide activity in numerous
              research groups. Advances have been made both in the fields of devices and
              applications as well as in the underlying chemistry, physics, and materials
              science issues. The impact of this field will also influence many adjacent
              disciplines such as nanotechnology, sensors, and photonics.

The growth of
              the field has been impressive. The first commercial products were based on
              photo-conductive films, a business now with annual sales in the multi-billion
              dollar range. Light emitting diodes (LEDs) and displays based on light emitting
              diodes have been introduced to the market and a large expansion in market
              penetration has been forecast in the next decade. Efficiencies of organic and
              polymeric LEDs have reached figures close to theoretical maxima. Thin-film
              transistor based circuits and systems incorporating several hundred devices in
              flexible substrates have been demonstrated. These levels of integration are
              sufficient for application such as radio frequency identification tags. 
              

Transistors have also been successfully integrated with display elements
              such as PDLCs and electrophoretic cells and used as chemical sensors.
              Photodiodes have been fabricated with quantum efficiencies in excess of 70% and
              solar cells with power conversion efficiencies more than 3% have been reported.
              Solar cell efficiencies are expected to increase with improvements in materials
              design. There have been major strides made in understanding the physics of
              charge transport and luminescence and in understanding interfaces between
              organic materials and also between metals and organics. There continue to be
              advances made in the synthesis of new compounds and in improved synthetic
              procedures of important materials. Another area that has seen a lot of growth
              is the use of novel low-cost fabrication procedures such as in the realization
              of a variety of organic devices.

Despite this impressive set of advances, it
              is clear that more research needs to be done.  The chief objective of the
              workshop is to help define the future of the field. This will be done by having
              a series of experts give talks on key subjects and also by encouraging debate
              and discussion amongst all participants in a series of panels. The proceedings
              of the workshop will be a set of reports and discussion summaries by group
              leaders.

The workshop will also have an impact on graduate education. A
              large number of universities offer courses in the general area of organic
              semiconductors, and the workshop will help define directions in this area as
              well as in retraining high technology workers for careers in the organic
              semiconductor field.

