Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Lithic Raw Material Exploitation Patterns in the
               Wadi al-Hasa, West-Central Jordan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0309247

Award Number: 0309247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold L. Dibble hdibble@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Harold Dibble and Dr. Deborah Olszewski, Ms. Maire
              Crowley will collect data for her doctoral dissertation on lithic raw material
              exploitation patterns in the Wadi al?Hasa, Jordan.  She will analyze lithic
              assemblages from seven sites which span a time range from the Middle/Upper
              Paleolithic transition through to the Neolithic, and conduct a survey of chert
              bearing formations which will expand (both in detail and areas covered) a
              survey conducted in 2000 by the Eastern al?Hasa Late Pleistocene
              Project.

There are two principal models which dominate interpretations of
              Late Pleistocene human behavior in the Levant, the circulating/radiating model,
              based on research in the Central Negev Highlands, and the transhumance model,
              based on research in southern Jordan.  However, these models are based on the
              study of  behavioral responses to very different environmental and/or
              topographical conditions from the lake/marsh ecological system which existed in
              the Wadi al?Hasa in the Late Pleistocene.  Ms. Crowley will be testing and
              refining a model of behavioral mobility developed specifically for this type of
              lake/marsh environment.  This model will provide a useful alternative to the
              two dominant models and aid our understanding of prehistoric behavior patterns
              in other areas of the Levant where similar lake/marsh environments existed, for
              example the Azraq and Jafr Basins.

Raw material availability has been shown
              to be one of the most important factors influencing morphological and
              technological patterns in lithic assemblages.  Because high quality raw
              material is widely available in the Levant, an assumption pervades much
              Levantine lithic research that raw material can be treated as a constant. 
              Research in other regions of the world, such as Europe, where raw material is
              much less widely available, has shown that depletion of raw material sources
              over time is a significant factor which must be taken into account when
              examining diachronic assemblage variability.  Ms. Crowley will also examine
              whether depletion is a factor that needs to be considered when studying
              diachronic variability in Levantine lithic assemblages, questioning the
              previously unchallenged assumption that in this area raw material availability
              may be treated as a constant.

The difficulty of identifying raw material
              sources utilized by prehistoric flintknappers has frequently been noted in the
              literature.  However, Ms. Crowley will be developing and refining procedures
              for combining a variety of visual criteria which will enable large numbers of
              artifacts to be analyzed efficiently and inexpensively and which should make it
              possible to narrow sources down to where the body of raw material data
              collected may be used to test behavioral models.

Sourcing studies have
              rarely been performed in the Levant.  This research is also important because
              it will generate a large and detailed computerized database of sourcing and raw
              material utilization data.  This database will provide a useful resource for
              other paleolithic lithic researchers to draw on to test a variety of
              hypotheses.  This research will also make a significant contribution to the
              training of a promising paleolithic archaeologist.

