Title       : CAREER: Medium-Range Order in Polymeric Phosphate Glasses: Effects of
               Atomic-Scale Structures on Macroscopic Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0309115

Award Number: 0309115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23845              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua U. Otaigbe Joshua.Otaigbe@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9733350  Otaigbe    This  Faculty  Early Career Development project will 
              investigate  one  of the most fundamental and general questions regarding  the 
              properties   of  amorphous  materials:  namely,   what   is   the  relationship
              between the structural characteristics of disordered  materials and the various
              physical processes used to produce  the  amorphous  material.  Specifically,
              the project will examine  the  changes   in  polymeric  phosphate  glass 
              structure  caused   by  variations  in  composition and evolved by melt 
              processing.   It  will   correlate  these  structural  changes  in  novel  
              durable  polymeric  phosphate  glasses with the  rheology,  durability  to 
              water, and resistance to crystallization. The research objectives  will  be 
              accomplished using an interdisciplinary  approach  that  integrates  aspects 
              of materials science, rheology,  solid-state  chemistry  and  physics, and
              process engineering to  explore  the  effects of controlled shear flow on both
              the short-range and  the  intermediate-range order structure of the glasses 
              produced.  The  macroscopic   glass   structure  will  be  studied   by  
              various  spectroscopy, microscopy, high performance liquid chromatography,  and
               calorimetry  techniques; it  will  then  be  linked  to  its  microscopic 
              origin through X-ray diffraction  experiments.  This  work  will  correlate
              melt-processing conditions (such  as  shear  distortion,  temperature,  and 
              shear  rate)  with  the  ultimate  rheological behavior of the glass.  The
              results will be  compared  to  reported  structural  models  for  phosphate 
              glasses.   This  project   will  evolve  into  a  major  education  and  
              research  capability  at  Iowa  State University that will  be  facilitated 
              through  collaborations with international leaders  in  phosphate  glass 
              research.  In addition, students in the Materials  Science  and  Engineering 
              (MSE)  Department  will  be  provided  with   a  relevant,  and
              practice-oriented education that is attractive  to   industry.   This objective
              will be accomplished by (a)  providing  research  experiences for graduate and
              undergraduate students  in  MSE;  (b)  demonstrating to students the 
              synergistic  effect  of  interdisciplinary research in solving fundamental
              problems  using  innovative, computer-based instructional modules; (c) 
              developing  graduate  student  internship  opportunities  with  industry   by 
              leveraging  both  the human and the equipment  resources  of  the  industrial  
              collaborators;  (d)  developing   simple   practical  materials  science 
              demonstration kits for  high  school  science  students   and  other  distant 
              education  teaching   aids;   (e)  developing   cooperative  student  learning 
               groups,   and   (f)  incorporating research findings into the principal
              investigator's  courses.  %%%  Understanding   the  dependencies  of  chemical 
              durability   and  resistance  to crystallization tendencies on both the
              composition  and  the  melt-processing conditions of  phosphate  glasses  will 
              enhance  the  use  of phosphate glasses in applications  such  as 
              glass-to-metal seals for high expansion metal applications, flame  retardants, 
              biomaterials, storage materials for nuclear  wastes,  optics,
              phosphorescent/fluorescent materials, scintillators,  and  load-bearing
              organic/inorganic composites. In addition,  students  in the Materials Science
              and Engineering (MSE) Department at Iowa  State   University  will  be 
              provided  with  a   relevant,   and  practice-oriented education that is
              attractive to industry.  ***
