Title       : Formulated and Specify: Using Visual Programming to Enable Web-based
               Biodiversity Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0310467

Award Number: 0310467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19626              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Leopold leopoldj@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              


Biological collections document the occurrence and distribution of life on
              earth. A vast amount of taxonomic and ecological information is associated with
              the estimated three billion specimens in museums worldwide. The informatics
              challenges the biodiversity research community faces with collections data are
              a consequence of numerous autonomous database systems and an absence of
              software tools to track and analyze changes in those databases. Time series and
              regional analysis of biodiversity, based on actual collections data within a
              distributed computing environment on the Internet, represent the grand
              challenge for the biodiversity research community. The distributed computing
              framework developed herein will provide a powerful infrastructure for the
              integration of data sources and for the data analysis objectives of
              biodiversity research.

     This project will create tools that assist in
              research analysis and synthesis, and which can, by design, respond to the high
              levels of data flux within the discipline. To accomplish one requires (1)
              support of heterogeneous, network-based, distributed computing environments,
              (2) the ability to track changes at different servers without having to
              manually issue one time queries on a repeated basis, and (3) empowerment of
              biodiversity researchers to build automated retrieval and analysis functions
              through a network interface without any specific knowledge of programming
              tasks.

     From a Computer Science perspective, the problem is to provide a
              facility for biodiversity scientists which makes possible meaningful analyses
              over a network of heterogeneous, constantly-updated data sources. This is
              termed the Biodiversity Community Analysis (BCA) problem. The BCA problem
              differs from the general Universal Access problem in two ways. First, the user
              community is restricted to biodiversity researchers. Second, the level of
              access required goes beyond simply accessing data; in addition, users must be
              able to construct meaningful biodiversity analyses using such data, and without
              becoming trained programmers.

     An Internet-based system specifically for
              facilitating the development of biodiversity analyses using information
              obtained from databases on the Internet will be developed. The main distinction
              between this system and existing Internet facilities to retrieve information
              and assimilate it into computations is that this approach will provide the
              necessary facilities to develop and maintain dynamic links such that
              computations and reports automatically maintain themselves. A further
              distinction is that the system proposed is specifically designed for users of
              spreadsheet-level ability, rather than professional programmers.

     The
              investigators include leaders from the Biodiversity community, including the
              project managers for the Specify collections management project and the joint
              KU-SDSC KDI project in earth system sciences, and from the user interface and
              public programming language community. The proposed system builds directly on
              years of prior work. It is made feasible by systems already in place as a
              result of this prior work and builds on our collateral development
              activities.

     The ability to easily formulate temporal ad hoc analyses of
              biological collections data distributed across national and international
              networks will leverage 300 years of biological earth inventory by engaging
              species information in a national analytical and computational
              infrastructure.





