Title       : SGER--Engineers and Engineering Education In The Middle East: Symposium June
               2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0310592

Award Number: 0310592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48449              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Downey downeyg@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan C. Lucena  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to produce much needed scholarship on engineering
              education and practice in the Middle East, from a selection of both Arab and
              Islamic states. U.S. engineers often assume engineering education is similar
              across Middle Eastern countries due to commonalities in language, religion,
              geographical location, or emphasis in oil production. Yet each country has had
              a unique history, including distinctive colonial struggles and varying sets of
              political and economic relations with other countries around the world, which
              have, in turn, shaped its engineering education and practice in particular
              ways. Hence, the main intellectual merit of this project involves providing
              U.S. engineering educators and practitioners with new knowledge about
              engineering education and practice in the Middle East, with a focus on
              outlining the diversity of engineering cultures in this part of the world.
              

The gathering of content on the past, present, and future of engineering
              education and practice in several Middle Eastern countries will take place in
              three panel discussions and individual interviews with expert panelists at the
              2003 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Engineering Education, to be
              held on June 22-25, 2003, in Nashville, TN. With the participation of selected
              STS scholars knowledgeable about the Middle East, panel discussions and
              individual interviews with experts in engineering education in the Middle East
              will both document histories and highlight similarities and differences among
              national patterns. Presenters will also identify important issues currently
              confronting engineering educators, engineering institutions, and engineering
              employers. 

The results of this project include (1) a video archive
              available via the Internet to individuals and organizations interested in
              learning about engineering in the Middle East; (2) frameworks for multimedia
              modules on engineering cultures in 3-5 Middle Eastern countries, and (3) the
              organizing framework for a future International Conference on Engineering
              Education in the Middle East. This project can have a significant impact on how
              engineering students and practitioners approach and understand their colleagues
              from the Middle East, whether in education or in industry. An additional
              benefit is to expand networks and increase collaborations among American and
              Middle Eastern engineers. 

