Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land Use and Land Tenure in Prehispanic Tlaxcala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0310478

Award Number: 0310478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11953              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Lesure lesure@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Drs. Richard Lesure and Charles Frederick, Aleksander
              Borejsza will collect data for his doctoral dissertation in the state of
              Tlaxcala, in the highlands of Central Mexico. He will conduct archaeological
              excavations of prehispanic agricultural terraces, and examine alluvial
              sedimentary sequences influenced by past land use. The data will be used to
              evaluate changing relationships between land use, land tenure and social
              structure, from the time of the first sedentary communities (ca. 850BC) to the
              early Colonial period (ca. AD1650).

Most slopes in Tlaxcala are or have been
              terraced for cultivation. Cultivated and abandoned fields are interspersed with
              vast areas where the soil has been stripped away by erosion. Intermittent
              streams flow in deeply entrenched gullies, making irrigation impossible. This
              degraded landscape is a human creation, but its origin is unclear. In other
              parts of Mexico land degradation has been blamed on the population collapse
              that followed Spanish conquest, and the introduction of the plough and grazing
              animals. In Tlaxcala this picture is complicated by the effects of two
              millennia of intensive aboriginal agriculture. Changes in prehistoric
              settlement patterns suggest that different agro-ecosystems had repeatedly been
              created, abandoned and reclaimed in that time span.

Anthropologists have
              observed that the investments required by intensive agriculture bind farmers to
              the land. The increased costs of leaving a community where land has been
              improved create opportunities for social exploitation by emerging elites. At
              the same time checks are imposed on the severity of exploitation, by creating
              agro-ecosystems that require intensive management by motivated and skilled
              smallholders, whose direct supervision or replacement is too costly for the
              elite. Conditions are set for the appearance of individual and hereditary
              claims to land. The terracing of slopes exemplifies this process, as the means
              of both intensifying agriculture and demarcating property. Episodes of land
              degradation can have equally far-reaching social consequences, by decreasing
              the value and amount of available farmland.

Whether such relationships
              obtained in the past, however, cannot be known until firmly dated regional
              sequences of agricultural change are established. Borejsza will make a step in
              that direction by dating the construction and abandonment of terrace systems
              and relating them to the phenomena of soil erosion and stream entrenchment. The
              techniques employed in terracing and their influence on yields will be assessed
              through excavation and laboratory analysis. The age of terraces will be
              established by dating the organic matter, charcoal and artifacts in soils
              buried by terrace construction or included in the retaining walls and fill.
              River valleys downstream from terraces will be surveyed for cutbanks where
              alluvial deposits are exposed. There, cycles of sedimentation and soil
              development will reveal alternating episodes of slope erosion and
              stability.

The research will contribute to the debate about how 'pristine'
              the landscape of the Americas was at contact, and to what extent its modern
              degraded condition is the effect of the introduction of technologies developed
              in different environments and therefore ill-adapted to local conditions. It
              will also explore the social context necessary for the successful introduction
              of particular innovations in agriculture and the continued maintenance of
              artificial agro-ecosystems.

