Title       : Verification of Properties of Geometric Structures and Reconstruction of
               Geometric Objectsfrom Partial Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0310589

Award Number: 0310589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Daniels kdaniels@cs.uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Klain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Konstantin Rybnikov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0310589
Karen Daniels, Daniel Klain, Koonstantin Rybnikov

This is a
              CARGO incubation award made under solicitation
              
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2002/nsf02155/nsf02155.htm.
The investigators will
              develop new techniques and algorithms for solving a 
collection of problems
              that address the verification and reconstruction of 
geometric objects from
              partial information.   The approach is to have two 
stages:  first, verify if
              the partial information is consistent with the 
desired outcome. Second, if
              the answer is positive, reconstruct the object.  
If the answer is negative,
              find an approximation to the desired reconstruction.  
The group will focus on
              four major types of problems.  The first type is a 
general class of NP-hard
              containment, covering and packing problems.  Although 
complete information
              about the objects may be available, partial information 
will be used due to
              the hardness of the problems.  In addition to 
strengthening existing
              algorithms for polygonal shapes, this work will 
design the first containment
              and covering algorithms using objects 
bounded by spline curves. For the other
              three problems only partial 
information about the objects is available.  The
              second problem is 
the verification of convexity and reconstruction of convex
              polyhedra 
and convex smooth shapes from partial data.   Reconstruction of
              
convex polytopes from partial data is a fascinating classical problem 
going
              back to Maxwell, Steinitz, and Minkowski. While much work has 
been done on
              recognition and reconstruction of convex polyhedra 
from projections,
              reconstruction of smooth convex shapes with a 
given discrete set of
              parameters is a problem that has not been 
adequately addressed. Our work will
              emphasize reconstruction of 
convex smooth bodies using splines.  The third
              problem is that 
of statistical determination of topological properties of a
              body, 
such as the Euler characteristic, from a finite set of sample points. 
              
The fourth problem, tightly related to the third one, is the determination
              
of the topology of a non-convex body from its projections on a 
finite
              number of planes.  Dissection and subsequent use of valuations, 
i.e. finitely
              additive probability measures, will play an especially 
important role in the
              third and fourth problems.  The team of mathematics 
and computer science
              investigators will combine computational geometry 
techniques, mathematical
              programming approaches, methods of graph theory 
and discrete geometry,
              methods of convexity theory, and work on 
multivariate splines to design
              verification and reconstruction algorithms. 

In addition to their
              significance in the context of pure mathematics and 
theoretical computer
              science, these problems are important to applications 
of computational
              geometry and geometric software design. For example, 
verification of metric
              and topological properties of geometric software 
outputs is important for
              implementing and testing geometric algorithms.  
Containment algorithms are
              useful in 2D packing and layout for manufacturing.  
Containment for 3D shapes
              is applicable to modeling tasks such as molecular 
docking and to medical
              treatment planning. Covering problems arise in practical 
settings such as
              military sensor coverage and targeting, telecommunications, 
spatial query
              optimization, and graphics. Work involving splines is applicable 
to CAD and
              design of numerical methods.  Determination of the topology of a 
body from
              finite samplings, projections, and sections is a hard problem 
important for
              computer tomography and pattern recognition.

