Title       : Neuroendocrine Basis of Reproductive Flexibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0310995

Award Number: 0310995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64243              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Coombs-Hahn tphahn@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI Transfer                                                                     
                                                                                         
              Abstract from original Proposal   Coombs-Hahn, Thomas  IBN 98-08470            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             Fluctuating environmental
              conditions require that  animals time demanding activities such as breeding to 
              coincide with periods when food is abundant. They achieve  this by  responding
              to cues from the environment with  neuroendocrine adjustments that affect
              reproductive  physiology and behavior. A great deal has been learned about 
              these processes through studies of temperate zone birds that  breed on
              relatively invariant schedules each spring, but  little is known of how
              opportunistic species capable of  breeding throughout the year time breeding
              flexibly.  This  study explores how the brain regulates reproduction in a 
              species that breeds on an extremely flexible schedule.  Red  crossbills are
              finches that are highly specialized to feed  on the seeds of coniferous trees
              such as pines.  These seeds  may be sufficiently abundant for the birds to nest
              at almost  any time of year.  However they are not produced regularly  at
              particular locations.  Consequently the birds must wander  nomadically, and the
              season when they discover abundant  seeds may vary dramatically from year to
              year.  Crossbills  regularly breed during about 10 months of the year (late 
              December through early October), and apparently occasionally  nest even during
              the remaining two months. Two complementary  questions about how crossbills
              achieve this reproductive  flexibility will be addressed in the present study. 
              First,  how does reproductive responsiveness to environmental cues  change
              seasonally in crossbills?  In other temperate zone  birds, the spring increase
              in day length first leads to  reproductive development, but then induces birds
              to become  "refractory" to long days.  That is, they cease to respond  to the
              stimulatory effects of long days.  This refractory  period ensures that
              breeding terminates in time for birds to  replace their plumage and prepare for
              fall migration.  It is  ubiquitous among temperate zone birds that have been
              studied  thus far, and restricts flexibil ity by prohibiting breeding  for
              several months in late summer and autumn.  It may be  absent or much reduced in
              crossbills.  Two experiments will  test to see whether crossbills become
              refractory to the  stimulatory effects of day length, and of non-light cues 
              such as food supply and behavior of mates.  Second, how do  changes in
              crossbill sensitivity to environmental factors  relate to changes in the brain?
               All other temperate zone  birds that have been studied show dramatic reduction
              in  production of brain reproductive hormones during the  refractory period.  I
              will examine these hormones in  crossbills at several times of year to
              determine whether the  greater reproductive flexibility of crossbills reflects 
              relatively constant hormone production, providing a  mechanistic explanation
              for their extraordinary reproductive  flexibility. This study is important
              because it addresses  phenomenological and mechanistic questions in a species
              with  a highly flexible reproductive schedule.  The results will  clarify the
              physiological basis of reproductive flexibility  and help to reveal whether
              findings based on studies of  rigidly seasonal breeders apply to birds
              generally, and to  reproductive opportunists in particular. Studies of how 
              animals respond to environmental information help us to  understand the effects
              of changing environmental conditions  in the short and long term, and therefore
              have conservation  implications.  They also answer basic questions about 
              responses to the environment that continue to provide  insight into how all
              animals, including humans, may be  affected by their environment.
