Title       : Pseudorandomness, Codes, and Cryptography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0310960

Award Number: 0310960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Zuckerman diz@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is about pseudorandomness and its relationship with coding
              
theory and cryptography.  A fundamental object in the study of
              
pseudorandomness is the extractor, introduced by Nisan and the PI.  An
              
extractor is an algorithm which extracts high-quality randomness from a
              
low-quality random source, using a few auxiliary high-quality random 
bits. 
              Recently, the PI and co-authors have discovered interesting 
connections
              between extractors and coding theory.  Specifically, they 
showed how to use
              Reed-Muller codes to build good extractors, and how 
extractors yield good
              list decodable codes.  While there have been 
improvements in these methods,
              optimal extractors have not been 
achieved, and the PI proposes to work
              towards that goal.  The PI also 
plans to work on related issues in coding
              theory.

In addition, the PI plans to work on using low-quality randomness in
              
cryptography, where less work has been done.  Cryptography also 
motivates
              the notion of deterministic extractors, which extract 
randomness from
              low-quality sources without any auxiliary random bits.  
While this is
              impossible for general low-quality sources, it is possible 
with more
              specialized ones.  For example, the PI and a student 
constructed
              deterministic extractors for so-called oblivious bit-fixing 
sources. This has
              applications to exposure-resilient cryptography, where 
cryptographic
              primitives are made to work even if large portions of keys 
are exposed.  The
              PI proposes to improve previous results and work on 
related
              issues.

Broader Impact

Many scientists use pseudorandom generators in
              Monte Carlo 
simulations,and may get wrong answers without knowing it. 
              Advances in 
pseudorandom generators can therefore mean advances in other
              areas of 
science.  Advances in cryptography are also important to society, as
              
computer security becomes more relevant for national security.  The 
project
              also has educational benefits:  the PI's research is integrated 
with his
              teaching, especially in his mentoring of graduate students and 
postdocs.

