Title       : Foundations of Complexity Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0310466

Award Number: 0310466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew C. Yao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Complexity theory addresses the question of how much resource 
is needed to
              solve a given computational problem.  In recent 
years complexity theory has
              found connections and applications 
in many scientific and engineering
              disciplines.  This project 
plans to investigate complexity theory across a
              broad front.  
The topics include communication complexity, decision trees,
              
quantum algorithms, quantum cryptography, and other foundational 
issues in
              complexity theory.  Te goal is to gain deep insights 
into the nature of
              computation, so that one can most effectively 
perform computational tasks in
              any model.  It is expected that 
a variety of algebraic and combinatorial
              techniques will be 
called upon to explore these topics.

Two of the most
              interesting scientific developments in recent years 
spring from the
              realization that complexity theory can be utilized 
for cryptography, and that
              quantum mechanics can be used for 
performing powerful computation.  Advances
              in these fronts have 
attracted interest from scientific communities at large,
              
as their relevance is far-reaching.  The research of this project 
could
              lead to substantial further progress in these two areas.

In the broader
              domain of public education, the Principal Investigator 
has given many
              speeches in recent years on various topics on 
complexity, cryptography and
              quantum computing.  Many of these talks 
are geared toward general audiences
              and often undergraduate students.  
These lectures, if thoughtfully designed,
              can stimulate the 
intellectual curiosity of young minds and develop their
              interest 
in the computing sciences.  With further advances of research in
              
these areas, one can expect that public awareness and interest 
will be
              further enhanced to the good of a stronger scientific education.
