Title       : Real-time Monitoring, Enhanced Visualization and Temporal Analysis of Tectonic
               and Geophysical Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0310232

Award Number: 0310232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Declan DePaor ddepaor@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI will develop a web-based, interactive stereographic projection
              application, 
called TempoNet, which will permit end users to incorporate the
              time dimension into their structural and tectonic analyses of orientation data.
               The design of TempoNet will be based on a prototype that has already been
              developed as a proof of concept. The prototype is currently used for teaching,
              but lacks the functionality of the proposed research tool.  TempoNet will be
              written using a Java-like programming language called Actionscript that is
              embedded in the Flash web development application from Macromedia.com. Data
              input will be possible via plain text documents, spreadsheets, HTML documents,
              and XML documents.

It will be easy for non-technical geoscientists to use
              TempoNet, either as a stand-alone
application for both Windows and Macintosh,
              or with a version 5 or higher web browser
running under Windows 95 / NT / Xp,
              Mac OS9 / OSX, or Unix (including Linux and Solaris).

 Examples of potential
              research applications include:
(i) Real-time monitoring of neotectonic and
              geophysical data stored locally, or at any
worldwide web URL;
(ii)
              Interactive, sequential restoration of paleotectonic data in areas of
              fault-related tilting and folding;
(iii) Forward modeling of macro- and
              micro-fabric development during progressive
deformation.
TempoNet will enable
              an extremely wide range of geoscience teachers and researchers to access
              information that is available on the web and to view it in a convenient and
              meaningful format that is updated in real-time.  Practical applications of
              TempoNet will be tested by a group of undergraduate students using data
              currently available in-house, as well as web-based data sources. The students
              will participate in Boston University's Undergraduate Research Opportunities
              Program (www.bu.edu/UROP), a program that encourages minority participation in
              research.

