Title       : Ecological Genetics of Host-Parasite Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1995        
File        : a9206916

Award Number: 9206916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Jaenike joja@mail.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Although parasites are ubiquitous and play an important role in                
              most natural communities, they have generally been overlooked by               
              population biologist.  The almost complete lack of knowledge of the            
              genetic structure of natural populations of parasites is                       
              particularly noteworthy.  Genetic variation among parasites in                 
              their ability to infect various species of hosts is relevant to                
              questions concerning (1) the effects of parasites on species                   
              diversity within communities, (2) the maintenance of genetic                   
              variation and sexual reproduction within host species, (3) host-               
              parasite coevolution, and (4) modes of speciation in parasites.                
              Such genetic variation may also be important in the evolution and              
              ecology of zoonoses (parasites of animals that can infect humans)              
              and pathogenic fungi that infect agricultural plants.  The research            
              proposed here focuses on a species of nematode, Howardula                      
              aoronymphium, that in nature parasitizes mushroom-feeding species              
              of Drosophila.  Previous studies have indicated that this nematode             
              can have major effects on individuals, populations, and communities            
              of flies.  The proposed research includes: (1) a survey of natural             
              populations of H. aoronymphium for genetic variation in                        
              infectivity, pathogenicity, and individual growth rate as a                    
              function of host species; and (2) selection experiments to                     
              determine how patterns of host availability affect the evolution of            
              host specialization.
