Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Convergence Properties of Hilbert's Substitution Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1994  
File        : a9206976

Award Number: 9206976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon Feferman sf@csli.standford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grigori Mints  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The substitution method was suggested by Hilbert (1930) as a              
              successive approximation method for finding finite function                    
              solutions of a system of number-theoretic functional equations,                
              which are derived from proofs in formal systems.  Convergence, i.e.            
              termination of this method produces finitistic proofs of                       
              combinatorial identities and numerical realizations of provable                
              Sigma-zero-one-formulas.  The problem of convergence was treated by            
              von Neumann (1927) for quantifier-free induction and by Ackermann              
              (1940) for the system of first-order arithmetic.  The problem for              
              analysis remained open until very recently, when it was settled by             
              Mints (1990).  Mints now intends to investigate convergence                    
              problems for other systems where the problem is still open,                    
              including the following:  1) predicative analysis and predicatively            
              reducible systems, 2) stronger subsystems of analysis whose proof-             
              theoretic ordinal is known, 3) the theory of types, 4) full                    
              analysis with the axiom of choice, 5) Zermelo set theory and                   
              possibly stronger systems.                                                     
                   Proof theory examines questions about proofs that lie to one              
              side of their correctness.  Correctness is understood and taken for            
              granted.  For example, what axioms are required, all the axioms of             
              a system or only a proper subset?  Indeed, certain axioms are                  
              particularly critical in such studies, the necessity of employing              
              the so-called Axiom of Choice, involving orders of infinity greater            
              than that of the set of all the positive integers, 1, 2, 3, ...,               
              being considered particularly interesting.  Other strong axioms of             
              infinity often play this role too.  In another direction, one can              
              ask of a proof that shows that something or other exists whether it            
              provides an explicit recipe for constructing the thing shown to                
              exist.  Proofs which do are called "constructive," and others,                 
              "non-constructive."  A particularly intriguing part of proof theory            
              concerns itself with whether a non-constructive proof can be                   
              reworked in some automatic way into a constructive one.  It turns              
              out that the answer depends on the theory being studied.  The                  
              investigator has shown that a method known as the Hilbert                      
              substitution method can be used to turn any non-constructive proof             
              in a certain formulation of analysis into a constructive one by                
              essentially turning a crank, and he would like to know if the                  
              argument he gave can be adapted to obtain the analogous result for             
              certain other mathematical systems.
