Title       : Flavonoid-Induced Pollen Germination: Localization, Kinetics and Gene Isolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9206712

Award Number: 9206712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loverine P. Taylor ltaylor@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most higher plants reproduce sexually, consequently factors that               
              influence fertilization have a significant impact on reproductive              
              success.  Despite that little is known of the cellular and                     
              molecular events surrounding pollen germination, tube growth, and              
              deposition of the sperm into the embryo sac.  We established that              
              flavonoids, normally found in pollen, are essential for successful             
              fertilization.  Flavonoid-deficient pollen is unable to germinate              
              but this defect can be "rescued" by the exogenous application of               
              micromolar quantities of a specific class of flavonoids leading to             
              germination and tube growth in vitro and normal fertilization and              
              seed-set in vivo.  How do these small, hydrophobic molecules induce            
              pollen germination?  The basic tool to address this question if the            
              pollen rescue assay.  To begin, the accumulation site and                      
              intracellular transport mechanisms of flavonoids will be determined            
              by localization and kinetic analysis.  The identical flavonoid                 
              required for germination also stimulates transcription; this                   
              suggests a molecular mechanism of flavonoid action and requires                
              that these genes be identified by cloning and sequencing.  This                
              will lead to a model of flavonoid action during pollen germination.            
              The product of this proposal will extend the knowledge of basic                
              reproductive biology and provide information useful in the design              
              of mechanisms to manipulate plant fertility.
