Title       : Structure, Mechanism & Biosynthesis of Methylamine Dehydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9206952

Award Number: 9206952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. McIntire   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Calif Inst for Res & Edu
	      4150 Clement St (151NC)
	      San Francisco, CA  941211598    415/750-6954

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Methylamine dehydrogenase (MADH) from methylotrophic bacteria                  
              contains tryptophan tryptophylquinone (TQQ) as the essential redox             
              cofactor.  TTQ is biosynthesized by in situ transformation of 2                
              tryptophyl residues in the small subunit of MADH.  MADH from                   
              bacterium W3A1 (MADHw) has unusual spectral properties.  The UV-               
              visible spectrum is very sensitive to the presence of the                      
              monovalent cations Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cs+, NH4+, (CH3)3NH+ and (CH3)4N+.       
              NH4+ interacts with MADH in a biphasic manner, the binding of which            
              can serve as a model for the enzyme's initial interaction with the             
              substrate, CH3NH3+.                                                            
              Research aims are: 1.  Study the cation interactions in more detail            
              by UV-visivle and resonance Raman spectroscopy, and by steady-state            
              kinetic analysis.  2.  Begin work on the comparison of the basic               
              properties of MADHw and MADH from Methylobacterium extorquen sp.               
              AM1 (MADHA) to establish the similarities/differences for 2 major              
              subclasses of this enzyme.  3.  Initiate steady-state kinetic                  
              studies of the interaction of MADHW and its physiological electron             
              acceptors.  4.  Attempt to obtain the x-ray structure of MADHA.  5.            
              Endeavor to obtain the structures of the enzyme an isoform in                  
              complex with their physiological electron acceptors.  6.  Using the            
              MADH structures, chose amino acids for site-specific mutation.  The            
              mutants will be used to elucidate the mechanism of substrate                   
              oxidation, electron transfer, cation binding, enviromental                     
              interactions, etc.  7.  Conduct some experiments that should shed              
              light on the mechanism of biosynthesis of the cofactor in MADH.                
              %%%                                                                            
              The enzyme methylamine dehydrogenase is isolated from numerous soil            
              bacterial classified as methylotrophs.  The enzyme converts                    
              methylamine (CH3NH2 to formaldehyde and ammonia, and the organism              
              uses these as the only carbon and nitrogen source for growth.  In              
              order to carry out the conversion of methylamine, the enzyme                   
              contains an essential factor (the coenzyme) that is formed by                  
              modification and crosslinking of two specific amino acids units                
              (tryptophans) in the enzyme.  The absorption of visible light                  
              (i.e., the color) of the enzyme-bound coenzyme is changed on                   
              addition of any of several positively charged ions.  Among these               
              are the ions of lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium,                  
              ammonia and trimethylamine ?<CH3)3N!.  Studying this phenomenon in             
              more detail will provide essential information regarding how the               
              enzyme is able to convert methylamine to formaldehyde and ammonia.             
              Research aims are: 1.  Study the ion interactions in more detail by            
              several spectroscopic method, and investigate how the ions affect              
              the rate at which the enzyme converts methylamine.  2.  Begin work             
              on the comparison of the basic properties of two, somewhat                     
              different forms of methylamine dehydrogenase from different                    
              bacteria.  3.  Initiate studies of the interaction of methylamine              
              dehydrogenase with other proteins that are required for the                    
              conversion of methylamine.  4. Obtain and refine the 3-demensional             
              structure of two forms of methylamine dehydrogenase, and the                   
              structures of these when bound to other proteins.  5. Using these              
              structures, chose amino acids for site-specific mutation (i.e., the            
              selective substitution of specific amino acid in the protein by                
              another amino acid).  The mutant forms will be used to elucidate               
              how the enzyme functions on a molecular level.   6. Conduct some               
              experiments that should shed light on the mechanism of conversion              
              of two tryptophan groups into the essential coenzyme.
