Title       : Phospholipid Metabolism: Its Role in Coupling Signal to Response in
               Photosynthetic Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9206179

Award Number: 9206179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Crain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1145,
Abstract    :
              Perception of environmental conditions and initiation of                       
              appropriate responses to these conditions is crucial for survival              
              of all organisms.  Additionally, individual cells of multicellular             
              organisms must detect and respond to signals which coordinate the              
              behavior and physiology of the whole organism.  In contrast to the             
              case for animal systems, little is known about transduction                    
              pathways coupling signals to cellular responses in plants.  The                
              coupling of light reception to leaflet movement in the tropical                
              legume Samanea saman and of environmental stress to deflagellation             
              in the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii are signal                   
              response systems that appear to involve calcium.  We hypothesize               
              that inositolphospholipid and phosphatidylcholine turnover which               
              produces inositol phosphates, lysophosphatidylcholine and                      
              diacylglycerol, and which results in mobilization of cellular                  
              calcium and protein phosphorylation mediates these responses.  To              
              elucidate the specific role of phospholipid turnover in these                  
              systems we will:  i.) correlate temporally changes in                          
              inositolphospholipid and phosphatidylcholine metabolism and                    
              intracellular calcium levels with signal reception and cell                    
              response, ii.) examine effects of agents that perturb the                      
              functioning of inositolphospholipid metabolism and calcium                     
              homeostasis on physiological responses to signals, and iii.) purify            
              and characterize the putative regulatory enzyme phospholipase C                
              with the aim of understanding its role in plant signal                         
              transduction.
