Title       : Trace Metal Geochemistry in Anoxic Waters: Molybdenum and Mercury
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9206542

Award Number: 9206542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162634             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Helz gh17@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Much current research is directed toward understanding the                
              behavior of trace metals in anoxic aquatic environments.  These                
              studies create a need for accurate data on the stoichiometry and               
              stability of metal complexes containing reduced sulfur ligands.                
              Many existing stability constants are uncertain at the order of                
              magnitude level and thus are far less accurate than the field data             
              to which they are applied.  In some cases, especially for                      
              polysulfide or thiol ligands, no data exist.  When data are                    
              available, it is often uncertain whether the species described are             
              mononuclear or polynuclear.  This is an insidious problem that can             
              introduce large, unsuspected errors into predictions of metal                  
              behavior.  We have completed investigations of copper speciation               
              in solutions equilibrated with reduced Cu-S assemblages,                       
              chalcocite+djurleite and anilite+covellite.  This has included                 
              EXAFS studies which demonstrate that multinuclear complexes exist              
              in this system.  We have also completed studies of zinc and cadmium            
              speciation under conditions appropriate for anoxic marine waters.              
                We will continue this line of research, focusing in the next two             
              years on mercury and molybdenum.  Specific objectives are as                   
              follows:  1) Mercury.  Measure the solubility of cinnabar under                
              conditions approaching those in anoxic marine waters and compare               
              with metacinnabar solubility to determine if polynuclear complexes             
              exist.  Determine if Hg-polysulfide complexes will be important in             
              nature.  Investigation the solubility of cinnabar over its solid               
              solution range, and 2) Molybdenum.  Characterize Fe-Mo-S                       
              precipitates formed under conditions representative of anoxic                  
              marine waters by elemental analysis, EXAFS and solubility.                     
              Investigate the possible importance of thiomolybdates as ligands               
              for Cu, Zn, Cd and Fe.  Extend preliminary EXAFS work on Mo in                 
              black shales and seeks links between the products produced in the              
              laboratory and those preserved in shales from ancient sulfidic                 
              marine basins.
