Title       : Excavation of Aztec Urban Houses at Yautepec, Morelos, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1994     
File        : a9206770

Award Number: 9206770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Smith mesmith@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr.Michael Smith will                
              conduct archaeological excavations at the Aztec-period site of                 
              Yautepec which is located in north-central Morelos, Mexico. The                
              site, at the edge of the modern town of Yautepec consists of a                 
              large palace structure and 30 hectares of adjacent fields with                 
              traces of house remains. This is one of the only areas of a major              
              Aztec city anywhere in central Mexico where a district of houses is            
              available for excavation. The project itself has five major                    
              objectives: 1. The exposure of large horizontal areas of 3 to 6                
              houses; 2. limited testing of another 15 or more houses; 3.                    
              establishment of a fine-grained chronology for the site by means of            
              ceramic seriation, stratigraphy and radiocarbon dates; 4.                      
              determination of the size and extent of the Aztec city by means of             
              a surface survey of the modern town of Yautepec; 5. synthesis of               
              the data in economic and social terms.                                         
                                                                                             
              Cities are important components of nearly all state societies and              
              archaeologists have long acknowledged the crucial role played by               
              urban centers in the origin and operation of states. Many of the               
              traits that distinguish states from simpler societies are also                 
              characteristics of cities and important political, economic and                
              religious institutions are usually concentrated in urban centers.              
              Therefore in order to document and explain the development and                 
              organization of ancient states, archaeologists need to map and                 
              excavate cities. The Aztecs constructed one of the largest and most            
              impressive New World states. It was heavily urbanized yet very                 
              little is known about the nature of Aztec urbanism. Dr. Smith's                
              project will help to solve this problem. His data have the                     
              potential to help resolve a number of issues involving urban                   
              structure, economic organization and the political processes which             
              characterized Mexico at this time.                                             
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists and shed light            
              on how complex societies - including our own - arise and are                   
              maintained. This area is slated for urban development. Thus the                
              site is threatened and research must be conducted quickly.
