Title       : Initiation of Transcription in Chromatin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9206051

Award Number: 9206051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Pederson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In eukaryotes, newly replicated DNA assembles with histones and                
              regulatory and general transcription factors to form nucleosomes               
              and transcription initiation complexes.  Competition between the               
              binding of regulatory factors to DNA and assembly of the same DNA              
              into nucleosomes may play a key role in establishing and                       
              maintaining patterns of differential gene expression.  The goal of             
              this proposal is to help elucidate mechanisms which govern the                 
              outcome of this competition in vivo and guide studies of                       
              transcription using chromatin templates in vitro.  Initial studies             
              demonstrated that heat shock factor (HSF) can activate                         
              transcription while bound to a nucleosome in Saccharomyces                     
              cerevisiae.  This result suggests that the position which a factor             
              binding site adopts when it is packaged in a nucleosome influences             
              the outcome of competitive assembly events in vivo.  To test this              
              possibility and to determine why HSF, like most regulatory factors,            
              is usually bound to nucleosome-free DNA, we will systematically                
              examine the influence of helical orientation and other geometric               
              factors on the ability of regulatory factors to bind to nucleosomal            
              DNA or, alternatively, to prevent the formation of nucleosomes.                
              Cells will be transfected with plasmids that present cells with a              
              choice between the binding of a regulatory factor to DNA and the               
              assembly of the same DNA into a uniquely positioned nucleosome.                
              HSF and the ACEI factor will be used as model regulatory factors.              
              Results will be assessed using transcription and high resolution               
              genomic footprinting assays.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Because of its great length, DNA must be extensively compacted to              
              fit into the nuclei of cells.  Compaction of DNA is accomplished by            
              histones, proteins which associate with DNA to form nucleosomes.               
              Nucleosomes are altered or absent from DNA in regions bound by a               
              second class of proteins, namely those which regulate gene                     
              expression.  Replication of DNA partially disrupts nucleosomes and             
              displaces regulatory proteins.  Thus, DNA must be repackaged each              
              cell generation.  Whether repackaging is by histones or by                     
              regulatory proteins may be central to whether specific patterns of             
              gene expression are maintained or altered.  However, mechanisms                
              which govern how DNA is packaged in vivo are poorly understood.                
              The goal of the proposed research is to elucidate these mechanisms.            
              We will determine how the unique configuration which DNA adopts in             
              some nucleosomes affects its packaging.  The occurrence of this                
              unique configuration, termed nucleosome positioning, suggests that             
              if a DNA segment were forced by the binding of a rgulatory protein             
              to adopt an alternative configuration in the nucleosome, the                   
              stability of the nucleosome would be impaired.  To test whether                
              this can account for the formation of nucleosome-free regions, we              
              will construct a series of test DNA sequences.  These sequences,               
              when introduced into yeast, will present cells with a choice                   
              between ?a! the binding of a regulatory factor which excludes or               
              shifts the position of nucleosomes, ?b! the assembly of a                      
              positioned nucleosome which excludes the regulatory factor, or ?c!             
              the formation of a factor:nucleosome complex.  The choice cells                
              make will be related to the structure of nucleosomes, and                      
              interactions between regulatory proteins and DNA.
