Title       : 5S RNA Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9206668

Award Number: 9206668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aimee H. Bakken bakkena@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9145,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Ribosomes play a key role in the synthesis of proteins in all                
              living cells, whether they be plant cells, animal cells, or                    
              bacteria.  In eukaryotes, these complex giant macromolecules are               
              composed of four kinds of ribosomal RNA molecules and approximately            
              eighty different ribosomal proteins.  Ribosome assembly occurs in              
              the nucleolus of the cell, where three of the four RRNAS are                   
              synthesized.  All other components of the ribosome are synthesized             
              elsewhere and transported to the nucleolus for assembly.  This                 
              research project is focused on identifying and characterizing the              
              transport pathways and regulatory mechanisms that bring the 5S                 
              ribosomal RNA to the nucleolus for assembly into ribosomes.  The               
              research will use mutants of the cloned 5S RNA genes and their                 
              associated proteins to try to disrupt normal ribosome assembly or              
              function in order to discern how each component might function in              
              normal ribosome assembly.  The mutated genes or their gene products            
              (5S RNAs or 5S RNA-binding proteins) will be microinjected in                  
              Xenopus oocytes, and the gene products will be followed through the            
              cell by way of the radioisotopic labelling and/or specific                     
              antibodies against the protein or nucleoprotein components.  In                
              vitro exchange studies will be carried out with isolated nucleoli              
              and with isolated ribosomes, and the results will be verified in               
              vivo through the microinjection experiments.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Protein synthesis is a fundamental process of all living cells.                
              The machinery for protein synthesis is the ribosome, a complex                 
              structure consisting of many individual macromolecular components,             
              both proteins and polyribonucleic acids (RNAs).  The synthesis of              
              ribosomes is a complex process, since the synthesis of the                     
              individual macromolecular components occurs in various parts of the            
              cell, and sometimes at different times, yet it is necessary to                 
              bring all the different components together for assembly.  The                 
              protein components of the ribosome are themselves synthesized on               
              preexisting ribosomes, and this takes place in the cytoplasm.  The             
              ribonucleic acids are synthesized in the nucleus, since they are               
              direct transcripts of the ribosomal genes.  Three of the four RNA              
              molecules are synthesized in a specialized region of the nucleus               
              termed the nucleolus, first as a very long transcript which is                 
              processed into the three smaller pieces.  It is to the nucleolus               
              that all the other components are brought for assembly, including              
              the fourth and smallest RRNA molecule, termed "5S."  This 5S RNA is            
              synthesized in the nucleus, but not in the nucleolus.  Prior                   
              results from this laboratory have shown that, in Xenopus oocytes,              
              the 5S RNA is synthesized in advance of the other RRNA components,             
              and that after the 5S RNA is transcribed it is transported to the              
              cytoplasm, together with its own transcription factor (a protein               
              termed TFIIIA), and is stored there.  Subsequently, it becomes                 
              dissociated from TFIIIA and associates with a different protein,               
              L5, which is a ribosomal protein; the 5S RNA-L5 complex is then                
              transported back to the nucleus, specifically now to the nucleolus,            
              where it becomes assembled into the nascent ribosomes.  This                   
              project will address the mechanism and regulation of this                      
              complicated nucleocytoplasmic trafficking.  The work is of                     
              significance not only for understanding ribosomal biogenesis, which            
              is itself a very important problem in biology, but also for                    
              understanding nucleocytoplasmic trafficking in general, which as a             
              phenomenon is fundamental to much of eukaryotic cellular                       
              regulation.
