Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Morphology, Geochemistry and Stable Isotope Compositions
               of Vertic Paleosols as Indicators of Paleozoic Paleoclimates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1995       
File        : a9206694

Award Number: 9206694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46914              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Fastovsky defastov@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is a collaborative research between C.I. Mora and S.G.               
              Driese (University of Tennessee; lead institution) and D.E.                    
              Fastovsky (University of Rhode Island) to support ongoing research             
              on aspects of Paleozoic paleoclimates that are reflected in                    
              vertic-featured paleosols preserved in the central and southern                
              Appalachian sedimentary sequence.  The study takes advantage of the            
              wide spatial and temporal distribution and climatic-dependency of              
              these paleosols, as well as their amenability to stable isotopic               
              analysis.  Morphology, geochemistry, and stable isotopic                       
              compositions of the vertic paleosols form the database of the                  
              study.                                                                         
                   Vertic-featured paleosols are exposed in six states,                      
              representing fluvial and marginal-marine environments from the                 
              Ordovician through the Permian.  Because vertic paleosols are, by              
              comparison with other paleosol type, diagnostic of specific                    
              climatic variables such as annual wet/dry cyclicity and subtropical            
              to tropical conditions, these paleosols are ideal subjects for the             
              reconstruction of paleoclimatic variables.  Moreover, the common               
              occurrence of pedogenic carbonate permits the estimation of annual             
              rainfall (based upon nodular horizon depth), as well as the                    
              opportunity to estimate Paleozoic atmospheric pCO2 and to tests of             
              models of global atmospheric CO2 concentrations throughout most of             
              the Paleozoic Era.
