Title       : Characterization of E2F-I, an inhibitor of the transcriptionfactor E2F
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9206180

Award Number: 9206180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles D. Liarakos                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srilata Bagchi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The retinoblastoma gene is one of the best characterized tumor                 
              suppressor genes.  The loss of Rb function has been correlated with            
              the etiology of a subset of human neoplasias such as                           
              retinoblastomas, osteosarcomas, small lung carcinomas, breast                  
              carcinomas, etc.  The Rb protein is also an important regulator of             
              normal cell proliferation and has been shown to bind DNA tumor                 
              virus oncoproteins, such as adenovirus EIA, papillomavirus E7 and              
              SV40 T antigen.  Thus elucidation of the normal role of Rb protein             
              and identification of the cellular targets of its interactions is              
              critically important.  Rb protein has been shown to interact with              
              cellular transcription factors E2F.  The interactions of Rb with               
              E2F are particularly significant as E2F has been shown to be                   
              involved in the transcription of several proliferation associated              
              genes.  The work described is based on the principal investigator's            
              recent observation that Rb protein in the from of a cellular                   
              complex, E2F-I, inhibits the DNA binding activity of the                       
              transcription factor E2F by forming an E2F/E2F-I complex.  In this             
              proposal: i) we plan to characterize the Rb associated proteins                
              that cooperate with Rb to reconstitute the E2F-I activity.  ii)                
              analyze the cell cycle dependent biochemical alterations of E2F-I,             
              which will enable us to correlate the growth suppressor function of            
              Rb with its regulation of E2F DNA binding activity.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              The retinoblastoma (Rb) protein has been shown to act as a                     
              suppressor of cell growth which suggests it is an important                    
              regulator of normal cell proliferation.  Rb has been shown to bind             
              DNA tumor virus oncoproteins (proteins which in mutated forms can              
              cause uncontrolled cell growth).  The elucidation of the normal                
              role of Rb protein and identification of the cellular targets of               
              its interactions is a fundamental question in understanding cell               
              growth.  Rb protein has been shown to interact with a cellular                 
              protein E2F.  The interactions of Rb with E2F are particularly                 
              significant as E2F has been shown to regulate several cell growth              
              associated genes.  A recent observation is that Rb protein forms a             
              cellular complex, E2F-I, which inhibits E2F by forming an E2F/E2F-I            
              complex.  Proposed research involves:  i) characterizing the Rb                
              associated proteins and reconstituting the E2F-I activity; and ii)             
              analyze the cell cycle regulation of the factor E2F-I, which will              
              enable the correlation of the growth suppressor function of Rb with            
              its regulation of E2F DNA binding activity.
