Title       : Substrate Specificity of V-Src and v-Tyrosine Kinases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1993  
File        : a9206482

Award Number: 9206482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Todd Miller miller@pofvax.pnb.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal focuses on the role of protein-protein                           
              interactions in the function of the v-Src and v-Abl tyrosine                   
              kinases.  It has been suggested that the Src homology (SH)                     
              regions 2 and 3 of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases are important                  
              both in the regulation of kinase activity and in the                           
              recognition of cellular substrates.  Regions of v-Src and v-Abl                
              which are involved in intra-or-intermolecular recognition will                 
              be identified by peptide-based photoaffinity labelling                         
              experiments.  Modified regions inside and outside the SH2 and                  
              SH3 domains will be studied further by site-directed,                          
              mutagenesis and the mutant enzymes will be tested by in vitro                  
              phosphorylation with tyrosine-containing synthetic peptides.                   
              These results will be correlated with a model of the three-                    
              dimensional structure of v-Src based on the recent crystal                     
              structure of the catalytic domain of the cAMP-dependent protein                
              kinase.  Finally, to identify determinants in protein                          
              substrates for v-Src which confer recognition by the enzyme,                   
              synthetic peptide "libraries" will be used to select those                     
              peptides which give maximal phosphorylation by v-Src.  The goal                
              of these studies is to describe at a molecular level the steps                 
              leading to the formation of the "signalling complexes" which                   
              play a central role in signal transduction and oncogenic                       
              transformation.                                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This research involves the role of certain regions of a protein                
              in its ability to phosphorylate tyrosine residues of other                     
              proteins.  These regions may be important for its biological                   
              activity. These regions will be identified by chemical labelling               
              and genetic experiments. These results will be correlated with a               
              model of the three-dimensional structure of protein based on the               
              recent crystal structure of a similar enzyme. Lastly, special                  
              substrates for the enzyme will be prepared by random substitution              
              of a variety of amino acids for the particular one found in a                  
              peptide which the protein phosphorylates.  This will be used to                
              describe structural features of substrates recognized by the                   
              modifying protein.
