Title       : Chemical Modulation of Marine Deposit Feeding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1994      
File        : a9206834

Award Number: 9206834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Mayer lmayer@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Deposit feeding is important in gating the transfer or burial of               
              all particles that arrive at the seafloor, with implications                   
              ranging from flow through trophic webs to resolution of the                    
              stratigraphic record.  The resources that fuel deposit feeding,                
              however, remain poorly identified-with a few notable exceptions.               
              By chemical examination and biological experimentation that isolate            
              the processes of food detection and digestion this project will                
              attempt to generalize the approach used to create a pair of those              
              exceptions.  This project will be guided by theory that predicts               
              maximization of net absorption rate as material transits the gut of            
              an organism.  The focus of the project is on three specific                    
              processes that modulate processes leading to this maximization,                
              namely smell, taste and absorption across the gut wall.  Smell and             
              taste will be determined with chemical, operational definitions                
              based on response to diffused or contacted compounds.  The efficacy            
              of compounds that elicit feeding responses in the laboratory will              
              be tested for their roles as attractants in the field.  While the              
              correlation between sensing ability and nutritional value will not             
              be perfect, the imperfection affects the ability of these animals              
              to sense the presence of food and so itself is of interest.  The               
              concept of optimal gut retention times of ingested food focuses                
              attention on a kinetic definition of food quality, whose                       
              determination will also likely result in identification of usable              
              food resources.  Measurements of absorption of digested foods into             
              the gut wall will allow explicit tests of these models of                      
              absorption maximization on a series of animals from Puget Sound and            
              the Gulf of Maine.
