Title       : Flagellar Glycoproein Dynamics and Whole Cell Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9206535

Award Number: 9206535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Bloodgood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1134,
Abstract    :
                 Active movement of a class of 350 kDa glycoproteins within the              
              plane of the Chlamydomonas flagellar membrane is responsible for               
              whole cell gliding motility in this organism.  Plasma membrane                 
              protein dynamics may also be involved in many other forms of whole             
              cell locomotion along solid substrates or extracellular matrix.                
              Contact of the flagellar membrane with a solid substrate is                    
              hypothesized to initiate a transmembrane signaling pathway that                
              activates an intraflagellar motor responsible for binding to and               
              applying force to the flagellar membrane glycoproteins.                        
              Crosslinking of certain populations of flagellar membrane                      
              glycoproteins with anti-carbohydrate monoclonal antibodies is an               
              artificial means to initiate the signaling pathway (involving                  
              calcium influx and changes in protein phosphorylation) and result              
              in redistribution of the flagellar membrane proteins recognized by             
              the antibodies.  The present study is directed towards an                      
              elucidation of the role of protein phosphorylation in the signaling            
              pathway and the identification and characterization of the                     
              biological motor responsible for glycoproteins movements and hence             
              whole cell gliding motility.  Studies will address the regulated               
              association of flagellar membrane proteins and protein kinases with            
              the 350 Kda flagellar membrane glycoproteins, and the association              
              of phosphoproteins and other proteins in the membrane-matrix                   
              fraction with axonemal and brain microtubules.  An in vitro system             
              for studying flagellar membrane dynamics using inside-out flagellar            
              membrane vesicles and purified microtubules will be developed.                 
              Biological motor activity will be sought within the membrane-matrix            
              compartment using in vitro microtubule gliding assays.  The 3S                 
              calcium-specific ATPase in the membrane -matrix fraction will be               
              purified and characterized as a candidate motor.  Monoclonal                   
              antibodies to various flagellar membrane-matrix phosphoproteins and            
              to candidate motor proteins will be obtained for use as probes for             
              studying the role of these proteins in flagellar signaling and                 
              force production for glycoprotein movement and whole cell                      
              locomotion.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The unicellular green alga, Chlamydomonas, is a widely used model              
              organism for studying a wide variety of biological questions.  The             
              alga has flagellae, which enable it to swim freely in aqueous                  
              media, in a manner which is functionally similar to other                      
              flagellar-propelled motilities in other organisms.  The                        
              Chlamydomonas flagellum has therefore been a highly productive                 
              model for studying the mechanism of flagellar motility in general.             
              In addition to the free-swimming mode of locomotion, Chlamydomonas             
              also exhibits a gliding motility on solid substrata, which also                
              involves the flagellum, or, more specifically, the plasma membrane             
              surrounding the flagellum.  The mechanism of this gliding motility             
              has been traced to the active movement of certain membrane                     
              glycoproteins within the plane of the flagellar membrane.  It is               
              likely that this system will serve as a good general model for                 
              studying "deliberate" movements of membrane proteins within the                
              plane of the membrane.
