Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Localization and periodicity in unstable homotopy theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9206376

Award Number: 9206376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : August 1,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Mahowald mark@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator intends: (1) to continue his study of                    
              unstable periodic homotopy groups, using Adams spectral sequence               
              techniques and Bousfield localization; (2) to generalize joint work            
              with Mark Mahowald on v2 periodic homotopy groups of the fiber of              
              the secondary suspension map to higher periodicity; (3) to study               
              the localization of an unstable sphere with respect to the homology            
              theory E(n); (4) to study the unstable Adams-Novikov spectral                  
              sequence based on E(n); (5) to compute the mod-p K-theory of free              
              iterated loop spaces and apply this to the calculation of v1                   
              perioidic homotopy groups.                                                     
                   Topology arose originally as an approach to the study of                  
              differential equations.  Over the intervening century it has                   
              evolved prodigiously, often seeming to have a life entirely its own            
              and independent of its source.  Increasingly, however, it has begun            
              to repay its debt.  The point is that it is often more important to            
              know of the solution of an equation whether it is a closed loop or             
              whether it is knotted, for example, than to know precisely and                 
              numerically what are the coordinates of all of its points.                     
              Furthermore, although the former qualitative information is                    
              implicitly contained in the latter complete description, it is not             
              at all obvious how to extract it.  The sophisticated machinery that            
              has been developed by topologists, such things as the                          
              investigations in homotopy theory outlined for this project, has               
              now been developed to a degree that often permits these natural                
              problems to be handled in a natural way.
