Title       : Cryo-Electron Microscopy and Image Analysis of Plant Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9206305

Award Number: 9206305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy S. Baker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study involves the coordinated application of cryo-electron               
              microscopy (cryoEM), three-dimensional image reconstruction, and               
              X-ray diffraction methods to address fundamental questions about               
              the overall morphology, composition and function of plant                      
              viruses.  These studies will focus on structural analyses of                   
              three plant viruses:  cowpea mosaic virus (CPMV), cowpea                       
              chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV), and barley yellow dwarf virus                   
              (BYDV).  Complexes of CPMV with two separate monoclonal Fab                    
              fragments will be studied to investigate the detailed                          
              interactions between viruses and antibodies as well as the                     
              organization of the single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) in CCMV (and also              
              brome mosaic virus).  Work with BYDV aims to localize the                      
              factor(s) responsible for aphid transmissibility.  In addition,                
              studies will be made to coordinate cryoEM and X-ray data to learn              
              how to correct for the effects of the microscope contrast                      
              transfer function.  This should allow for reconstructed density                
              maps that give a more accurate definition of protein and nucleic               
              acid distributions and also provide the potential to attain                    
              higher resolution.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              These studies provide a powerful way to examine protein-protein                
              and protein-nucleic acid interactions which are involved in                    
              establishing virus stability and dictating viral assembly and                  
              disassembly (uncoating).  The cryoEM techniques are ideally                    
              suited for studying large macromolecules and complexes that have               
              proved difficult or "impossible" to crystallize and examine by                 
              diffraction methods.  Long term goals are to examine and                       
              understand virus-antibody interactions, examine protein and                    
              nucleic acid organization, and develop enhanced methodology for                
              studying virus structures with complementary biophysical                       
              techniques.  The plant viruses are excellent model systems for                 
              these studies because i) they are readily and inexpensively                    
              obtained in large, highly-purified quantities, ii) they are not                
              human pathogens, and iii) their molecular biology and genetics                 
              are well characterized.
