Title       : Target Recognition During Gastrulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9206872

Award Number: 9206872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Hardin jdhardin@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During gastrulation the embryo undergoes a dramatic reorganization,            
              as massive morphogenetic movements and tissue differentiation                  
              result in the formation of patterned structures arrayed along the              
              body axis.  The cells that participate in morphogenesis at the                 
              gastrula stage must presumably "read out" information regarding                
              their position along the axes of the forming embryo, and use that              
              information as they produce patterned structures.  Dr. Harden's                
              laboratory has focused on pattern formation during gastrulation in             
              a seemingly simple system, the sea urchin embryo, in order to                  
              discover general rules that all embryos use to produce patterned               
              structures during gastrulation.  Using experimental approaches that            
              are unique to this system, we have found that mesenchyme cells in              
              that sea urchin embryo form patterned structures in response to                
              spatially localized target information in the ectoderm or                      
              underlying basal lamina.  This proposal is aimed at gaining a                  
              greater understanding of these target recognition events, using                
              molecular biology, computer-enhanced imaging techniques, and                   
              classical embryology.  Specifically, this proposal seeks to answer             
              the following questions: (1) What is the nature of the interaction             
              between cells and their targets? (2) When and how do these targets             
              arise during development? (3) What is the molecular nature of these            
              targets? Our long term goal is to understand the rules that cells              
              use to interact with one another in a coordinated fashion to                   
              transform the structure of the embryo during gastrulation.
