Title       : A Unified Approach to Inter-Domain Multiple-Tos Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1992 
File        : a9206418

Award Number: 9206418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307537             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Estrin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4090,9217,
Abstract    :
              The Internet today has evolved from a model based on a hierarchy               
              to one mainly based on a richly interconnected mesh.  Due to this              
              change in topology, in addition to the exponential growth the                  
              Internet is currently experiencing, there exists a dire need for               
              new protocols that support both the ability to route traffic                   
              based on policy (PB) and/or type of service (TOS) and the ability              
              to scale well with respect to the memory, computational, and                   
              bandwidth resources necessary to provide for adaptive routing of               
              traffic.  This proposal addresses these requirements by combining              
              the best of three current routing protocols.  The Border Gateway               
              Protocol (BGP) was first implemented on the NSFNET backbone as a               
              direct response to the need for a new exterior gateway protocol                
              in the late 1980s to handle the increase in size of the Internet               
              and the non-hierarchical peering that was beginning to appear.                 
              It is based on a path-vector routing model which uses static                   
              routes with accompanying policies per network and is intended for              
              use with IP-based networks. It is currently being adapted and                  
              implemented by major routing vendors in their products.  The                   
              Inter Domain Routing Protocol (IDRP) is BGP with additional                    
              capabilities and adapted for use in the OSI world using CLNP.                  
              IDRP is very close to passing its last international standards                 
              vote and will then be an ISO/CCITT standard.  Its emergence will               
              be very helpful in the deployment of U.S. GOSIP compliant                      
              networks.   The Inter Domain Policy Routing (IDPR) is a model                  
              that allows for the pre-selection of the networks a packet will                
              transit based on the policies and TOS supported by the transit                 
              networks in addition to the policies or TOS required by the                    
              source.  This capability is one that many Federal agencies need                
              in order to select network paths based on security, cost factors,              
              guaranteed bandwidth for multi-media and real time experimental                
              control, in addition to providing the agencies with the tools                  
              necessary for implementing their acceptable use policies.  The                 
              IDPR uses dynamic installation of routes to accomplish its goals.              
              The combination of BGP, IDRP, and IDPR would provide the best of               
              all worlds. Economy of resources would be gained using the                     
              aggregation features found in BGP/IDRP, thereby reducing routing               
              table sizes, reducing the computational cycles required to                     
              calculate routes, and the bandwidth necessary for transmitting                 
              the routing information. In addition, the flexibility found in                 
              IDPR, required to handle special cases such as those defined by                
              the federal agencies, and both quality of service and type of                  
              service support will be provided.  This proposal aims at building              
              on the currently deployed infrastructure and protocols in a                    
              manner that would not require a mass scale replacement of current              
              technologies and equipment, and therefore provide for a phased                 
              evolution to an Internetwork with enhanced capabilities.
