Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Percolation, Particle Systems, and Other Stochastic
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9206139

Award Number: 9206139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth S. Alexander alexandr@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia M. Neuhauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   There are a number of problems to be studied.  Three                      
              problems concern percolation.  The cluster size distribution and               
              closely related aspects of the geometry of finite clusters will                
              be examined for a continuous model in which the probability of a               
              bond being occupied is a function of its length; the spread of th              
              distribution of the passage time in first passage percolation                  
              will be studied; and finite clusters in the Fortuin-Kastelyn                   
              random cluster model will be examined and the results applied to               
              the Ising model conditioned to be less magnetized thatn is                     
              typical.  Research in interacting particle systems and cellular                
              automata will center around four model which have applications in              
              physics and biology: a catalytic surface reaction model, a                     
              threshold forest fire model, a cancellative system with mass                   
              extinction, and a model for the even-odd theory of food chains.                
              Results to be sought concern the asymptotic behavior of these                  
              model and phase transitions.                                                   
                   The investigator will study systems in which small-scale                  
              randomness produces large-scale phenomena which are essentially                
              nonrandom.  Such systems have long been an object of study in                  
              mathematical physics, and more recently also in biology.  A                    
              standard physical example is a magnet, in which individual iron                
              atoms have randomly aligned magnetic poles, with a slight                      
              tendency for nearby atoms to have parallel alignments.  Depending              
              on the temperature, this tendency may or may not be reflected in               
              a large-scale nonrandom amount of magnetization of the chunk of                
              iron.
