Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applied Descriptive Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1992    
File        : a9206922

Award Number: 9206922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard S. Becker becker@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Descriptive set theory is the branch of mathematical logic                
              concerned with sets of real numbers.  The investigator intends to              
              work on three topics in applied descriptive set theory, that is, on            
              some connections which exist between descriptive set theory and                
              some other parts of mathematics, specifically (1) classification of            
              pointsets in the projective hierarchy, (2) descriptive set theory              
              and finer topologies, (3) descriptive set theory and Polish group              
              actions.  All three topics are related to analysis and topology.               
              The third topic is also related to other parts of mathematical                 
              logic, such as Vaught's Conjecture and the theory of definable                 
              cardinality.  Some of the problems in the project will be                      
              considered under the assumption of strong set theoretic axioms such            
              as the axiom of determinacy.                                                   
                   Considering that the real numbers can be thought of as the                
              ordinary number line of grade school arithmetic, it is surprising              
              how much structure can be imposed upon them and how intricate the              
              questions that can be asked about this structure.  Descriptive set             
              theory is the theory that addresses these questions with all the               
              machinery of modern mathematical logic.  For example, a standard               
              construct of this theory is the Borel hierarchy of sets, consisting            
              of two infinite sequences of families of sets, the Pi sets and the             
              Sigma sets, defined inductively, and hence of increasing                       
              complexity.  One of the obvious applications of the theory is to               
              locate precisely in this hierarchy a particular set which arises in            
              analysis, say the set of points at which a function is                         
              differentiable.  In fact, it is a typical and classical theorem of             
              descriptive set theory (due to Mazurkiewicz) that any such set of              
              differentiability belongs to the family Pi-one-one in the Borel                
              hierarchy.  The investigator is focussed on questions such as                  
              these, which make logic relevant to the wider world of mathematics.
