Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Demographic Dynamics: Mathematical Models,
               Biological Experiments, and Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1992 
File        : a9206678

Award Number: 9206678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Dennis brian@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Cushing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Desharnais  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Costantino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1128,1184,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators undertake an interdisciplinary project to               
              test nonlinear population theory, incorporating the construction               
              and analysis of mathematical models, the design and                            
              implementation of biological experiments, and the development and              
              application of statistical techniques for the analysis of data.                
              They use flour beetles of the genus Tribolium as the experimental              
              organism.  In the first part of the project they identify                      
              appropriate models and estimate the parameters that control the                
              detailed behavior of the models.  In the second part they                      
              document transitions in the qualitative behavior of the                        
              demographic dynamics.  They use combinations of reproductive                   
              rates and adult mortality rates that span boundaries in parameter              
              space from stable equilibria, to invariant cycles, to chaos.  In               
              the third part they test hypotheses concerning the existence of                
              these unusual demographic phenomena and develop methods for                    
              identifying the phenomena in experimental data.                                
                   Understanding the observed fluctuations in animal numbers is              
              a central question in population biology; indeed, it                           
              has far-reaching impacts ranging from food production to                       
              the conservation of species diversity.  In the past ten years or               
              so, the recognition that simple equations can generate                         
              complex dynamics has led to an outpouring of fascinating                       
              theoretical possibilities for the explanation of population time               
              series data.  This project aims to explore the possibility that                
              populations can exhibit chaotic behavior similar to that seen in               
              other physical phenomena.  As indicated above, such behavior                   
              would have significant consequences.
