Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Boundary Value Problems for Operatorsof Mixed Type on
               Closed Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9206140

Award Number: 9206140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Payne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project concerns mathematical research on partial                    
              differential equations.  In particular, work will be done on                   
              boundary value problems for two different linear partial                       
              differential operators on closed domains in the plane.  The first              
              is the Tricomi equation for transonic fluid flow and the second                
              is a model equation for electromagnetic wave propagation in                    
              axisymmetric cold plasmas.  The primary objective of the work is               
              to characterize well-posed problems for singular solutions with                
              data prescribed on the entire boundary by studying the location                
              and strength of possible singularities to these problems. The                  
              methods to be employed are a mixture of modern microlocal                      
              analysis with classic objects such as special functions.                       
              Explicit solution operators will be employed to obtain precise                 
              information on the location and strength of the resulting                      
              singularities.  The explicit methods used in these models should               
              result in a more general understanding of mixed type problems and              
              provide a foundation for the study of nonlinear boundary value                 
              problems of mixed type.  In addition, the precise description of               
              the singularities in these models is of scientific interest                    
              because their presence has physically reasonable interpretations.              
              In the fluid models, singularities correspond to the possible                  
              presence of shock waves in transonic regimes, and in the plasma                
              models, singularities are related to possible plasma heating due               
              to energy absorption from the electromagnetic wave propagation.                
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them.
