Title       : Collaborative Basic Research Towards the Development and Maturation of Phytolith
               Analysis in Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9206419

Award Number: 9206419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25905              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dolores R. Piperno   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Possehl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Deborah Pearsall and Dolores Piperno will collaborate on a                
              project to develop the application of phytolith analysis to                    
              archaeological materials.  Phytoliths are small bodies of silica               
              which are deposited within plants and are usually preserved in                 
              soil after death and decomposition occurs.  Although one species               
              of plant may produce phytoliths of many shapes, and very few                   
              shapes are restricted to a single species, it is possible to                   
              examine phytolith assemblages and make some species                            
              identifications.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The research team will concentrate on corn and related species.                
              They will obtain phytoliths from different vegetative parts of                 
              both domestic corn and possible confusing species to determine                 
              what features are unique to corn phytoliths.  they will also                   
              develop an expert system to permit accurate and easy                           
              identification.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Only under the most unusual conditions are plants remains                      
              preserved in archaeological sites.  Thus, because plants play                  
              such an important dietary role, it is extremely difficult to                   
              reconstruct prehistoric diets.  In tropical areas of the work,                 
              where preservation is extremely poor, this problem is                          
              particularly acute.  Phytoliths, because they are so durable,                  
              provide a potential way around this problem  and therefore merit               
              attention.  However, because of the lack of one to one                         
              correspondence between phytolith species, analysis poses                       
              difficulties.  This research should help to solve this problem.                
                                                                                             
              The project is important because it will provide archaeologists,               
              as well as paleobiologists, with a value tool which should be                  
              useful in many parts of the world.
