Title       : Fundamentals of Surface Exposure Dating: Latitude, Matrix and Geometric Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1993       
File        : a9206037

Award Number: 9206037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129281             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Elmore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred M. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Lipschutz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                   Cosmogenic nuclides provide an important tool for determining             
              the time a rock has been exposed to cosmic rays on the Earth's                 
              surface and also for determining erosion rates of geomorphic                   
              surfaces.  Several important applications have already been                    
              demonstrated:  dating past glacial episodes from exposure ages of              
              rocks on moraines, dating volcanic eruptions, and dating meteor                
              crater impacts.  Although these studies have been successful in                
              producing semi-quantitative results, reliable interpretation                   
              requires a better understanding of the fundamentals of production              
              mechanisms of cosmogenic nuclides.  The three aspects of surface               
              exposure dating that have been studied least are the dependence of             
              the cosmic ray flux on latitude, the dependence of the production              
              rates on the rock matrix, and the dependence of production rates               
              on the geometry of the rock.  The limited data available on the                
              cosmic ray flux does not include important effects of the                      
              air/ground boundary.  This proposal requests funding to measure                
              10Be, 26Al, and 36Cl depth profiles in several rocks of same age               
              and in the same location but of different lithology using                      
              accelerator mass spectrometry.  The latitude correction will be                
              investigated using granitic rocks of same age, but from different              
              latitudes.  All rocks will be dated independently and will show                
              glacial polish to rule out erosion.  A production rate model will              
              be developed using Monte Carlo particle transport codes and                    
              measurements will be compared with theoretical values.  The                    
              production rate model developed will then be available for others              
              to predict surface production rates in other rocks of different                
              lithology, other geometries, and other latitudes.
