Title       : Supramolecular Liquid Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9206781

Award Number: 9206781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virgil Percec   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              For the past 150 years, organic chemists were concerned with the               
              understanding of the covalent bond.  Recently, research on                     
              molecular recognition (generated by weak, non-covalent                         
              interactions) has been recognized worldwide as an important                    
              intellectual and technological frontier.  Endo- (generated by                  
              convergent cavities) and exo (generated by larger bodies of similar            
              size and shapes, or surfaces) molecular recognition,                           
              preorganization and self-organization provide the basis of                     
              spontaneous generation of functional supramolecular architectures              
              via self-assembly from their components.  It is now accepted that              
              molecular recognition directed synthesis and self-assembly are                 
              responsible for the generation and properties of biological                    
              systems.  This research aims to use molecular recognition both to              
              self-assemble synthetic supramolecular liquid crystalline polymers             
              and to direct their phase behavior.  Two novel classes of polymers             
              will be investigated:  functional supramolecular polymers which                
              self-assemble by using principles that resemble those of tobacco               
              mosaic virus, and both cyclic main-chain polymers, as well as                  
              polymers containing liquid crystalline cyclophane (i.e., cyclic                
              derivatives of main-chain liquid-crystalline oligomers) receptors              
              as structural units.  The second class of liquid-crystalline                   
              polymers will display molecular recognition directed phase                     
              transitions.  It is expected that this research will produce                   
              molecular devices such as self-assembled supramolecular synthetic              
              ion channels and various other systems which, by analogy with                  
              natural biological systems, will combine selective recognition with            
              external regulation.  Most important, this research will enable a              
              step ahead in understanding some of the processes that nature uses             
              and about which we know so little, and transplant them to the field            
              of synthetic su                                                                
              pramolecular polymers.
