Title       : Substructure and Communication in Myosin and Actin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9206739

Award Number: 9206739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emil Reisler reisler@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The contraction of skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscles requires              
              cyclic interactions between the two main muscle proteins, myosin               
              and actin.  The essential steps in these interactions include the              
              activation of the myosin ATPase activity by actin and, according to            
              prevalent views, conformational changes on one or both of these                
              proteins.  A major goal of the proposed research is to clarify the             
              molecular basis of these events.  To achieve aim, actin sites                  
              necessary for the activation of the myosin ATPase activity and the             
              motility of actin filaments will be mapped.  The experimental                  
              materials to be used in the mapping of functional sites on actin               
              will include peptide antibodies, actin mutants, and modified                   
              actins.  These materials will be used in the in vitro motility                 
              assays, and in biochemical and  biophysical assays of actomyosin               
              interactions.  In another part of this program, the structural                 
              determinants of the essential steps in actomyosin interactions will            
              be clarified by comparing the properties of monomeric and polymeric            
              complexes of actin and myosin.  Peptides, protein fragments, cross-            
              linked protein complexes, peptide antibodies, and actin mutants                
              will be used in this project.  The role of specific sites on actin             
              in actomyosin interactions will be assessed via chemical                       
              modifications, proteolytic digestions, fluorescence and light                  
              scattering measurements, and other measurements carried out on                 
              these materials.  Additional insight into actomyosin interactions              
              will be obtained by clarifying the mechanism of G-actin                        
              polymerization by myosin.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              The proposed studies should lead to the elucidation of the basic               
              mechanism of actomyosin interactions and thus, a better                        
              understanding of how the muscle functions and how chemical energy              
              is transduced into work in biological systems.
