Title       : Studies of Dinosaur Bone Histology: Paleobiological Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1994      
File        : a9206603

Award Number: 9206603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99763              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Dodson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dinosaur bone contains many significant features including                
              fibro-lamellar bone, dense vascularization, and secondary haversian            
              bone  Such features are found in living endotherms, and have been              
              cited as supporting the concept that dinosaurs were endothermic.               
              Recently the view has emerged that all tissue types are found in               
              both endotherms and ectotherms.  Specific histological types of                
              bone may indicate elevated growth rate.  Combined with other                   
              approaches such as skeletochronology, some insight into metabolic              
              rate may be obtained.  Progress was made by careful investigation              
              of the histology of series of femora that span the ontogeny of two             
              Early Jurassic dinosaurs from Zimbabwe, Massospondylus carinatus               
              and Syntarsus rhodesiensis.  Both dinosaurs show fibrolamellar bone            
              but neither shows all features of living endotherms.                           
              Massospondylus shows growth rings that indicate it took 15 years to            
              attain a body size f 250 kg.  Growth rate was indeterminate as in              
              modern ectotherms.  In Syntarsus growth was determinate as in                  
              living endotherms, but it took 7 years to attain the size of 20 kg.            
              Each of these dinosaurs occupies a unique position on a                        
              physiological continuum between endothermy and ectothermy.  The                
              proposed study will extend the careful techniques worked out on the            
              Zimbabwean dinosaurs to ontogenetic series of Triassic, Jurassic               
              and Cretaceous dinosaurs from North America and Mongolia in order              
              to obtain a phylogenetic, stratigraphic and geographic perspective             
              on dinosaurian growth rates and the potential development of                   
              endothermy.
