Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Tests for Direction-Invariance and Separability of the
               Second-Order Variation of Spatial RandomFields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1992      
File        : a9206966

Award Number: 9206966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sallie Keller-McNulty                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale L. Zimmerman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this research is to develop statistical                  
              tests for some important properties of stationary spatial random               
              fields.  The properties to be considered are those of direction-               
              invariance (isotropy) and separability, and variations thereof,                
              of the second-order variation.  In addition to having important                
              scientific meaning in many situations, these properties, when                  
              they hold, can greatly simplify both the computations involved                 
              in, and conclusions made from, the analysis of spatial data.                   
              Parametric testing approaches, which are based on a parametric                 
              model for the semivariogram or covariance function, and                        
              nonparametric approaches, which utilize method-of-moments                      
              estimators for sempiparametric approach will also receive                      
              attention.  Biological environmental, and physical scientists who              
              analyze spatial data will find the testing procedures useful.                  
                   The objective of this research is to develop statistical                  
              tests for some important properties of stationary spatial random               
              fields.  The properties to be considered are those of direction-               
              invariance (isotropy) and separability, and variations thereof,                
              of the second-order variation.  This work will have potential                  
              impact on fields of biological, environmental and physical                     
              sciences.
