Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Wavelets, Mulivariate Splines, and Radial Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9206928

Award Number: 9206928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles K. Chui   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph D. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators undertake research in three areas of                    
              approximation theory: wavelet analysis, multivariate splines and               
              wavelets, and radial basis functions.  In the study of wavelets,               
              beyond the mathematical analysis a major focus is on applications              
              to real-time (or on-line) time-frequency analysis.  Hence the                  
              investigators study the analysis and algorithmic and                           
              computational aspects of spline-wavelets and non-orthogonal                    
              wavelet packets.  In particular, they will design a                            
              predictor-corrector algorithm along the line of the Kalman filter              
              to implement the spline-wavelet decomposition without truncation               
              and to take care of noise processes such as white noise.  The                  
              research on multivariate splines also extends to the construction              
              of multivariate wavelets using box splines.  One of the most                   
              difficult problems is the study of minimum supports that give                  
              rise to reconstruction sequences with minimum length.  Again a                 
              predictor-corrector algorithm will be implemented to avoid                     
              truncation of the decomposition sequences. "Radial basis                       
              functions" is a tool that allows fiting both regular and                       
              scattered data by continuously differentiable functions. Certain               
              matrices associated with interpolation and approximation                       
              processes arise in connection with the data fitting.  The                      
              investigators will study the "stability" of these matrices.  They              
              also consider various aspects of the question of how rapidly the               
              approximating surfaces approach the underlying surface from which              
              the scattered data are sampled as the number of data points                    
              increases.                                                                     
                   The wavelet transform is a tool that cuts up data or                      
              functions as well as their spectra into different frequency                    
              components and then studies each component with a resolution                   
              matched to the appropriate scale.  For example, given a signal,                
              one is interested in "cutting" up its frequency content with                   
              local time-information.  This is similar to music notation, which              
              tells the player which notes to play at any given moment.                      
              Wavelets, wavelet transforms, and wavelet packets help in                      
              analyzing signals and data.  Wavelet analysis is useful in data                
              reduction, which already has been applied to high-definition T.V.              
              Using wavelets, the investigators aim at decomposing and                       
              reconstructing signals as simply and accurately as possible.                   
              Another aim is to represent the underlying processes generating                
              scattered data by means of "simple" radial functions.  This                    
              allows one to analyze and extrapolate data, which is important                 
              for artificial learning devices.
