Title       : Response of Mammals to Late Quaternary Global Warming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1992       
File        : a9206894

Award Number: 9206894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell W. Graham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ill St Museum Soc
	      
	      Springfield, IL  62706    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                   Mammal fossils from 14 sites distributed along the central                
              Mississippi River valley from southern Missouri to northern Iowa               
              will be used to reconstruct paleoclimatic changes for the last 20              
              ka.  To accomplish this project faunal remains (ca. 4500-5000                  
              specimens) from seven sites will be identified and analyzed.                   
              Fossils from four sites have already been identified and analyzed              
              and data from electronic catalogs can be captured for analysis in              
              this study.  An additional four sites have been analyzed and                   
              published; their data will be encoded from the literature.                     
                   Taphonomic investigations will assist in defining the size of             
              the catchment areas for the faunal samples.  Radiocarbon dates will            
              established absolute chronologies.  Bone dates will be based on two            
              amino acid fractions (proline and hydroxyproline) to insure the                
              accuracy of dates and to directly date individual species of small             
              mammals.                                                                       
                   Quantitative paleoclimatic reconstructions will be based upon             
              both Climate Space Sympatry (CSS) and Response Surface Analysis                
              (RSA).  These techniques, or variations thereof, have provided                 
              paleoclimatic interpretations of beetles and vegetation,                       
              respectively.  Comparisons of these two techniques for the                     
              mammalian database should elucidate local and regional variations.             
              The mammalian RSA will be directly comparable to the pollen RSA;               
              therefore, it should provide another means of examining local and              
              regional climate patterns.  Results from this project will document            
              mammalian responses to global warming in the late Quaternary, but              
              they should also facilitate knowledge of potential affects for                 
              future climate change.
