Title       : Study of Industrial Buildings and Long Span Bridges Under Wind Loads, Award in
               Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1992     
File        : a9206822

Award Number: 9206822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1505000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Prem Krishna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Roorkee
	      
	      Roorkee, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0304020   Extreme Wind                            
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              Technical Narrative: This proposal supports collaborative                      
              research in wind engineering between Dr. Robert Scanlan of Johns               
              Hopkins University and Dr. Prem Krishna of the University of                   
              Roorkee, India.  Experiments will be conducted at the Corrsin                  
              laminar flow wind tunnel at Hopkins and at the new boundary layer              
              tunnel at Roorkee.  Research will be carried out on the specific               
              use and interpretation of bridge deck section models and building              
              models in the respective wind tunnels.  A backlog of theory                    
              developed at Hopkins on the use of flutter derivatives in                      
              determining wind stability will be used relative to section                    
              models at Roorkee and Hopkins.  Together with various experiments              
              for obtaining flutter derivatives, new techniques for                          
              interpreting the forthcoming data will be applied.  The research               
              will address determining the detailed geometric forms                          
              needed in deck models to enhance stability.                                    
                                                                                             
              Scope: This supports funding for travel of the principal                       
              investigators for exchanges at each other's base of operations                 
              and for experimental work at Roorkee.  The proposed collaboration              
              is expected to continue the development of the flutter                         
              derivatives concept which is considered a major advance in wind                
              engineering, to extend abroad the influence of U.S. methods of                 
              long-span bridge aerodynamic design, and to lead to enhanced                   
              capabilities in both countries.  In India, this research will                  
              lead to developing modelling expertise, to the improvement of                  
              design and construction techniques, technical education and to                 
              minimization of the enormous damage caused by wind storms.
