Title       : Support of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9206821

Award Number: 9206821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Blanpied                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9430400            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. de Janosi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internat Inst Appl Sys An
	      Schlossplatz 1, A-2361
	      Laxenburg, AU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5985      INTER INST FOR APP SYS & ANALY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510205   International Economic Cooperation      
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 0000,5969,5985,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in            
              Laxenburg, Austria, is a multinational, nongovernmental                        
              institution established in 1972 to conduct research in systems                 
              analysis "in relation to problems of modern society arising from               
              scientific and technological development."  The Institute is                   
              governed by a council comprised of representatives from 15                     
              National Member Organizations (NMOs), including the United                     
              States, Russia, Canada, Japan, and several Western and Eastern                 
              European countries.  The                                                       
              grant will support research in three program areas:  (1) Global                
              Environmental Change, (2) Global Economic and Technological                    
              Transitions, and (3) Systems Methods for the Analysis of Global                
              Issues.  The primary goal of the Global Environmental Change                   
              program is to advance understanding and develop the means to                   
              assess the implications of the interactions between human                      
              development and the environment.  Specific areas of concern                    
              include emission, transformation, and transport of toxic materials             
              and pollutants; changes in water resource availability and quality;            
              degradation of soils, biological resources, and ecosystems; and                
              implications for managed agricultural ecosystems.  The Global                  
              Economic and Technological Transitions program is concerned with               
              issues arising from the transition from centrally planned economies            
              to market economies, the integration of these economies into world             
              markets, the impact of technological developments on all                       
              economies, and the complex relationships between the economy and               
              the environment. Research in the Systems Methods program aims at               
              an analytical approach uniting mathematical modeling and other                 
              methods that can deal with complexity, coupling of diverse                     
              processes, uncertainty, and nonlinearity.  IIASA maintains a                   
              balanced research program in this area, with an emphasis on                    
              applying methodological expertise to applied problems in its                   
              substantive program areas.
