Title       : Paleoclimate Change in China: Rock Magnetic Indicators and Their Validation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9206024

Award Number: 9206024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subir K. Banerjee banerjee@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher P. Hunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   In the 2.4 Ma old continental Chinese loess/paleosol sequences            
              large magnetic susceptibility peaks (in paleosols) and troughs (in             
              loess) correlate very well with sedimentological, geochemical and              
              paleotological signatures of climate change, as well as with the               
              dated global ice volume records ( 18O) from the oceans.  For                   
              interpreting the finescale   X record in terms of quantitative                 
              paleoclimatic parameters two models have been proposed in which the            
              magnetic source is either eolian and of constant grainsize, or                 
              pedogenic and thus finer-grained in the paleosol.  We have compared            
              the room temperature rock magnetic properties of a sequence of four            
              identical paleosol and loess horizons (that last 150ka) from one               
              arid climate and one humid climate site, equidistant from the                  
              source of loess.  First, we confirm that recent observations by                
              others are correct:  that the magnetic grainsize is finer in the               
              paleosol layers than in the loess, suggesting a partly pedogenic               
              origin.  Next, we have extended the magnetic measurements to low               
              temperatures (to 15K) to obtain semi-quantitative estimates of the             
              ultrafine fraction and confirmed them by bulk grainsize                        
              distribution measurements.  Thirdly, using additional data                     
              (Mossbauer absorption spectra), we have shown that the magnetic                
              mineral is not the same:  there is more eolian magnetic (> l um)               
              and less pedogenic maghemite (~10 nm) in the loess horizons.                   
              Overall, the humid site does show a higher pedogenic fraction and              
              a comparison of such paired magnetic depth profiles can separate               
              the eolian input from the pedogenic production.                                
                   This is an extended supply in which the average magnetic                  
              record from two nearby arid climate sites will be compared with the            
              average of two humid climate sites, to separate the common eolian              
              record from the regional pedogenic one.  Quantitative estimates of             
              magnetic mineral composition and grainsize will be obtained from               
              combined low temperature magnetic and Mossbauer data, and then the             
              inferred variations in pedogenesis (interpreted as regional                    
              paleomonsoon strength variations) will be checked for selected                 
              samples using independent measures of pedogenic alterations.  bulk             
              grainsize distribution, chemical indices such as (A1 2O3 + Fe2O3)              
              (Na2O +K22O), FeO/FeO3, CaCo3 content etc., authigenic clay                    
              mineralogy and SEM textural evidence of pedogenic maturation and               
              CBD- extracted soluble finegrained iron oxide content.  The results            
              will be a validation of the magnetic parameters used to measure                
              paleoenvironmental changes, as well as the history of global (i.e.,            
              continental Asian) and regional climate changes in central China.
