Title       : Hormonal Regulation of Cytoplasmic Ca2+ in the Cereal Aleurone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9206692

Award Number: 9206692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas S. Bush   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,9145,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This project is aimed toward the elucidation of intracellular               
              signalling pathways that involve calcium in the transduction of                
              hormonal and environmental stimuli in higher plants.  The project              
              is focused on the necessity and sufficiency of changes in cytosolic            
              calcium activity in aleurone cells from wheat seeds after                      
              hormonally- or environmentally-induced germination.  The early                 
              signal transduction events in the seed culminate in a change in                
              gene expression in the aleurone cells.  Cytosolic calcium activity             
              changes will be determined in individual cells fluorometrically,               
              and changes in calcium channel activity that underlie the                      
              redistribution of calcium will be assessed by patch clamp studies.             
              Finally, the timing of the changes in gene expression will be                  
              compared with the timing of shifts in cytosolic calcium activity.              
              The thrust of the project is to link transient shifts in cytosolic             
              calcium activity with specific changes in channel activity and with            
              changes in transcription and translation.                                      
              %%%                                                                            
                 This study is directed toward intracellular signalling pathways             
              in higher plants.  In the process of seed germination, much is                 
              known about hormonal activation of the aleurone cells in the seed              
              and much is known about the changes in gene expression that follow             
              several hours after hormonal stimulation, but the intermediary                 
              steps of hormonal reception and intracellular signal transduction              
              that lead to altered transcription and translation remain elusive.             
              This project will provide significant, new information on the                  
              involvement of calcium in the cascade that culminates in altered               
              gene expression in developing seeds of wheat.
