Title       : Biochemical Analyses of Cytochromes c Biogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1994     
File        : a9206106

Award Number: 9206106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Kranz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The c-type cytochromes possess heme that is covalenty ligated to               
              the apocytochrome and these cytochromes are present in distinct                
              compartments within eucaryotes (i.e., mitochondrial intermembrane              
              space) and procaryotes (i.e., periplasmic space).  Major questions             
              that remain concern what factors are needed for their assembly and             
              how these individual factors are themselves transported to the                 
              proper compartments.                                                           
              The long-term objective of this work is to understand at a detailed            
              molecular level the specific proteins and events that are required             
              for the biogenesis of c-type cytochromes.  Moreover, the mechanism             
              by which heme is transported across bilayer membranes from its site            
              of biosynthesis, the mitochondrial matrix or the bacterial                     
              cytoplasm, is a fundamental question in biology.                               
              Specifically, using the Gram negative photosynthetic bacterium,                
              Rhodobacter capsulatus, we will develop biochemical assays for                 
              processes required in cytochrome c biogenesis.  Previous molecular             
              analysis of R.capsulatus mutants that are defective in cytochrome              
              c biogenesis have indicated that hel genes may encode the first-               
              reported specific heme transporter; ccl gene products may be                   
              involved in the ligation of heme to apocytochrome c in the                     
              periplasmic space.  Thus, we will develop (1) in vitro heme                    
              transport assays and (2) in vitro heme lyase assays and apply these            
              to R. capsulatus mutants that are predicted to be defective in                 
              these processes.                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Both eucaryotes and procaryotes possess heme proteins called c-type            
              cytochromes that are present in distinct compartments within their             
              cells.  These cytochromes are vital for mitochondrial and bacterial            
              electron transport processes and consequently ATP production.  The             
              c-type cytochromes have been the subject of thousands of studies               
              concerning their function and structure (e.g., X-ray                           
              crystallography). Nevertheless, little is known about how a native             
              c-type cytochrome is assembled in a particular compartment.  For               
              example, it is unknown how (and in what form) heme is transported              
              from its site of biosynthesis, the mitochondrial matrix or the                 
              bacterial cytoplasm, to the assembly site of the cytochrome (i.e.,             
              the mitochondrial intermembrane space or the bacterial periplasm).             
              Thus, the mechanism of heme transport across bilayer membranes is              
              a fundamental question in biology.                                             
              Our previous molecular genetic analysis of mutants in the                      
              bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus that are specially defective in               
              cytochromes c biogenesis, have implicated specific gene products               
              (called hel) as the best candidate (and first ever reported) for a             
              specific heme transporter.  This proposal includes the development             
              of in vitro heme transport assays to further investigate these                 
              defects.  Additionally, the mechanism by which heme is covalently              
              ligated to the apocytochromes will be studied by the development of            
              in vitro assays for this process.  The long-term objective of this             
              work is to understand at a detailed molecular level the specific               
              proteins and events that are required for the biogenesis of c-type             
              cytochromes in bacteria.
