Title       : Molecular Genetics of a New Tumor Suppressor Gene in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9206096

Award Number: 9206096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Bryant pjbryant@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We propose a molecular genetic analysis of a newly discovered                  
              tumor-suppressor gene (warts,abb.wts) in Drosophila.  The gene is              
              identified by the tumorous phenotype of mitotic-recombination                  
              clones that are homozygous for small chromosome deficiencies of the            
              wts gene.  Absence of the wts gene from imaginal disc cells causes             
              excess cell proliferation, causes clone rounding presumably by                 
              interfering with control of oriented cell divisions, and allows                
              cuticle to be secreted between cells as well as over their apical              
              surfaces.  The wts gene is known, from cytogenetic mapping, to be              
              present in DNA that has already been cloned.  We will isolate new              
              mutations in wts and other unidentified tumor suppressor genes                 
              using a new method for revealing the homozygous phenotype of                   
              recessive mutations in mitotic recombination clones.  We will                  
              identify the transcription unit corresponding to wts in the cloned             
              DNA by mapping deficiency breakpoints and wts mutations at the DNA             
              level.  We will isolate cDNAs corresponding to wts and determine               
              their nucleotide sequence in order to predict the amino acid                   
              sequence and possible function of the gene product.  Antibodies                
              will be raised against a fusion gene product made in bacteria, and             
              the antibodies will be used to localize the gene product at both               
              light and electron microscopic levels.  We will mark wts clones in             
              the undifferentiated imaginal disc in order to further examine the             
              effects of the mutation on clone growth and on the distribution of             
              cytoskeletal and cell-surface proteins.                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              The identification and characterization of novel tumor-suppressor              
              genes in this simple model system of the fruit fly may lead to the             
              identification of new tumor-suppressor genes in man.
