Title       : SGER: Structure and Function of Electroreceptive Organs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9206390

Award Number: 9206390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36786              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Klinger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Southern Research Inst
	      
	      Birmingham, AL  35205    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Sharks, rays and skates are able to detect extremely                           
              weak electromagnetic fields and use this sense to                              
              capture their prey, since all living animals produce                           
              natural electric fields.  Sharks also use this ability                         
              for navigation in the open seas by using the earth's                           
              magnetic field as a frame of reference.  These special                         
              organs which act as "ears" for sensing weak                                    
              electromagnetic fields are long, jelly-filled tubes                            
              within the sharks's bodies.  Although these organs have                        
              been studied for years, little attention has been given                        
              to the jelly, itself, and it has usually been considered                       
              to be a filler substance without much importance.                              
                                                                                             
              The major objective of this research is to test the idea                       
              that the jelly material in the shark organs plays a                            
              major role in their ability to detect electromagnetic                          
              fields.  If this notion is correct, a better                                   
              understanding of how sharks detect their prey is                               
              anticipated.  Furthermore, the results of these studies                        
              may be important for human health concerns in relation                         
              to the controversy about whether high-voltage power                            
              lines may cause cancer in nearby residents.  If this                           
              suspicion is correct, it would suggest that certain                            
              molecules or cells in the human body are sensitive to                          
              electric or magnetic fields.  A better understanding of                        
              how the shark organ jelly responds to electromagnetic                          
              fields may provide clues into the ways in which such                           
              fields may affect humans.
