Title       : Biogenesis of Photosystem II: Maturation and Stabilization of Transcripts of the
               psbB and psbC Loci of Chlamydomonas Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9206689

Award Number: 9206689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Schmidt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9145,
Abstract    :
                 A complex aspect of chloroplast biogenesis is the pervasive                 
              involvement of postranscriptional processes within the organelle               
              that govern the formation of mRNAs for proteins of the                         
              photosynthetic apparatus.  We have isolated nuclear mutants of                 
              Chlamydomonas that do not accumulate chloroplast transcripts for               
              two light-harvesting components, CP47 and CP43, of Photosystem II              
              reaction centers.  Mutants 6.2z5 synthesizes, but does not                     
              accumulate, psbC mRNA while GE2.10 is defective in stabilization               
              of several transcripts from the psbB locus.  The mutants appears               
              to lack proteins that interact specifically with the mRNAs and                 
              function to protect degradation.  For GE2.10 however, it is also               
              possible the maturation of a polycistronic psbB transcript is                  
              impaired.  Our studies include: 1) completing sequencing of the                
              psbB locus to elucidate the products encoded by this region of                 
              the alga's chloroplast genome and the occurrence of secondary                  
              structures that presumably specify transcript maturation of                    
              stabilization; 2) characterizing the primary transcripts and                   
              products of psbB; 3) analyzing proteins from purified                          
              chloroplasts from wildtype versus the mutant strains, that bind                
              to RNAs from psbB and psbC subclones; 4) isolating of genes                    
              encoding the RNA-binding proteins by use of oligonucleotide                    
              probes or complementation of the mutant strains by transformation              
              with a plasmid library of wildtype nuclear DNA; 5) if time                     
              allows, assessing the roles of non-coding sequences of the psb                 
              transcripts by transforming chloroplasts of the mutants and                    
              wildtype with constructs of psbC gene fragments with psbB                      
              flanking regions (and vice-versa).                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The photosynthetic apparatus of plants and algae is formed                     
              through the coordinated activities of two cellular compartments:               
              the chloroplast, where photosynthetic activities are                           
              compartmentalized, and the nuclear/cytoplasmic chambers where                  
              many regulatory and photosynthetic proteins are synthesized.                   
              Although chloroplasts can synthesize a many photosynthetic                     
              proteins, especially those involved in light energy conversion                 
              into chemical energy, they are not autonomous with respect to                  
              either their ability to generate functional photosynthetic                     
              complexes or with respect to the regulation of their                           
              photosynthetic and synthetic functions.  Our work concerns                     
              understanding how chloroplast gene expression is regulated by                  
              proteins imported from the cytoplasm.  We have found that nuclear              
              mutants of the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas, which unlike              
              vascular plants can easily grown by provision of simple                        
              carbohydrates, are defective in the accumulation of mRNAs                      
              encoding chlorophyll-binding proteins that are made in the                     
              chloroplast.  This project is to characterize the nature of the                
              defect which causes the chloroplast gene products to be rapidly                
              degraded after they are synthesized.  Our approach is to utilize               
              gene sequencing, biochemical and genetic means to resolve the                  
              nature of the proteins that normally interact with and stabilize               
              the chloroplast mRNAs.
