Title       : Project A.S.T.R.O. ("Astronomers in the Schools" Teaching Resource Org.)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1996   
File        : a9253156

Award Number: 9253156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger D. Mitchell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Fraknoi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Astronomical Soc of Pac
	      390 Ashton Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941121722    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Project A.S.T.R.O. is a program to bring both amateur and                      
              professional astronomers into the schools to assist fourth                     
              through ninth grade teachers in the classroom, with day and                    
              evening observing activities, with individual student projects,                
              and with inspiration to provide a greater appreciation of                      
              science and lead students to science and engineering careers.                  
              Amateurs are a largely untapped resource for science education                 
              and this project will explore the impact their enthusiasm and                  
              experience can have in providing significant assistance to                     
              teachers and students in grades where crucial science attitudes                
              are formed.  The California-based pilot program will -- after                  
              the development of appropriate protocols and materials -- use 40               
              astronomers and 40 teachers to test the effectiveness of                       
              astronomers (especially amateur astronomers) as school resource                
              agents.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The project has four related components: 1) the assessment of                  
              existing programs of this type and of materials to help both the               
              visiting scientists and the teachers; 2) workshops to train the                
              astronomers, prepare the teachers, and continue developing                     
              activities and resources; 3) school visits and other activities                
              by astronomers for a full school year; and 4) the production of                
              a loose-leaf Teachers' Resource Notebook and a How-to-Manual for               
              bringing astronomy to the schools.  Formative and summative                    
              evaluation by those involved and a professional evaluator will                 
              be a key component of each phase.  A set of guidelines for the                 
              national dissemination of the project will also be developed.
