Title       : Continuous On-line Monitoring of Bacteria in Water and Wastewater Treatment
               Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1992 
File        : a9253006

Award Number: 9253006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando Cadena fcadena@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Eiceman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1417,
Abstract    :
              The concept proposed for this research program is based on combining           
              advanced immunoassay strategies for microorganism recognition with             
              capable vapor sensors for on-line feedback in wastewater                       
              chlorination.  the antibody-antigen step will be configured to yield           
              simultaneously vapors specific to certain pathogens and will likely            
              involve multiple antibody-enzyme-substrate-vapor combinations.  The            
              sensor will be an ion mobility spectrometer which has been altered             
              chemically in the ion source to produce favorable response to target           
              vapors and diminished sensitivity to potential interferences.  This            
              combination of antigen-antibody recognition will be a basis for high           
              selectively and the ion mobility spectrometer will provide ultra-low           
              detection limits and fast response.                                            
                                                                                             
              The combination of immunoassay with vapor sensors is intended for              
              domestic fixed point monitoring in domestic water treatment plants.            
              The feedback loop is intended to allow a rational and informed                 
              control over chlorination.  Such enhanced control will permit a                
              balance between over-chlorination (chemical pollution) and under               
              chlorination (biological pollution) in wastewater treatment plants             
              initially.  However, with minor changes in inlets and small                    
              modifications in procedures (mostly sample handling), in-field rapid           
              bacteria assays could be developed and used nationally and in                  
              developing nations where water borne pathogens constitute daily                
              threats to public health.  The core science and engineering is much            
              the same and both uses will be pursued although priority will be               
              given to water and wastewater treatment plants.
