Title       : Science in the SEAMLESS Day: An Interdisciplinary, Urban, Multicultural
               Enhancement Program for Elementary School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1996     
File        : a9253279

Award Number: 9253279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2075546            (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Camins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Jablon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara M. Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi D. Ludwig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sondra E. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y City Board of Educ
	      110 Livingston St., Rm. 1010
	      Brooklyn, NY  112015065    718/935-2794

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Arthur Camins is the Science Coordinator for New York City's                   
              Community School District 16.  Mr. Camins has designed a                       
              collaborative elementary teacher enhancement project with                      
              Community School Districts 18 and Brooklyn College.  These                     
              school districts are located in Brooklyn, and include                          
              Bedford-Stuyvesant and other high minority and low income                      
              areas.  This project would train more than half of the 1,000                   
              teachers in the 25 elementary schools in these districts in                    
              constructivist inquiry-based approaches to interdisciplinary                   
              science teaching.  The intent of this comprehensive                            
              district-wide effort is to create a "seamless" day in which                    
              science forms an integral part of instruction in all subject                   
              areas.  Education and science faculty from Brooklyn College                    
              would act as resources in the project, and staff trainers                      
              from Lawrence Hall of Science and other curriculum                             
              developers would instruct teacher trainers in several                          
              exemplary hands on curricula. Teachers, principals, and                        
              school administrators will receive hands on training.  In                      
              addition, exemplary teachers will receive additional                           
              training that will prepare them to act as mentors for                          
              pre-service teachers from Brooklyn College.  The project                       
              includes several other extensions, such as a summer science                    
              camp, a materials support center, and supervisory training.                    
                                                                                             
              This comprehensive approach to science instruction can have                    
              significant and lasting impact in the classrooms of these                      
              underserved school districts.  Science will become a vehicle                   
              for teaching reading, language arts, music, social studies,                    
              and all other subjects.  Math instruction will use data                        
              gathered by the students during their science activities,                      
              thereby reinforcing the relationships among subject areas.                     
              This integration of subject areas will be modelled through                     
              an internship program for teachers in training at Brooklyn                     
              College, making this a systemic and potentially permanent                      
              change in science teaching in Brooklyn.                                        
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing on this project amounts to 63% of the NSF                         
              contribution.
