Title       : Science Exhibit Starter Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1994     
File        : a9253404

Award Number: 9253404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2087041            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe Ansel  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Semper robs@exploratorium.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ron Hipschman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Humphrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Exploratorium
	      3601 Lyon Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941231099    415/563-7337

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              13        Physics                                 
              20        Mathematics                             
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Exploratorium seeks support for a program designed to                      
              help approximately twelve new or expanding U.S. museums                        
              acquire quality, educationally provern interactive exhibits.                   
              Over a thirty-six month period, two groups of museums will                     
              work with the Exploratorium to select and produce an                           
              individualized set of exhibits.  The museums will dedicate                     
              staff to participate in the exhibit production process, as                     
              well as in the development of exhibit-based educational                        
              programs.  The production cost of the exhibits will be                         
              shared on a fifty/fifty basis, with NSF's portion being                        
              matched by funds raised independently by the participating                     
              museums.  Participant museums will be able to acquire                          
              stimulating and proven exhibits at half cost, and make use                     
              of the Exploratorium's exhibit construction shops, staff and                   
              other resources in developing educational programs and                         
              materials that complement their chosen exhibit set.  It is                     
              expected that each participants will receive between                           
              fourteen and twenty-four exhibits.  The program will repeat,                   
              to include another six institutions, in the second eighteen                    
              months.  Participants will select exhibits in an initial one                   
              week visit to the Exploratorium and then return for a                          
              minimum four-week period to assist in producing their                          
              exhibits.  Participation staff, through their involvement                      
              with construction, will become conversant with their                           
              exhibits' technical and operational aspects.  The program                      
              will give participants true hands-on training.  In addition                    
              to individualized assistance, each participant museum will                     
              receive publications about exhibit construction and use, as                    
              well as a booklet that includes technical, maintenance, and                    
              educational information about their own exhibits.
