Title       : Examining the Impact of Geology on American Society: An Interdisciplinary
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1992 
File        : a9253417

Award Number: 9253417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith L. Hannah                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lauret E. Savoy lsavoy@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9136,
Abstract    :
                   The experiences of all humans are tied to the Earth, its                  
              processes and materials, and an understanding of this                          
              relationship is critical to the ability of individuals and                     
              society to make informed decisions about environmental issues.                 
              Unfortunately, the current level of earth-science illiteracy in                
              the United States indicates that the nature and history of human-              
              environment interactions is not adequately understood.  The                    
              proposed research represents the initial stages of an                          
              interdisciplinary program to review and analyze aspects of the                 
              interaction between humans and the environment in North America                
              from a geologic perspective.  Focusing initially on the American               
              Southwest, this study will examine the idea that the physical                  
              environment and its study directly influenced human (Native                    
              American and Euro-American) perceptions of landscape and, in                   
              turn, land use through time.  The record of human-environment                  
              interactions will be evaluated using historical review of                      
              geologic studies and other primary and secondary literature                    
              (e.g., in anthropology, history, or geography), and field study.               
              The proposed program will contribute a geologic context by which               
              Earth-human interactions through time can be considered.  The                  
              interdisciplinary nature of this study also has the potential to               
              increase the accessibility of earth science to a wider, more                   
              culturally diverse audience.
