Title       : RIMI: Photocatalytic Oxidation Kinetics of Priority OrganicPollutants by TiO2 -
               A Molecular Structure and Reactivity Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1992    
File        : a9253014

Award Number: 9253014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50073              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Z. Tang tangz@servax.fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin E. O'Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1440,
Abstract    :
              In a one-year study, the research term proposed to study the                   
              kinetics of the oxidation--in the presence of UV light and TiO2--of            
              chlorinated phenols and substituted phenols which are two classes of           
              compounds that include 24 of the 129 priority pollutants listed by             
              EPA.  The intent is that the results will aid environmental                    
              engineers in the development of photocatalytic oxidation techniques            
              for water and wastewater treatment.                                            
                                                                                             
              Objectives of the proposal research are:                                       
                                                                                             
              1.    Photocatalytic oxidation kinetics or organics for three                  
                    different classes, namely, chlorinated aromatics, substituted            
                    aromatics, competitive oxidation between them will be                    
                    investigated.  A model compound in each organic class will be            
                    extensively studied for both adsorption and oxidation.  The              
                    oxidation kinetics will be mathematically modeled by Langmuir-           
                    Hinshelwood equation.  The kinetic parameters obtained will be           
                    used to estimate the oxidation parameters of other organics in           
                    the class according to molecular structure-reactivity                    
                    relations at a given water quality.                                      
                                                                                             
              2.    The effects of water quality such as pH, dissolved oxygen,               
                    alkalinity, and hardness on the Hammett plot will be studied.            
                    The effect of temperature and light intensity will also be               
                    investigated for different classes of organic pollutants.                
                                                                                             
              3.    When more than on substrate coexist in the solution, a                   
                    competitive oxidation kinetics will be established.  A                   
                    mathematic model will be constructed according to molecular              
                    parameters, water qualities, temperature, and light intensity            
                    to predict the oxidation rate for a given organic compound at            
                    a given water quality and organic mixture.                               
                                                                                             
              4.    Fundamental mechanisms such as hydroxyl radical attack and               
                    positive hole oxidation will be differentiated under different           
                    experimental conditions for different organic compounds                  
                    through Hammett plots by using pH as the master variable.
