Title       : Math Smart
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9253376

Award Number: 9253376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1086683            (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Crippens dcrippens@kcet.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KCET/Comm Telev of So Cal
	      4401 Senset Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900276017    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Community Television of Southern California (KCET/Los Angeles)                 
              proposes to create a national television series supported by                   
              outreach activities designed to motivate parents to participate                
              in and support children's learning and enjoyment of mathematics.               
              This proposal requests National Science Foundation funding of $1               
              million towards a total twenty-two month project costing                       
              approximately $1.7 million.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The proposed television series Math Smart (working title) will                 
              include 5 lively half-hour programs designed specifically to aid               
              parents and other adult family members of children in first                    
              through third grade.  The series will be offered for broadcast                 
              nationally on the Public Broadcasting System (PBS).                            
              Videocassettes of the series and an accompanying Resource Guide                
              will also be made available for home use.  National promotional                
              and outreach activities will complement the PBS broadcast,                     
              including presentations of national educational conferences and                
              one-day orientation workshops for parents and teachers at                      
              selected sites.  Over the course of the project, process and                   
              outcome evaluation will be conducted to ensure the effectiveness               
              of the MATH SMART materials and activities.                                    
                                                                                             
              The primary goal of the MATH SMART Project is to empower parents               
              to participate in and reinforce the learning of mathematics and                
              a vital par t of everyday life.  It is from parents that                       
              children develop the foundation for their educational success.                 
              Unfortunately, many parents do not possess the mathematical                    
              skills or confidence needed to help their children.  By                        
              providing examples of hands-on learning activities which                       
              families can do together at home, MATh SMART offers parents the                
              tools to help excite young children about mathematics.  While                  
              special emphasis will be given to encouraging minority                         
              participation, this project seeks to help all parents and other                
              primary caretakers prepare children for the 21st century.
