Title       : Learning Science Through Guided Discovery: Liquid Water and Molecular Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9253407

Award Number: 9253407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1778805            (Estimated)
Investigator: H. E. Stanley hes@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              13        Physics                                 
              20        Mathematics                             
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 7257,9177,9217,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In every drop of water, down at the scale of atoms and                         
              molecules, there is a world that can fascinate anyone -                        
              ranging from a non-verbal young science student to an ardent                   
              science-phobe.  The objective of Learning Science Through                      
              Guided Discovery: Liquid Water & Molecular Networks is to                      
              use advanced technology to provide a window into this                          
              submicroscopic world, and thereby allow students to discover                   
              by themselves a new world.  We are developing a coordinated                    
              two-fold approach in which a cycle of hands-on activities,                     
              games, and experimentation is followed by a cycle of                           
              computer simulations employing the full power of computer                      
              animation to "ZOOM" into the depths of his or her newly-                       
              discovered world, an interactive experience surpassing that                    
              of an OMNIMAX theater.  Pairing laboratory experiments with                    
              corresponding simulations challenges students to understand                    
              multiple representations of concepts.  Answers to student                      
              questions, resolution of student misconceptions, and                           
              eventual personalized student discoveries are all guided by                    
              a clear set of "cues" which we build into the computer                         
              display.  Moreover, the ability to visualize "real-time"                       
              dynamic motions allows for student-controlled animated                         
              graphic simulations on the molecular scale and interactive                     
              guided lessons superior to those afforded by even the most                     
              artful of existing texts.  While our general approach could                    
              be applied to a variety of topics, we have chosen to focus                     
              first on water; later we will test the generality of the                       
              approach by exploring macromolecules such as proteins and                      
              DNA.                                                                           
                                                                                             
              The simulation sofware we have been developing embodies a                      
              simple molecular interaction model but requires leading edge                   
              computing in order to (1) apply the model to large enough                      
              systems to yield simple and realistic behavior, and (2)                        
              animate the result in real time with advanced graphics.  Our                   
              ultimate goal in this project is not only to help students                     
              learn science, but also to help them learn to think like                       
              research scientists.  By looking at scientific knowledge as                    
              a set of useful models - models that are essentially                           
              temporary and will inevitably lead to better ones - they can                   
              see that science is not a set of facts, but a method for                       
              discovering patterns and predictability in an otherwise                        
              disordered and unpredictable world.  Through mastery of the                    
              simulation software, students will gain the self-confidence                    
              to embark on their own missions of discovery.
