Title       : Action Research: Purposes, Practices, Possibilities - Creating Links to National
               Science and mathematics Reform...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1992     
File        : a9253030

Award Number: 9253030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret B. Cozzens                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Molly Watt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel St
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/969-7100

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 7355,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal links action research with three educational                     
              reform initiatives for this decade; the push for new                           
              professional roles for teachers, the revitalized reform                        
              movements in mathematics and science education, and the need                   
              to reframe the current practices in teaching and assessing                     
              learning along a more constructivist approach.  Action                         
              research in schools is usually undertaken by teachers to                       
              improve their own practices; it can make significant                           
              contributions to each of these agendas, although it has been                   
              under-utilized.  This project will develop and disseminate                     
              the rationale and knowledge of how action research can                         
              support real change in classroom practices.  It has been                       
              used extensively in Australia and the United Kingdom to                        
              bring teachers' professional knowledge to bear on                              
              educational development and reform initiatives, and in the                     
              United States for major reforms in the teaching of reading                     
              and writing.  Despite significant local projects, this                         
              approach remains largely outside of mainstream science and                     
              mathematics reform efforts.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project will bring together for one weekend a working                     
              conference of 35 participants who represent multiple                           
              perspectives in the fields of math, science, teacher                           
              development, and research methodology, and who play key                        
              roles in educational reform: teachers, school                                  
              administrators, research methodologists, policy makers, and                    
              teacher educators.  They will define action researcch as it                    
              applies to American education, identify its enabling                           
              conditions, and create a vision of its potential to support                    
              renewal in science and math education.  This project will                      
              create a strong network of colleagues knowledgeable about                      
              how action research can faciliate reform; ongoing                              
              telecommunications among participants as the project is                        
              developed and as follow-up to new initiatives; a set of                        
              recommendations for ways that action research can suport                       
              reforms in science and mathematics education, disseminated                     
              through professional organizations; a published monograph                      
              written by conference participants that encompasses current                    
              theory and practice of action research, which will be                          
              delivered to 1,000 leaders and made available for purchase;                    
              and a new methodology for linking small, context-specific                      
              research by teachers for the purpose of informing larger                       
              educational decision-making.
