Title       : Buzzards Bay Rim Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1995   
File        : a9253292

Award Number: 9253292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $956276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. O'Sullivan TOSULLIVAN@UMASSD.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Timothy O'Sullivan, a chemistry professor at the                           
              University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth campus, has designed                    
              the Buzzards Bay Rim Project. This multi-year effort will                      
              train a science teacher leader in every elementary school in                   
              the region surrounding Buzzards Bay in southeastern                            
              Massachusetts (approximately 100 schools in nine school                        
              districts), as well as many principals and school district                     
              administrators. The region has a high proportion of minority                   
              students and recent Portugese immigrants, and a level of                       
              education that trails behind the rest of the state. These                      
              teachers will receive more than 50 hours of training on                        
              exemplary hands on curriculum, as well as two summer                           
              institutes devoted to inquiry based pedagogy and assessment.                   
              This cadre of teacher leaders would train teachers in their                    
              schools in the use of hands on inquiry based curriculum, and                   
              would interact as agents for systemic change in each of                        
              their host districts. Each district will form a leadership                     
              team consisting of leader teachers, principals and district                    
              administrators, and will develop a plan for reform of their                    
              science instruction. Pre-service teachers at U Mass                            
              Dartmouth will be assigned to these science leaders as                         
              mentees. Scientists from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute                    
              and Lloyd Environmental Center will act as science content                     
              resources. Massachusetts has recently received a State                         
              Systemic Initiative award from NSF, and this project will                      
              coordinate its activities with the State Department of                         
              Education. The New Bedford School district will participate                    
              in both projects, and will provide a meeting ground for                        
              integrating the efforts.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The Buzzards Bay Rim Project is a model collaboration among                    
              universities, informal science centers, and local school                       
              districts. This effort has significant potential to                            
              establish outstanding science instruction in elementary                        
              schools throughout the region. Interactions with the                           
              Massachusetts State Systemic Initiative Project PALMS will                     
              allow this approach to be duplicated throughout the state.                     
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing represents 83% of the NSF contribution.
