Title       : Science in the Liberal Arts Education: An Undergraduate Course Development
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1996      
File        : a9253973

Award Number: 9253973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199749             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Becker beckerw@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Flower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Science in the Liberal Arts Curriculum                                         
              This two-year collaborative curriculum development project will                
              develop and implement an innovative interdisciplinary Science                  
              in the Liberal Arts Curriculum at Portland State University and                
              at Clackamas, Mt. Hood, and Portland Community Colleges.                       
              Faculty from the four institutions will cooperate in                           
              formulating a curriculum that provides liberal arts students                   
              with three types of interdisciplinary science courses that will                
              meet the University's general education science requirement.                   
              Natural Science Inquiry courses will focus on open-ended                       
              laboratory and field studies in the manner recommended by                      
              Project Kaleidoscope.  Integrated Science Concepts courses will                
              be developed around concepts that bridge more than one                         
              scientific disciplIne and will feature investigative                           
              laboratories.  Context of Science in Society courses will                      
              explore the social, political, economic and ethical dimensions                 
              of science and technology.  The project will support course                    
              development efforts by natural science faculty from the greater                
              metropolitan area community colleges and the university                        
              academic departments.  The Advisory Council for the project                    
              will consist of nationally recognized experts in undergraduate                 
              science education and educational evaluation in both university                
              and community college settings. In the year following                          
              completion of the project Portland State University  will host                 
              an undergraduate science curriculum conference as one of the                   
              dissemination tools for the project.  Throughout the course                    
              development period educational research will be conducted to                   
              evaluate the effectiveness of the curriculum and teaching                      
              strategies.***//
