Title       : Science is BASIC (Bridging Assessment into Science Instruction and Curriculum)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1993      
File        : a9253208

Award Number: 9253208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435368             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Angello   (Principal Investigator current)
              Judi Backman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Highline School District
	      15675 Ambaum Blvd. S.W.
	      Seattle, WA  981662523    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Highline School District of Seattle, Washington, has                       
              been a leader in the use of hands on science kits in                           
              elementary schools.  Virtually all teachers in all schools                     
              rely on a series of experiential learning modules for                          
              science instruction.  The district now plans to replace                        
              their current system of paper-and-pencil student assessment                    
              with "authentic assessment", which uses student performance                    
              products (portfolios, discussion, simulations, etc.) as data                   
              for evaluation by teachers.  Testing would change from a                       
              separate activity to one that is embedded in the                               
              instruction.  Teachers will be exposed to a variety of                         
              approaches to authentic assessment and the research that has                   
              been done on each.  With the guidance of specialists on                        
              performance assessment, the teachers will develop assessment                   
              techniques that fit into each kit module.                                      
                                                                                             
              Many simultaneous benefits will accrue from this change.                       
              Teachers will gain greater insight into each student's                         
              abilities and needs, and the methods used for assessment                       
              will become better aligned with the educational goals of the                   
              district.  Teachers will also work with volunteer scientists                   
              in developing assessment plans, thereby increasing their                       
              understanding of the true nature of scientific inquiry as                      
              well as of specific content areas.  The implementation of                      
              performance assessment throughout the Highline District                        
              constitutes a unique and important experiment that has the                     
              potential for very wide impact.                                                
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing on this project represents 29% of the NSF                         
              contribution.
