Title       : Dissemination of Instructional Materials in Science for the PreCollege level: A
               Report to the Profession
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  1995   
File        : a9253093

Award Number: 9253093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114881             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Reynolds   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reynolds & Schaeffer, Inc.
	      PO Box 265
	      Haddonfield, NJ  080330219    609/428-6700

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the past decade, the Division of Materials Development,                 
              Research, and Informal Science Education (DMDRI) at the National               
              Science Foundation (NSF) has funded more than 100 projects aimed               
              at developing materials to enhance both formal and informal                    
              teaching and learning across the nation in the fields of                       
              mathematics, science and technology.  While each of these                      
              projects has had a limited, project-specific evaluation                        
              component built into it, heretofore there has been little effort               
              to assess the longer-term impact of the projects either                        
              individually or as a class on teaching and learning on a broad                 
              scale across the nation.                                                       
                                                                                             
              To find the answers to key questions about the impact of                       
              DMDRI/NSF-sponsored activities, Reynolds and Schaeffer                         
              Associates, Inc. (R&S), proposes to use a highly interactive                   
              interdisciplinary team approach.  R&S will begin by working with               
              the DMDRI/NSF staff to select between 15 and 18 projects that                  
              are presently funded, or have been funded, by DMDRI/NSF within                 
              the past decade and have been judged to be successful according                
              to the limited objectives of the individual project evaluations.               
              R&S will recruit and coordinate a team of people with                          
              significant expertise in the field who have successfully served                
              in past projects, analyze the data and file individual reports                 
              for each project with the R&S PI.  The PI will analyze and                     
              synthesize the reports on the 15 to 18 individual projects into                
              a single coherent report on the impact of DMDRI/NSF activities                 
              on formal and informal teaching and learning in the fields of                  
              mathematics, science and technology across the broad national                  
              spectrum.  This report will be filed with the Director,                        
              DMDRI/NSF not later than seven months from the project start                   
              date.
