Title       : VANT Outreach Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9253317

Award Number: 9253317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $536682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia Tharp   (Principal Investigator current)
              E. Murray Rudisill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The grant funds a 3 year project to inservice and supports                     
              teacher trainers n Virginia and eastern North Carolina.  In                    
              addition, the project would develop a network of leadership                    
              teams, each composed of one mathematics and one science                        
              teacher.  Thirty of these teams act as site coordinators for                   
              interactive telecourses that use TRANSIT (Technology Reform                    
              and Specialists Inservice training) materials developed at                     
              Ohio State University and NASA Langley.  The courses primarily                 
              focus on innovative methods of teaching mathematics and                        
              science and include significant amounts of appropriate                         
              technology for grades 6-12.  Through a combination of video                    
              demonstrations, interactive dialog with the  VANT (Virginia                    
              Network for Technology) staff, "hands-on" work with the site                   
              coordinators, and time to practice new techniques in each                      
              teachers's classroom, the participants modify their own                        
              teaching to meet new NCTM standards and respond to local                       
              concerns.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Each year, fifty mathematics or science teachers form Virginia                 
              and North Carolina attend a 2-week inservice in the summer to                  
              learn to become lead teachers.  Twenty of them are chosen to                   
              form 2-person telecommunication site coordinator teams.  Ten                   
              new teams are formed each year.  Theses teams are chosen for                   
              their expertise and for the availability of a satellite                        
              receiving station.  In turn, these sites are connected to Old                  
              Dominion University and become telecourse and inservice                        
              training centers for additional teachers.  All site                            
              coordinators receive two site visits from the VANT staff for                   
              support and are invited to participate in two academic year                    
              one-day inservice workshops.  In each of the subsequent two                    
              years, fifty additional teachers are directly trained and new                  
              centers formed until 150 teachers have been trained directly,                  
              20 telecommunication centers formed, and thousands of teachers                 
              trained at these sites.
