Title       : RIMI: "Thiol-Mediated Regulation of Yeast-to-Mycelial Dimorphism in Candida
               Albicans"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1997  
File        : a9253037

Award Number: 9253037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397172             (Estimated)
Investigator: Muthukumaran Gunasekaran mguna@fisk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elias K. Manavathu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hart Spiller  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Fisk University
	      1000 Seventeenth Avenue North
	      Nashville, TN  372083051    615/329-8500

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1117,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fisk and Wayne State Universities (located in the urban surroundings           
              of Nashville and Detroit, respectively) are "minority institutions"            
              with a firm commitment to improve the entry and retention of                   
              minority students in various fields of science and engineering.  The           
              overall objectives of the proposed research program are to motivate            
              and train the undergraduate and graduate minority students by (a)              
              teaching the basic principles and applications of different                    
              biological and biochemical techniques in life science research (b)             
              providing hands-on-experience with laboratory instrumentation (c)              
              encouraging the students to participate in the proposed research               
              project on "Thiol-mediated regulation of yeast-to-mycelial                     
              dimorphism in Candida albicans", providing confidence to                       
              independently conduct experiments involving biochemistry and                   
              molecular genetics; and (d) providing training in scientific data              
              collection and presentation to their peers in scientific conference            
              or meetings.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The specific objectives of the research project are:  (1) study the            
              effect of various penetrating and non-penetrating thiol-blockers on            
              the yeast-to-mycelial transition in C. albicans; (2) determine the             
              levels of key enzymes of the v-glutamyl cycle from the yeast and               
              mycelial forms of C. albicans to gain insight into the reason for              
              the rapid decline of intracellular glutathione; (3) The genes                  
              encoding the enzyme(s) with altered expression concomitant with the            
              morphological changes will be clones, sequenced and characterized              
              using gene cloning techniques.  the gene(s) will be isolated form              
              cDNA and genomic libraries of C. albicans and (4) The cloned gene              
              (s) from C. albicans will be expressed in E. coil, the gene                    
              product(s) will be purified and used for molecular and biochemical             
              studies.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project would help to increase the number and improve the                 
              levels of training of minorities and women in life science research.           
              The implementation of the Research Initiation in Minority                      
              Institution (RIMI) project at Fisk and Wayne State Universities will           
              not only improve the quality of the preparation of the students,               
              which in turn will enhance their chances to enter graduate or                  
              professional schools, but also will enable the Biology Department at           
              Fisk to recruit more top quality advanced minority students by                 
              providing funds for their support.  These students, as research                
              participants, will be effective role models for other predominately            
              black undergraduates at Fisk and Wayne State Universities.
