Title       : Why is Music Music? An IMAX/OMNIMAX Film about the Science of Music and Sound
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9253473

Award Number: 9253473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1289137            (Estimated)
Investigator: Valentine Kass   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Sci & Ind
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60601    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              13        Physics                                 
              20        Mathematics                             
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Shedd Productions, Inc. will produce a 38 minute 70 mm                         
              IMAX/OMNIMAX film which uses multicultural music to stimulate                  
              audiences' interest in the physics, physiology, math and                       
              technology of music and sound.  The film will be a musical                     
              science investigation of what music is, why we respond to it,                  
              and what it means in the lives and diverse cultures of people                  
              around the world.  By exploring together music's scientific                    
              structure and its variety of human interpretations, WHY IS                     
              MUSIC MUSIC? will show the dynamic relationships between                       
              science, technology, art, and culture.  Hands-on science                       
              materials will be developed for general audiences and middle                   
              school classrooms to encourage in-depth exploration of the                     
              science and math concepts presented in the film.  Model                        
              teacher training workshops for middle school music and science                 
              teachers will be held with the opening of the film in each                     
              venue to increase teachers' effectiveness with the hands-on                    
              materials.  To enhance the educational effectiveness of future                 
              large-format films, comprehensive evaluations of WHY IS MUSIC                  
              MUSIC? and the accompanying classroom curriculum  will be made                 
              available.  This film will be distributed through the national                 
              and international network of science centers that house                        
              IMAX/OMNIMAX theaters, and may be seen by approximately 14                     
              million viewers during the first five years.
