Title       : Teachers as Research Partners: Testing A Problem-Solving Curriculum Model that
               Integrates Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9253281

Award Number: 9253281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1129271            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol L. Stuessy c-stuessy@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Kulm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Main Campus
	      
	      College Station, TX  77843    409/845-3211

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal seeks to bridge educational research and                         
              classroom practice through the establishment of                                
              collaborative partnerships among university educational                        
              researchers and practicing middle school classroom science                     
              teachers.  Expected results include (a) enhancing the                          
              expertise and professionalism of middle school science                         
              teachers in the state of Texas, and (b) producing a field-                     
              tested model for the development and integrated mathematics                    
              and science problem-solving curricula.  There are three                        
              major objectives of the project: (1) to plan, design,                          
              execute, and evaluate a project that develops and enhances                     
              teachers' abilities to teach science; (2) to design, filed                     
              test and revise a prototype of a model for the development                     
              of middle school problem-solving curricula; and (3) to                         
              evaluate the model's effectiveness in answering research                       
              questions that pertain to the teaching and learning of                         
              science.  Texas teachers will be involved at two levels.                       
              Three master teachers specifically chosen because of their                     
              areas of expertise in mathematics, science, and computers,                     
              will collaboratively execute all aspects of the project,                       
              including workshop teaching to other teachers and                              
              collaborative research with university researchers; and 30                     
              pilot teachers, chosen from a pool of teachers throughout                      
              the state of Texas, who will receive instruction, write and                    
              field test the prototype, and assist in the research                           
              activities of the project.  The significant of the project                     
              is that it provides a mechanism for interpreting research                      
              data and their cognitive worth within the context of good                      
              science teaching.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing is equivalent to 2.0% of the NSF award.
