Title       : RIMI: Establishment of a Molecular Biology Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9253051

Award Number: 9253051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bobby L. Wilson                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret C. Werner-Washburne maggieww@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Loker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald O. Natvig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane L. Marshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Anne Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1108,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in molecular biological techniques have not only               
              revolutionized the types of questions being addressed in research              
              laboratories but have also served to unify previously divergent                
              areas of biological research.  The aim of this proposal is to                  
              develop a core facility for nucleic acid isolation and analysis in             
              the Biology Department at the University of New Mexico.  The RIMI              
              grant will provide Biology students and faculty with a unique                  
              opportunity to work in an interactive facility that will increase              
              the level of training in the department, increase the interaction              
              among minority and nonminority students in different areas of                  
              Biology, and increase out ability to recruit, retain, and train                
              minority students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.               
              The five primary investigators have active research programs in                
              fungal molecular genetics, evolution of host parasite interactions,            
              and plant reproductive evolution.  Areas of research in the                    
              department that will be supported by the facility, in addition to              
              the above, are molecular parasitology, molecular cell biology,                 
              bacteriology, molecular evolution and biosystematics of plants and             
              animals, and developmental biology.
