Title       : Sea Experience: Theoretical and Practical Summer Programs of Teacher Enhancement
               in Marine Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9253324

Award Number: 9253324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1017028            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Joyce pjoyce@sea.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Audrey W. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Wigglesworth  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Sea Education Association
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This 5-year SEA (Sea Education Association) project offers                     
              two intensive summer institutes each year - one for                            
              elementary school teachers and one for middle through high                     
              school science and mathematics teachers - in marine and                        
              nautical sciences, designed to provide participants with a                     
              general knowledge of marine sciences, ideas of field and lab                   
              work that can be implemented in the classroom and passed on                    
              to other teachers, and practical experience working at sea                     
              as part of a team conducting scientific research.  Twenty-                     
              three elementary school teachers and twenty-three middle and                   
              high school teachers will be selected nationally each year                     
              to participate in the summer institutes, for a total of 230                    
              teachers over the course of the project.                                       
                                                                                             
              The Sea Experience programs will begin with shore-based,                       
              three week components held in Woods Hole, MA at SEA's                          
              campus; here, teachers will participate in courses                             
              emphasizing basic concepts in physics, chemistry, geology                      
              and biology which can be conveyed to students through                          
              studies of the ocean.  The final ten days of each program                      
              will be spent on board one of SEA;s fully equipped                             
              oceanographic research sailing vessels, where teachers will                    
              participate in the practical hands-on experience of carrying                   
              out research projects and in the operation of the vessels.                     
              Follow-up activities will include annual workshops for Sea                     
              Experiences participants, and each teacher will be committed                   
              to presenting two in-service training workshops in their                       
              home states.  Teachers will be provided with a large variety                   
              of materials to use in their own teaching and will also be                     
              required to conduct two workshops for colleagues in their                      
              home schools.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This proposal is appropriate for Teacher Enhancement because                   
              it is designed to enhance the science knowledge and teaching                   
              of participants, and because it provides practical                             
              experience working as part of a team conducting scientific                     
              research.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Non-NSF Cost-sharing is approximately 34% of the amount                        
              requested from NSF.
