Title       : An Analysis of Mathematic Teaching Reform Orientation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1992      
File        : a9253078

Award Number: 9253078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: C. A. Riedesel   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The Research Foundation of State University of New York seeks                  
              funds to conduct a study among preservice and inservice                        
              teachers which will inform the mathematics education community                 
              involved in teacher preparation and will also have                             
              implications for inservice education.  In particular, the                      
              proposers will identify teaching behaviors and relate them to                  
              teachers' mathematical understanding, beliefs and attitudes,                   
              class management styles, and to school-level socio-economic                    
              status.  They will try to determine the relationship between                   
              conceptual mathematics understanding and teaching consistent                   
              with the NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation Standards.                             
                                                                                             
              The principals investigators will use a Teaching Policy                        
              Instrument                                                                     
              in their research.  This instrument appears to be appropriate                  
              to assess teacher behavior.  It is grounded in current                         
              research and reform documents including the NCTM Curriculum                    
              and Evaluation Standards.  The instrument was developed and                    
              validated by mathematics education experts;  it was also                       
              piloted prior to the proposed study.                                           
                                                                                             
              The proposers are not requesting any funds for themselves or                   
              for their institution.  Instead, a very modest amount is                       
              requested for the teachers participating in the study.  Other                  
              funds will be provided by the university and by the Mark                       
              Diamond Research Fund at the University of New York at                         
              Buffalo.  Cost share is over 10%, given that no indirect costs                 
              are requested and additional funding will come from the Mark                   
              Diamond Research Fund at SUNY at Buffalo.
