Title       : RIMI: Confocal Microscopy Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1992   
File        : a9253052

Award Number: 9253052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Stricker sstr@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Loker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn G. Vogel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane L. Marshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret C. Werner-Washburne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1108,9130,
Abstract    :
              The University of New Mexico has an extremely high enrollment of               
              underrepresented minorities.  Many of these students are majoring in           
              the sciences and are attempting to gain research experience but are            
              finding it difficult because of the lack of common-use resource                
              facilities on campus.                                                          
              This proposal requests funding to establish a laser scanning confocal          
              microscopy facility.  Confocal microscopes provide a marked                    
              reduction in the out-of-focus haze that tends to make many studies             
              employing conventional flourescence microscopy impossible to carry             
              out.  In addition, the thin optical sections produced by confocal              
              microscopy can be used in conjunction with computer reconstructions            
              to produce highly informative 3-D images.  Such features make the              
              confocal microscope an extremely powerful research tool that is                
              ideally suited for the wide range from evolutionary/ecological studies         
              to cellular/molecular investigations, an in many cases, preliminary            
              data are presented to demonstrate the feasibility of these confocal            
              analyses.                                                                      
              The faculty members contributing to this proposal have active                  
              research programs that involve numerous minority undergraduate and             
              graduate students.  These students and other minority students                 
              enrolled at the University of New Mexico would greatly benefit from            
              having access to a confocal microscope.  Thus, the acquisition of the          
              confocal microscopy system requested in this proposal should                   
              significantly enhance the training of minority students at out                 
              institution.
