Title       : RIMI: Minority Research Enchancement Program in Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9253055

Award Number: 9253055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438747             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Bofah   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arunsi Chuku  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9130,
Abstract    :
              The "Minority Research Enhancement Program in Power Systems                    
              (MREPPS)" proposal is designed to enhance research education in the            
              application of systems theory, optimization, control and expert                
              systems for power systems planning, operation and management by                
              the use of artificial intelligence.  An outreach program and early             
              involvement in research are program components designed to                     
              increase the minority population in engineering.  Enhancement of               
              power systems research will advance Howard University's educational            
              mission by enhancing the quality of programs offered to                        
              undergraduate and graduate students and by providing a means of                
              sharing technological breakthroughs in power systems with other                
              HBCUs.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The research component of the proposal focuses on investigating four           
              of the nine national needs in power systems which have been                    
              identified by the Electric Power Research Institute and the NSF.               
              The outreach component of the program will provide pre-college                 
              students with a more systematic exposure to science and technology,            
              increase the level of graduate students, and broaden the expertise             
              of faculty.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Howard University is the only historically black university which              
              offers Ph.D. level studies in power systems, therefore, a unique               
              feature of MREPPS will include training of graduate students (about            
              12 students each year) from the HBCUs.  These students will be the             
              future college professors in power systems and through their                   
              research experience at Howard ?infinite transfer on program                    
              development at the undergraduate level will be developed!.  Faculty            
              researchers and prospective graduate students who specialize in                
              power systems will be invited to Howard University to attend a                 
              week-long workshop that will address current topics in the power               
              industry and provide a mini-course on knowledge-based systems                  
              engineering and neural networks application to power systems.  A               
              teleconference, to be held at Howard, will link students, faculty              
              and researchers of HBCUs and engineers in the power industry.                  
                                                                                             
              Minority engineers, particularly those with graduate-level degrees,            
              remain acutely underrepresented in the field of engineering.  This             
              problem is especially evident in the field of power systems.  Howard           
              University has contributed significantly to the current pool of                
              minority engineers in the power industry.  Through this program, the           
              University will have a grater impact on increasing the number of               
              minority students entering undergraduate and graduate programs in              
              engineering, on increasing the number of practicing engineers and              
              addressing faculty shortages in the field of power systems.                    
              Finally, the program will address national research needs in power             
              systems.
