Title       : Teachers, Time, and Transformation: A Grassroots Model for Reform in Practice
               and Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1994    
File        : a9253322

Award Number: 9253322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $796470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faye Ruopp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel St
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/969-7100

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The aim of this three year professional development program is to              
              give 36 teachers (grades 4 through 12) in the Boston MA area the               
              mathematical and pedagogical background to become teacher-leaders.             
              Specifically, the proposers have designed a program to explore in              
              depth and across grade levels, topics relating to algebra--                    
              beginning with "pre-algebra" topics at the elementary and middle               
              school levels, as well as high school algebra proper. Participating            
              teachers will study these topics using available, exemplary                    
              curricular materials, and in the kinds of teaching contexts called             
              for by the NCTM standards--including cooperative peer learning, use            
              of hands-on materials, and applications of computers and                       
              calculators. To these ends, participants will attend eighteen half-            
              day workshops during the school year, which will take place during             
              the school day. Local businesses cooperating with the project will             
              provide substitutes to the schools gratis, using volunteer                     
              employees who can discuss with students how mathematics is used in             
              the work place and who, in turn, will gain an appreciation of the              
              day-to-day problems of the schools. During the summer, the teacher-            
              participants will continue their studies in an intensive two-week              
              workshop. This basic format will be repeated in each of the three              
              years of the program. In the second year, the participating                    
              teachers will develop and begin to implement new lessons relating              
              to algebra in their own classrooms. Project staff will provide                 
              close support and mentoring throughout the year. The lessons                   
              developed will then be integrated into a coherent 4-12 program of              
              algebra: "Algebra for Everyone." In the third year, participants               
              will plan and lead a variety of inservice programs in their schools            
              and districts to familiarize other teachers with the new materials             
              and teaching styles. The program will conclude with a dissemination            
              conference at which the materials, lessons, and experiences of the             
              program will be made available on a national basis.
