Title       : Improving Science and Mathematic Education through Integrated Content and
               Interactive Discovery Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1993     
File        : a9253963

Award Number: 9253963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare C. Bailey cbailey@fccj.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane D. Gant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aubra J. Riddle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Q. Mullins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chew Lean Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fl Cmty Col Jacksonville
	      501 West State Street
	      Jacksonville, FL  322024030    904/632-3000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              This is a project to develop an integrated introductory course                 
              in undergraduate science and mathematics by a team of faculty                  
              and professional staff in science, mathematics and psychology                  
              representing three of our four major campuses of Florida                       
              Community College at Jacksonville.  The work is integral to the                
              College's long range plan to revitalize the curriculum and make                
              learning an exciting and rewarding process.  The goals are to                  
              increase understanding and retention of complex subject matter,                
              while at the same time make these enjoyable experiences,                       
              leading to the adoption of life-long learning habits by                        
              students.                                                                      
              Teaching faculty have teamed with psychologists versed in                      
              applications of learning and motivation theory to the classroom                
              as well as in the application of technology to the learning                    
              process.  The faculty team will develop an introductory level                  
              undergraduate course combining the central themes of cycles,                   
              information, and change common across scientific disciplines                   
              including botany, microbiology, chemistry, physics, and                        
              mathematics.  The developers will team teach the course using                  
              strategies that integrate science and mathematics and focus on                 
              the interrelationships among the sciences and mathematics.                     
              The course will be delivered in electronic classrooms that                     
              allow team teaching via telecommunications systems providing                   
              graphic, audio and visual interaction between faculty and                      
              students located on both the North and Downtown Campuses.  The                 
              course will engage student in learning by discovery exploration                
              and collaborative partnerships between students and faculty and                
              administrators acting as mentors to student teams.
