Title       : Interactive Bibliographic Database Resources for Elementary School Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1997   
File        : a9253142

Award Number: 9253142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1242473            (Estimated)
Investigator: E.Wendy Saul saul@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Wendy Saul is an education professor at the University                     
              of Maryland Baltimore County campus, where she specializes                     
              in the use of children's literature and trade books in                         
              elementary science instruction.  Dr. Saul has designed a                       
              collaborative effort with Scholastic Press to develop a                        
              commercial bibliographic software package.  This                               
              microcomputer-based system would provide teachers and                          
              librarians with information on science trade books for                         
              children.  The software would run on Apples, IBMs, and                         
              Macintosh computers, and could use CD-ROM drives if                            
              available or could rely on floppy disk drives.  This                           
              computerized bibliographic resource would contain titles,                      
              content descriptions, annotations concerning hands-on                          
              activities and materials, treatment of gender and ethnic                       
              issues, suitability for students with physical disabilities                    
              or limited English proficiency, and brief reviews by                           
              teachers and children's literature specialists.  The                           
              software would also contain an auditing function that would                    
              record how users navigate through the database query system.                   
              These audit data would be used to research how children,                       
              teachers, and librarians approach the use of science trade                     
              books, and would inform the software developers in refining                    
              the program.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The proposed bibliographic software system has potential for                   
              broad impact on the teaching and learning of science in                        
              elementary schools.  By increasing access to appropriate                       
              literature and trade books, this information resource will                     
              encourage teachers to use science as a way to expand reading                   
              and language arts instruction, and will improve the                            
              integration of instruction across traditionally separate                       
              disciplines.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing represents 146% of the NSF contribution.
