Title       : Equipment for a Full-Year Course in Discovering Physics for Pre-college Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9152938

Award Number: 9152938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28132              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey A. Gould hgould@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mauri Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Leslie Blatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Equipment is being utilized for the development of a two-                      
              semester introductory level laboratory course entitled                         
              "Discovering Physics."  The course emphasizes an understanding                 
              of the basic concepts that naturally lead us to ask "How do we                 
              know...?" and "Why do we believe...?" questions about physical                 
              phenomena.  The story lines of "What is light?" and "What is                   
              randomness?" are utilized for their general interest, their                    
              accessibility, and their importance in physics.  The course is                 
              oriented toward students planning to become elementary school                  
              teachers, adopts the same teaching philosophy that should be                   
              used in the elementary school classroom, and has a fifty                       
              percent enrollment of female students.  The laboratory                         
              emphasizes a cooperative learning environment and encourages                   
              students to develop hypotheses and to propose and perform                      
              experiments that generate real data and experiences.  Funds are                
              being utilized to purchase and construct more sophisticated                    
              equipment that will yield quantitative results, reduce one                     
              layer of student confusion, and allow further experiments                      
              related to electro-magnetic radiation, nonlinear phenomena, and                
              chaos.  Since there are no available textbooks for a course of                 
              this type, project staff are producing a university-level                      
              modular-based Discovery Workbook.  The proposed project is                     
              strengthening the laboratory based course at Clark University                  
              and having national impact.NSF grant funds are being matched                   
              with funds from non-federal sources.
