Title       : Joliet Junior College Physics Enhancement Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1991     
File        : a9152721

Award Number: 9152721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29070              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis J. Hieggelke curth@jjc.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joliet Junior College
	      1215 Houbolt Road
	      Joliet, IL  60431    815/729-9020

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The main goal of this project is to improve the learning,                      
              retention, and application of physics concepts and principles                  
              by students enrolled in physics classes at Joliet Junior                       
              College (JJC).  This is being accomplished by introducing a                    
              series of new experiences using contemporary computer and video                
              technology in physics.  A microcomputer is used in the areas of                
              force, motion, temperature, and radiation to perform data                      
              collection, analysis, and graphing; and is used to construct,                  
              execute, and display physical simulations in mechanics.  Stop-                 
              action videotapes are used to collect data in projectile and                   
              rotational motion.  Microcomputers and video technology provide                
              immediate feedback that makes possible a larger number and                     
              variety of trials and motivates students to probe in greater                   
              detail.The grant is providing software and hardware for six,                   
              networked, color Macintosh II workstations equipped with a                     
              Universal Lab Interface with appropriate sensors and probes.                   
              The grant also is providing a shared LaserWriter II, modem, CD                 
              player, scanner, high resolution video camera, and playback                    
              deck.  This support revitalizes the physics courses at JJC and                 
              provides current technology much more quickly than would                       
              otherwise be possible.This project is encouraging students to                  
              continue study or to support science by improving their                        
              experiences in physics, increasing science literacy, helping to                
              prepare JJC's physics courses for the next century, and                        
              stimulating other community colleges to adapt this approach.NSF                
              grant funds are being matched with funds from non-federal                      
              sources.
