Title       : Computer Education for Undergraduates in Meteorology/ Climatology and Geographic
               Information Systems: An Integrated Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9152174

Award Number: 9152174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton M. Rowe crowe1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Lavin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Leathers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Clark Archer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to develop a                                    
              meteorology/geographic information systems computer network                    
              that allows the exchange of raw data and finished products                     
              between the meteorological and geographic information systems                  
              (GIS) laboratories.  Each laboratory consists of a local area                  
              network (LAN) comprised of a file server and several                           
              workstations, with appropriate printers, plotters and other                    
              peripherals attached as shared resources.  These laboratories                  
              allow students to analyze and display meteorological,                          
              climatological and geographic data in non-traditional ways.                    
              One laboratory is primarily devoted to meteorological data                     
              display and analysis using the NSF-funded Unidata data stream                  
              and PC-McIDAS display and analysis software.  The second                       
              laboratory is used primarily for geographic information systems                
              (GIS) applications using both raster- and vector-based                         
              software.  The laboratories are joined through the University                  
              computing network (HuskerNet) to allow data interchange between                
              LANs.  The synergistic relationship of the laboratories creates                
              a unique environment for innovative undergraduate education and                
              research.  Existing courses in meteorology-climatoloqy and GIS                 
              are improved by the up-to-date computer equipment and the                      
              expanded capabilities allow additional courses to be added to                  
              these programs.  The coupled laboratories allow an emphasis of                 
              the inseparable nature of the physical world and societal                      
              activities in courses and provide a model program for other                    
              departments around the country.NSF grant funds are being                       
              matched with funds from non-federal sources.
