Title       : Undergraduate laboratories in Environmental Sciences: Environmental Analysis and
               Monitoring in an Urban Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1991     
File        : a9152407

Award Number: 9152407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23758              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kate Lajtha   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherman H. Bloomer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing innovative laboratory exercises for                 
              science and non-science majors involved in an interdisciplinary                
              program in Environmental Studies.  Grant funds are supporting                  
              the purchase of an atomic absorption spectrometer with heated                  
              graphite furnace and a scanning spectrophotometer.  These                      
              instruments are key components of laboratories built around the                
              examination and analysis of soils, water, and vegetation of the                
              Charles River Basin in urban and suburban Boston.  Experiments                 
              introduce students to the nature of the scientific method with                 
              a non-traditional approach--the field and laboratory                           
              acquisition and interpretation of data, rather than the                        
              completion of "demonstration" type labs. Each experiment                       
              includes four components: experimental design, field                           
              observation and sample collection, laboratory preparation and                  
              analysis, and data interpretation.  Emphasis in the first year                 
              is on developing experiments for a two semester natural science                
              sequence for non-science majors and for an Environmental                       
              Biology course which is one of the core courses for the                        
              Environmental Science major.  A laboratory manual for both                     
              sequences is being produced which can be used as a model for                   
              similar programs.  The equipment also is being used to support                 
              the modification of laboratory exercises and independent study                 
              projects for majors in Environmental Science, Biology, and                     
              Geology.
