Title       : Scanning Electron Microscope with Image Capture/Playback System for Classroom
               Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1991     
File        : a9152988

Award Number: 9152988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62645              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus R. Brasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Fehn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ching-Hua Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Britt Leatham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This is an interdisciplinary project involving the Departments                 
              of Biology and Geology from the California State University at                 
              San Bernardino.  Faculty are incorporating in lectures,                        
              laboratories and student research information about                            
              ultrastructural surface morphology of various specimens.  In                   
              order to show this information to students faculty are using an                
              Amray 1810 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) to observe                       
              surface ultrastructure of specimens ranging from rock to                       
              biological tissues.  The images observed in the SEM are                        
              captured on an optical disc with a Panasonic optical disc                      
              recorder/player.  The ultrastructural images are incorporated                  
              in classroom instruction in the various departments using a                    
              video workstation, consisting of a Panasonic optical disc                      
              player, a high-resolution monitor and a Macintosh computer                     
              controller.  In addition, images obtained from other                           
              microscopic systems currently available are captured on disc,                  
              thus achieving a range of magnification of specimens from 1 to                 
              100,000 X.  This system allows a variety of courses to use                     
              information not found in textbooks or commercial videodiscs                    
              directly in the lecture room and in laboratory exercises. The                  
              knowledge gained by undergraduate students, especially in the                  
              upper-division courses is greatly strengthened by this novel                   
              approach.  In addition, students have hands-on use of the                      
              equipment in laboratory exercises and independent research.                    
              Further, interactive video programs are being developed to                     
              allow students to simulate experiments using the stored                        
              images.NSF grant funds are being matched with funds from non-                  
              federal sources.
