Title       : Multidisciplinary Digital Communications Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9152883

Award Number: 9152883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36624              (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon Rosenstark   (Principal Investigator current)
              Irving Y. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Frank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony Robbi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The fields of computer engineering and digital data                            
              communications are becoming interwoven rapidly. Examples of                    
              systems where the disciplines overlap are the telephone                        
              network, computer integrated manufacturing (CIM) systems and                   
              the various local area networks (LANs) serving commerce and                    
              education.The computer engineer should understand the                          
              principles of digital data communications. The B.S.Co.E.                       
              computer engineering program at the New Jersey Institute of                    
              Technology includes a two course sequence in the senior year,                  
              communications theory and lab. Also, electrical engineering                    
              students wishing to specialize in communications, one of the                   
              senior year options in the B.S.E.E. program at NJIT, need to                   
              increase their understanding of digital data communications                    
              through a stronger lab experience. The educational experience                  
              of both sets of students is being strengthened considerably by                 
              the development of this multidisciplinary laboratory.  The                     
              equipment being obtained comprises combined pattern generator,                 
              pattern detection equipment to measure the bit error rate in                   
              data communications systems, multiplexer/ demultiplexer                        
              equipment to experiment with the mixing of several data sources                
              on a single medium, and distortion analyzers which can measure                 
              the signal/noise ratio and distortion level of transmitted                     
              signals.
