Title       : Laboratory for Geographic Analysis Equipment Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9152493

Award Number: 9152493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12362              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen P. Kraly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adam W. Burnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Elgie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              One of the primary educational goals of the Geography,                         
              Department at Colgate University is to develop students                        
              technical skills in manipulating social and environmental data                 
              to identify patterns, establish relationships, test hypotheses                 
              and make management decisions.  To achieve this goal, we                       
              require students to use techniques, such as quantitative data                  
              analysis and map development, in several of our courses and                    
              have increasingly stressed the use of Macintosh microcomputers                 
              to perform these tasks.  Although this program is successful,                  
              we recognize two important weaknesses.  Our computers lack the                 
              necessary speed and peripheral support to perform geographic                   
              information systems (GIS) and advanced map analysis                            
              applications, both of which are increasingly important skills.                 
              To address these weaknesses, we propose to create a computer                   
              facility equipped with two Macintosh II computers to perform                   
              the numerically intensive tasks associated with GIS and                        
              advanced map development, four smaller Macintoshes for graphic                 
              enhancement and simpler data analysis and some key peripheral                  
              devices and software for data entry, data manipulation and                     
              product output. The proposed package will not only meet our GIS                
              and map analysis needs but will improve our capability to                      
              require students to apply such techniques in other courses.
