Title       : Development of Engineering Technology Motion Control Laboratory at Cleveland
               State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9152065

Award Number: 9152065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30208              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Zeller  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Anthan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      East 24th and Euclid Ave
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project equips a laboratory with scientific hardware and                  
              software to teach the fundamentals of motion control systems.                  
              This equipment is incorporated into the laboratory portion of                  
              the automatic control systems curriculum for Electronic                        
              Engineering Technology undergraduate students.   Motion                        
              control, along with computer technology, is the basis for much                 
              of the work being done to upgrade U.S. manufacturing                           
              capabilities.  The purpose of the laboratory equipment is to                   
              complete the student's understanding of the complexities of                    
              motion control applications.  The laboratory experiments                       
              complements classroom lectures and computer dynamic simulations                
              of the motion control process. The hands-on experience make the                
              student better able to comprehend the intricacies of the                       
              multifaceted physical and position feedback control systems.                   
              Both rotary and linear output motion are available.  Actuation                 
              devices are DC servomotors and stepper motors, and high                        
              efficiency pulse-width-modulated drive electronics are                         
              provided.  Measurement devices are analog and digital                          
              transducers (e.g. tachometers, potentiometers, resolvers, and                  
              encoders).  Intelligent axis cards are used to study motion                    
              profile capability closely related to automation applications.                 
              A multi-axes demonstration system is included to provide a                     
              complete understanding of motion control flexibility.  The                     
              laboratory experiments insure that the students receive a                      
              strong fundamental understanding of the basic principles of                    
              high-performance motion control.
