Title       : Tabled Logic Programming in the Large
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1997 
File        : a9711386

Award Number: 9711386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96864              (Estimated)
Investigator: I. V. Ramakrishnan ram@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. R. Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Tabled resolution for general logic programs has been shown  to be effective in
              declaratively solving complex  applications, including program verification
              through model  checking, and program analysis for optimizing compilers. 
              Efficient implementations of the above applications have  been built using the
              XSB tabled logic programming system,  which perform at least as well as
              existing implementations  consisting of much larger programs written in lower
              level  languages. The project is aimed at improving the  expressiveness,
              efficiency and ease of use of tabled logic  programming systems. The main goals
              of this project  are: (a) To study the interaction of constraint solving with 
              tabled resolution, a combination that considerably increases  the
              expressiveness of tabled logic programming systems.  (b)To design techniques
              for optimizing tabled constraint  logic programming systems by extending
              traditional factoring  and indexing to constraints, and by selective tabling.
              (c)  To construct tools for high-level debugging of tabled logic  programs. 
              Tabling and constraints have both separately  introduced a new level of
              declarativeness to traditional  logic programming systems. The combination of
              tabling and  constraints enables encoding of problems that cannot be  solved
              declaratively using either individual paradigm.  Tabled constraint logic
              programming thus promises to be a  significant step towards realizing the ideal
              of declarative  programming.
