Title       : Noise-Shaping DACs for Delta-Sigma Data Converters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9711331

Award Number: 9711331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Galton galton@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 2891,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The unprecedented speed, integration density, and economy of modern CMOS circuit
               technology have fueled the rapid evolution of the computer industry, and hold
              the  promise of similarly fueling the personal communications industry. 
              However, the  circuit technology tends to be highly optimized for digital
              circuits wherein  precise analog performance is not critical.  Since
              communication systems must  transmit and receive analog waveforms, the most
              effective use of CMOS circuit  technology for such applications requires
              on-chip analog-to-digital (A/D) and  digital-to-analog (D/A) converters, and
              these are often the limiting factors in  overall system price and performance. 
              For low speed applications such as  telephone modems, delta-sigma data
              converters have emerged as the method of  choice for implementing the on-chip
              A/D and D/A converters because they are  particularly amenable to
              high-precision CMOS implementation.  The purpose of this  research is to
              eliminate a major limitation suffered by existing delta-sigma data  converters
              to facilitate their use in higher-speed applications such as personal  wireless
              communication systems.    Specifically, the research involves the development
              of practical multi-bit noise-  shaping DACs to be used in delta-sigma data
              converters. These DACs avoid the  severe component matching requirements of
              their conventional counterparts through  a digital signal processing innovation
              that causes the noise arising from  component mismatches to lie outside the
              signal band.  Such DACs have the  potential to significantly increase the
              present performance limits of delta-sigma  data converters by eliminating the
              need for one-bit quantization.  The primary  goals of the research are to
              develop practical high-order noise-shaping DACs that  extend the present
              performance limits of delta-sigma data converters, and to  theoretically and
              experimentally quantify their performance.
