Title       : Advanced OODBMS Conceptual Modeling for GIS and Other Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9711846

Award Number: 9711846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Wiegand wiegand@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop high level conceptual modeling and
              usage features in Object-Oriented Database Management Systems (OODBMSs) to
              improve data analysis and querying. This work contributes to current research
              within the database community to provide more comprehensive data management
              support. Areas investigated include Geographic Information Systems (GISs),
              engineering and other scientific applications. GIS applications have complex
              data management needs because of the recent integration of thematic and spatial
              data into the same system. Retrieving such information is currently complex and
              non-standardized. Interest in GIS modeling and querying has been expressed
              nationally by NCGIA and UCGIS. Current work is also being done by ODMG to
              develop OODBMS standards for object- oriented modeling and language support.
              The work here continues the efforts of these groups by studying modeling and
              query needs of advanced applications. Another important application
              investigated involves complex modeling and integration of engineering linear
              referencing systems. The approach of this research is to analyze modeling and
              query needs by working within application areas, evaluating the functionality
              of existing application software, and consulting with domain experts. The
              results of this research are conceptual models and query constructs that are at
              a higher level of abstraction than what currently exists for object-oriented
              modeling and languages. These models and constructs will more closely fit the
              data organization and query needs of the application to allow more natural
              representation of the data and expression of query statements. This research
              will provide stronger data management and analysis capabilities for complex
              problem solving.
