Title       : Inter-University Workshop on Next Generation Package Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9711762

Award Number: 9711762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Madhavan Swaminathan madhavan.swaminathan@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suresh K. Sitaraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9711762  Swaminathan    This award is for support  for the Inter-University
              Workshop on Next Generation Package Design.  The workshop will result in the
              identification of:  1) key technical barriers, 2) current university based
              research status, and 3) major voids that need to be addressed.  The results
              will be published in proceedings and workshop notes.  This knowledge gained
              from this workshop will enable researchers to concentrate research on major
              technical issues, leverage synergistic research, and identify collaborative
              activities.  The workshop will open to the electronics industry (users of
              design methods/tools), software industry (developers of design tools), and
              government organizations to facilitate an open exchange of ideas.  The
              collaboration plan is to use the workshop as a forum to leverage, establish
              synergy, and strategically coordinate university based research activities. 
              The workshop will help establish partnerships among universities for research
              and industry for commercialization.  These partnerships will then approach key
              companies and government organizations for support and assistance where needed.
               The second year workshop will highlight collaboration progress.  The result
              will be a more comprehensive and coordinated plan to address key technical and
              competitiveness issues associated with next generation package design.  A total
              of five sessions discussing key design issues is planned along with a panel
              discussion.    Engineering Research Centers normally involve studies in
              research that involves proof-of- concept testbeds.  This facility will be the
              first of its kind in an Engineering Research Center and in a university where
              the students will have the potential to go beyond proof-of-concept testbeds, to
              prototype production through a systems-level engineering project.  This extends
              their education from study of concepts to include the effects of manufacturing
              constraints on their results.
