Title       : Dissertation Research: Lithic Technology of Paleoindian Materials in Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1997  
File        : a9711546

Award Number: 9711546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10610              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. David Meltzer, Mr. Michael Bever will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to characterize the
              earliest archaeological assemblages in Alaska and compare them to relevant
              materials both from Eastern Asia and the continental United States. While
              archaeologists know the New World was originally populated near the end of the
              last ice age by Asian migrants who crossed the Bering Land Bridge the exact
              route and timing of this process in unknown. Because of its geographical
              proximity to Asia, Alaska should contain relevant archaeological information
              and it appears that such sites are present. For this time period the primary
              materials recovered through excavation are stone tools and the lithic waste
              projects associated with their manufacture. Through stylistic and technological
              comparison archaeologists attempt to characterize assemblages and then compare
              similarities and differences among them. The picture for early Alaska is
              complicated by the fact that many assemblages are stratigraphically mixed and
              contain lithics from different time periods which are jumbled together. Even
              for intact sites however the patterns appear anomalous because materials found
              associated do not occur together in either Asia or further South. Some Alaskan
              sites for example contain large lancolate spear points which are characteristic
              of the earliest archaeological occurrences in the continental US. However these
              same Alaskan sites also have very specific types of small tools which are
              unique.   In his research Mr. Bever will analyze a series of stratigraphically
              intact early Alaskan assemblages. Rather than concentrate, as most researchers
              do, on the form of the finished stone tools, he will examine the technological
              processes involved in tool production. This will provide a unique body of
              information with significant cultural content. He will first determine whether
              the Alaskan sites share enough similarities to be considered as a single
              cultural unit and then compare these materials to remains from both the West
              and South.  This research is important for several reasons. It will provide a
              body of evidence of interest to many archaeologists. It will, hopefully, shed
              new light on the peopling of North America and assist in training a promising
              young scientist.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
