Title       : Kinetics and Mechanisms of Heterogeneous Reactions Involving Carbonyl Sulfide in
               Sulfuric Acid Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9711923

Award Number: 9711923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Hoffmann mrh@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9711923  Hoffmann     Carbonyl sulfide (COS) is the primary reduced-sulfur
              source of sulfuric acid in the stratosphere, and is the most abundant sulfur
              compound in the atmosphere. The production of sulfuric acid aerosol from
              carbonyl sulfide involves the photodissociation of COS and oxidation by oxygen
              to yield sulfur dioxide, which, in turn, is oxidized by hydroxyl radicals to
              sulfuric acid. Sulfuric acid condensation leads to the formation of aerosols.
              The stratospheric sulfate aerosol layer influences the earth's radiation
              budget.    It is proposed that certain reaction pathways that link the global
              sulfur and nitrogen cycles (via the oxidation of COS and reduction of nitric
              acid) may play an important role in the heterogeneous chemistry of the upper
              troposphere and lower stratosphere, and may affect the ratios of NOy to NOx in
              the upper troposphere. In this project, the bulk-phase kinetics, mechanisms,
              and thermodynamics of selected reactions and processes involving COS in
              concentrated sulfuric acid solutions will be investigated over a broad range of
              temperature and solute conditions. Reactions of COS with water (acid-catalyzed
              hydrolysis), protonated hydrogen peroxide, nitronium ion, sulfate radical
              anion, and nitrate radical will be studied. Secondary research objectives
              include: the determination of the speciation of binary sulfuric acid/water
              systems and ternary sulfuric/nitric acid/water systems as a function of
              temperature, composition, and thermal history, the determination of the acidic
              strength of the perhydroxonium ion and protonated COS, and the determination of
              the effective Henry's Law constants for hydrogen peroxide and carbonyl sulfide.
                 Experimental techniques to be employed include multi-wavelength rapid-scan
              stopped-flow spectrophotometry, long path-length laser absorption spectroscopy
              in a liquid-phase cryogenically-controlled White cell configuration, Raman
              spectroscopy, time-resolved Raman spectroscopy, and attenuated total
              reflectance FTIR.
