Title       : Technical Change in Integrated Assessment Models: Estimating CO2 Mitigation
               Costs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9711498

Award Number: 9711498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hadi Dowlatabadi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The climate policy discussions have moved beyond issues of scientific
              uncertainty to the realm of the path along which greenhouse gas abatement
              should be implemented.  Reducing greenhouse gases will involve government
              intervention to spur greater carbon efficiency in the economy.  This can be
              brought about through a variety of actions:  standards in appliance, building,
              and transportation efficiency; imposition of carbon taxes so that consumers
              choose fuels which have lower carbon contents, and patterns of activity which
              are more carbon efficient; distribution of carbon emission permits which will
              limit the carbon dioxide that can be emitted nationally, and; investment in R&D
              for renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency.  Surprising as it may
              seem, we do not have a clear idea of which, individual or combination, of
              intervention(s) above is the best route for obtaining climate policy goals.  In
              fact, in our assessment of carbon dioxide abatement, we have not considered how
              policy induces technical change, thus bringing about more cost efficient
              technologies for meeting the objectives of the policy.  In this research, the
              investigators will use historical data to study how past crises and regulations
              have brought about technological change.  They will examine how the oil crisis
              lead to energy efficient gains and how the clean air act led to innovations in
              air pollution control technologies.  The investigators also will examine issues
              in the theoretical treatment of technological change.  The goal is to develop
              the insights and methods needed to inform policy assessment tools about how to
              differentiate between the different actions the government may take to bring
              about cost effective greenhouse gas mitigation.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
