Title       : Crystallizable Block Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9711436

Award Number: 9711436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Register register@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9711436  Register  This project revolves around materials - semicrystalline 
              block copolymers - which exhibit characteristics of both  semicrystalline
              homopolymers and conventional amorphous  block copolymers.  These materials can
              develop structure  over a range of length scales, from the unit cell structure 
              of the crystallizable block, to the microdomain length  scale, to the
              spherulite scale.  Two complementary classes  of materials and phenomena are
              proposed for investigation:  1) crystallization templated by fluid mesophases,
              and 2) new  polymers with a defect-free crystallizable block.  The first  case
              builds on a recent discovery that in at least some  cases, the well-known
              mesophases formed by block copolymers  (e.g., cylinders and spheres) are able
              to restrict  crystallization to within a particular part of the mesophase 
              (e.g., crystallization within cylinders, where the cylinder  diameter is a few
              tens of nanometers), even for materials  where the matrix remains fluid during
              crystallization and  the material is crystallized under conventional processing
               conditions.  The objective here is to determine the  conditions under which
              the melt mesophases are effective at  templating crystallization, and to
              elucidate the mechanism  and origin of this restricted crystallization.  In the
               second case, new polymers made by ring-opening metathesis  polymerization
              (ROMP) of cyclobutene and norbornene will be  studied.  Hydrogenation of
              poly(cyclobutene) yields a linear  (unbranched, high-density) polyethylene. 
              Finally, by using  a very active saturation catalyst, it will be possible to 
              saturate the norbornene block as well as the cyclobutene  block.  Such
              materials would thus be crystalline-crystalline  diblocks, where the
              possibilities for structure formation  and the tailoring of material properties
              are quite diverse.  %%%  These semicrystalline block copolymers are principally
               intended for use as melt-processible rubbers, where unlike  conventional
              vulcanized rubbers, they can be recycled   (simply remolded into new articles).
               In comparison with  existing melt-processible rubbers, these new polymers
              offer  higher temperatures (e.g., automotive applications),  improved optical
              clarity (e.g., medical applications), and  excellent resistance to oil and
              solvents.  ***
