Title       : Temporal Variation in Organic Carbon Utilization by the Deep-Sea Sediment
               Community at the Hawaii Ocean Time-Series Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9711697

Award Number: 9711697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $481000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Smith ksmith@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1650,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) was initiated to study the oceanic
              carbon cycle on time scales of days to decades. Two long time series stations
              were established, one in the North Atlantic and one in the North Pacific, to
              represent the expansive subtropical oceanic gyres. Although considerable effort
              has been expended to resolve the cycling of carbon in the upper water column at
              these two stations, the fluxes of carbon at the sea floor remain largely
              unstudied.  Of particular interest is the coupling between the production and
              export of organic carbon from surface waters and the utilization of organic
              carbon by the deep sea sediment community.  Rapid transport of surface derived
              particulate matter in episodic pulses to the abyssal sea floor occurs in both
              the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.  These episodic events are superimposed on a
              slower `rain` of particulate matter sinking to the sea floor throughout the
              year.  Once this material reaches the sea floor, it is transformed
              biochemically by the organisms comprising the sediment community.  The rate at
              which this organic matter is utilized by the sediment biota can be estimated by
              measuring sediment community oxygen consumption (SCOC).  We will measure SCOC
              at the JGOFS Hawaii Ocean Time series station (Station ALOHA).  Using the
              unique capabilities of the ROVER (a unique, autonomous, bottom-transecting
              vehicle), we will address the following questions: 1) Is there temporal
              variability in the utilization of organic carbon by the sediment community, as
              estimated from SCOC, on time scales of days to months?  And, considering data
              collected by other investigators in the Hawaii Ocean Time series program (HOT),
              2) is there a temporal relationship between the utilization of organic carbon
              by the sediment community and the production and downward flux of particulate
              matter through the water column?  These measurements will be made with
              unprecedented temporal resolution over a two year period, in concert with
              ongoing monitoring by other investigators of surface productivity, downward
              particulate fluxes, and a variety of other upper ocean parameters.  This
              combined effort will constitute the first long time series study to provide
              such a complete suite of measurements from surface waters to the abyssal sea
              floor with similar, high temporal resolution.  The results of this study will
              be valuable for modeling carbon cycling at the deep sea floor.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
