Title       : CRUI: Response of Tropical Marine Symbioses to Environmental Stresses: An
               Integrated Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1999    
File        : a9711075

Award Number: 9711075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $538775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gisele Muller-Parker gisele@biol.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Hardy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne L. Strom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1091      COLLAB RSCH AT UNDERGRAD INSTI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1091,9117,9178,9189,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9711075  Muller-Parker  Coral reefs are highly diverse, productive, and
              economically  important communities that depend on the symbiotic  association
              between algae (zooxanthellae) and corals.  This  collaborative
              cross-disciplinary study linking optics,  chemistry of pigments, and biology
              will determine the  sequence of events during disruption of the symbiosis in 
              tropical anemones and corals during exposure to stressors  linked to global
              climate change. Three aspects of coral  bleaching will be studied, using
              anemones and corals  subjected to ultraviolet light and high temperature: 1) 
              changes in the optical spectra of symbiotic associations  during bleaching, 2)
              changes in photosynthetic pigments of  zooxanthellae, and 3) changes in
              animal-algal biomass  parameters and photosynthetic performance of
              zooxanthellae.  The project team includes both science and science education 
              undergraduate majors who will develop research projects and  curricular
              materials for use in field teaching and  introductory courses.  The PIs will
              also develop a new  interdisciplinary course entitled "Marine Life and Light" 
              which will involve aspects of physics, biology, chemistry  and environmental
              science and will include students from all  of these disciplines.    Coral
              reefs are the "rain forests" of the ocean.  These  highly diverse, productive,
              and economically important  communities depend on the symbiotic relationship
              between  algae and corals.  Widespread coral "bleaching" (the loss of  the
              algal symbionts) is attributed to environmental stresses  linked to global
              climate change.  This project will study  how the intimate intracellular
              relationship between  photosynthetic algae and their animal host is affected by
               environmental stress, using a collaborative and cross-  disciplinary team
              approach linking optics, chemistry of  pigments, and biology. This project also
              provides a model  for integrating science and science education programs by 
              involving undergraduates from both disciplines in the basic  researc h and in
              the development of educational materials  which will benefit school children
              and the general public.  The PIs will also develop a new interdisciplinary
              course  entitled "Marine Life and Light" which will involve aspects  of
              physics, biology, chemistry and environmental science and  will include
              students from all of these disciplines.
