Title       : Kinetic Studies of Simple and Complex Redox Centers Attached to Self-Assembled
               Monolayers on Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9711779

Award Number: 9711779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry O. Finklea   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Harry O. Finklea of the Department of Chemistry at West Virginia   University is
              supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program   and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities to carry out fundamental   studies of the nature
              of electron transfer reactions at electrode   surfaces.  By using
              self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on gold and other   electrodes, large
              overpotentials can be reached that are usually   inaccessible without being
              obscured by other processes taking place at   the electrode surface such as
              mass transport or double layer charging.    Redox moieties will be tethered to
              the SAM and kinetic studies will   include coupled proton and electron
              transfer, a comparison of electron   transfer rates through the tethering chain
              and through the neighboring   diluent chains, and characterization of the rates
              of various binuclear   systems with different attachment modes.  Redox centers
              based on   Co(II/III) will be used to probe the validity of the Marcus  
              density-of-states model for electron transfer kinetics for the case of  
              one-electron exchange centers with large and unequal reorganization   energies
              for the two oxidation states. SAMs will be made with   alkanethiolates.  The
              objective of this work is to extend our knowledge of the mechanisms   of
              electron transfer reactions.  Such reactions are at the heart of   batteries
              and many biological processes.  The particular avenue chosen to   accomplish
              this is via surface reactions at metallic electrodes covered   with a self
              assembled organic monolayer.  Such an arrangement makes it   possible to make
              the measurements required in a manner relatively free   from other electrode
              surface processes that often interfere.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
