Title       : MMIA: Integrated Assessment of African Savannas with Spatial- Dynamic Vegetation
               and Land Use Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9711627

Award Number: 9711627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Coughenour mikec@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Coughenour  97-11627    Current projections of the effects of global climate
              change on terrestrial ecosystems are generated through simulations of
              climate-vegetation interactions at regional to global scales. However current
              models generally predict new equilibrium conditions and do not emulate
              process-driven transient conditions which could last for a long time, or even
              indefinitely if climate variability increases substantially. The models do not
              resolve vegetation responses to landscape structure, nor do they represent
              vegetation responses to herbivory by wild or domestic animals, or other human
              land uses. A major objective of this project is to evamate how much one can
              improve estimates or climate change effects on vegetation, ecosystems and
              people, by using process-oriented ecosystem-level simulauons. Current climate
              patterns will be used to drive three different types or models
              (quasi-equilibrium, SAVANNA-climate, SAVANNA-biotic), all parameterized to
              simulate extant vegetation conditions in the Serengeti Regional Ecosystem; a
              savanna system where soil, landscape features, human land use, fire and
              herbivore impacts all interact with climate to influence vegetation patterns
              and ecosystem state. Differences among models in predictions of responses to
              global change will be evaluated in terms of: (a) the accuracy of the models at
              predicting extant and as potential vegetation under current and doubled CO2
              climate conditions; (b) the effects of considering herbivory, land-use 
              compared to climate alone; (c) the effects of spatial scale on the predicted
              responses  Supporting field and remote sensing studies will result in a better
              understanding of current vegetation in relationship to climate, soils,
              herbivory, and land use. The research will be relevant to natural resources
              policy in the East African region. The integrated modeling approach will have
              utility for government land management and planning, for famine early warning,
              for park and game reserve managers, and for pastoral peoples. The re search
              will contribute to the development of dynamic global vegetation models
              (DGVM's).
