Title       : Coupled Bio-Physical Models for the Coastal Gulf of Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2000   
File        : a9711329

Award Number: 9711329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale B. Haidvogel dale@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  PROJECT SUMMARY  A core hypothesis of the US GLOBEC Northeast Pacific
              Implementation Plan is that interannual to interdecadal variability in the
              circulation and hydrography of the Gulf of Alaska drives changes in
              productivity of zooplankton in the coastal zone, with consequent effects on the
              feeding success of salmonids and other species in the Gulf. Production regimes
              in the Coastal Gulf of Alaska (CGOA) and the California Current may covary on
              interannual to decadal scales, due to spatially correlated changes in physical
              forcing. To address these issues for the CGOA, a set of linked circulation
              models, coupled with a lower trophic level Nutrients Phytoplankton Zooplankton
              (NPZ) biological model, and an individual based model (IBM) of salmon are used.
              The eddy and tide resolving CGOA circulation model embedded in a basin/global
              scale circulation model. Specific questions to be addressed by this set of
              models include:  1) How do the relative strengths of the offshore Alaska
              Current Alaskan Stream (AC AS) and the Alaska Coastal Current (ACC) affect
              exchange between the shelf and slope, and hence the supply of nutrients and
              deep sea zooplankton to the shelf area?  2) Can wind driven Ekman flux account
              for most of the transport of oceanic zooplankton onto the shelf, or are more
              intricate cross frontal process involved?  3) How does interannual/decadal
              modulation of the seasonal pattern of the ACC affect secondary production and
              transfer to higher trophic levels on the shelf? Does a stronger ACC act to
              enhance or reduce productivity on the shelf?  4) Does tidal mixing
              significantly affect coastal production in the Gulf of Alaska? If so, can very
              low frequency modulation of tides account for some of the decadal change in the
              coastal dynamics, and hence production?  The proposed set of coupled
              (global/basin and regional/coastal) circulation models are forced by realistic
              wind and river runoff time series. Output from the coastal circulation model
              will be used to drive the NPZ model of the near coastal area encompassing the
              shelf and shelf break. Circulation and prey fields produced in this manner will
              then be used as input to the spatially explicit IBM of juvenile salmon. This
              set of models will comprise a significant advance over past and existing models
              of the Gulf of Alaska, which have with few exceptions tended to use either
              coarse spatial grids or simplified physics, which exclude biologically relevant
              processes such as baroclinic instability in the coastal zone.   Results of this
              proposed research will help identify past and future trends and spatial
              patterns of circulation, zooplankton and salmonid production within the Gulf of
              Alaska, and help identify mechanisms for shelf slope exchange. Output from the
              models will be made available to other PI's in Northeast Pacific GLOBEC, and
              should be especially useful as physical and biological boundary conditions for
              finer scale regional models (e.g. of Prince William Sound).                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
