Title       : Aggregative Behavior of Zooplankton: In Situ and Laboratory Studies of Copepod
               Swarms and Mysid Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9711233

Award Number: 9711233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181458             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Buskey buskey@utmsi.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Zooplankton aggregations such as copepod swarms and mysid schools represent
              one end of a continuum of plankton patchiness from those controlled mainly by
              the behavior of the organisms to those controlled mainly by physical
              concentrating mechanisms.  By achieving a better understanding of the factors
              influencing behaviorally controlled zooplankton aggregations, the range of
              potential contributions of behavior to other forms of patchiness will become
              clearer.  By understanding the adaptive value of swarming and schooling
              behavior in zooplankton, the potential effects of patchiness on plankton
              trophic dynamics will be revealed.  This study will focus on several unanswered
              questions regarding copepod swarms and begin studies of schooling behavior of
              mysids.  In mangrove prop root habitats there are two excellent examples of
              aggregative behavior in zooplankton: the swarming behavior of the copepod
              Dioithona oculata and the schooling behavior of the mysid Mysidium columbine. 
              One objective of this study is to determine the sensory information used by D.
              oculata to find its way back to the mangrove habitat at dawn.  D. oculata
              swarms are also found near coral reefs, where environmental and optical
              conditions are quite different from mangrove habitats.  Swarms near coral reefs
              will be studied in situ, and the factors affecting swarm formation and
              maintenance in these environments will be quantified.  Mysidium columbine is a
              holoplanktonic mysid that schools in shaded areas near mangroves.  It's well
              developed compound eyes are thought to have limited visual acuity but highly
              developed movement perception.  The role of vision in the schooling behavior of
              this species will be investigated by determining the visual threshold and
              visual acuity of this mysid.  The adaptive value of schooling as an
              anti-predation device and metabolic costs of schooling behavior will also be
              investigated.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
