Title       : Remote Sensing of the NE Pacific: Retrospective and Concurrent Time Series
               Analysis using Multiple Sensors on Multiple Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9711916

Award Number: 9711916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Svejkovsky jan@oceani.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ocean Imaging
	      1289 1/2 Cave St
	      La Jolla, CA  920373602    619/454-1993

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 PROJECT SUMMARY: A significant number of physical and biological variables
              covary within and between the boundary currents of the subarctic and
              subtropical gyres in the NE Pacific Ocean. These (summarized in US GLOBEC
              Reports 17, 11 and 7) include the strength of the transports, surface
              temperatures, zooplankton biomass and the catch of commercially important
              fishes. Time scales range from individual events to interdecadal regime shifts.
              The mechanisms by which these physical and biological fields covary are
              unknown, but it is postulated that the same mechanisms involved in interannual
              variability also affect long term climatic variability. Clarification and
              quantification of the mechanisms governing interannual variability will
              therefore help to `model` the biological and physical responses of these
              economically and ecologically important systems to future climate change. One
              of the principal strategies for addressing variability across these time and
              space scales and their potential linkages is to make effective use of
              historical and presently available multi sensor satellite data sets.  The goal
              of this proposal is to process, archive and analyze environmental data from a
              number of satellite sensors and other sources in order to characterize and
              quantify the dominant modes of variability in surface transports, temperature
              and pigment concentrations in the NE Pacific Ocean. The analyses will cover
              multiple time/space scales, considering basin scale connections, mesoscale
              circulation within specific regions of the boundary currents, and small scale,
              nearshore circulation in two of the regions. In addition to the analysis
              carried out in this project, these data will be made available over Internet
              and on CDROM to other investigators.  On the basin scale, the project will
              quantify the exchange between the West Wind Drift (WWD), the Coastal Gulf of
              Alaska (CGOA) and the California Current System (CCS), testing the often used
              hypothesis that the covariability in the two boundary currents is due to
              changes in the location of the WOOD. The alternate large scale hypothesis is
              that this is not the case   that these boundary currents are forced by the
              large scale wind systems and that these atmospheric systems covary between the
              basins. Satellite altimeters and scatterometers provide the instruments to test
              this hypothesis for the first time. Consistently reanalyzed atmospheric model
              winds allow a test of the wind covariability over a longer period than possible
              with the satellite data. The largescale modes of transport variability will be
              quantified using EOF analysis and Canonical Correlat on Analysis.  On the
              mesoscale, within each boundary current, the combination of AVHRR SST and/or
              satellite ocean color with altimeter data can resolve mesoscale circulation
              features with scales of 50 100 km or less. AVHRR and ocean color data, with 1
              km resolution, will be collected and processed in ongoing fashion for the three
              years of the project (1998 2000). Historical 1 km AVERR data over the CCS (25Ý
              55ÝN) for the period 1981 1997 will also be processed in identical fashion.
              These data, will allow an examination of the mesoscale circulation (location
              and seasonality of jets and eddies) around the sites proposed for process
              studies in Phase II of the US GLOBEC/CoOP study. The direct transport along the
              boundaries of British Columbia and the Northwest US will also be examined, to
              provide greater details about the large scale connection between the gyres.
              Other areas of focus will be: the region around the Columbia River Plume, due
              to the impact on out migrating Coho salmon; the region west of Prince William
              Sound, where juvenile salmon encounter the Alaskan Stream; and details of the
              flow from the coastal ocean along central and southern Oregon into the core of
              the California Current oflf northern and central California. The analysis will
              test the hypothesis that much of the interannual variability seen off central
              California in the CalCOl?I data set comes from the upwelling region off Oregon,
              rather than from the WOOD. Combination of the satellite data with in situ data
              collected during monitoring studies (funded by GLOBEC or other sources) will be
              used to transform the satellite circulation fields into mass, heat and pigment
              surface transports. Timing of seasoual transitions will be another focus, due
              to possible mismatches of coastal ocean environmental couditions with salmon
              out migrations.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
