Title       : CRUI: An Integrative Study of Spider Silk Proteins and Prey Capture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9711031

Award Number: 9711031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $629780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Scot A. Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Merri L. Casem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Naftilan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scripps College
	      10th and Columbia
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8000

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1091,9161,9178,9181,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9711031  Moore    This spider silk study will determine molecular sources of 
              the mechanical properties that facilitate prey capture in  orb, funnel and cob
              webs.  The wide array of material  properties  found in spider silks offers an
              ideal system for  correlating material properties with molecular structure 
              within a single class of biopolymers.  This project will  recruit
              undergraduates to research in biology, chemistry,  physics and engineering at
              the Joint Science Department of  the Claremont Colleges.  Early exposure to
              crossdisciplinary  research will enable students to bring a valuable viewpoint 
              to their chosen careers.  Silks from the funnel weaver, Hololena, and the cob
              weaver,  Latrodectus mactans, will be compared to the known silks of  the orb
              weaver, Araneus. This comparison will integrate  information from five
              hierarchical levels: 1. primary  structure from amino acid analysis, protein
              sequencing and  gene expression;  2.  secondary structure from carbon13 NMR 
              spectroscopy;  3. higher order structure from atomic force  microscopy;  4.
              mechanical properties from materials  testing, and; 5. mechanical behavior of
              the whole web from  computational modeling.  Prey capture results from the 
              integrated function of these silks and webs.  Moreover, the  understanding of
              relationships between material properties  and molecular structure has
              implications for design of ideal  materials.    This project has been designed
              to enable undergraduates at  Scripps, Pitzer and Claremont McKenna Colleges to 
              collaborate with faculty in the study of spider webs and  silk from three
              different spiders.  Early exposure to inter  disciplinary research will bring a
              valuable viewpoint to  students' chosen careers.  Not all spiders weave orb
              webs,  although the familiar, circular orb web has been most often  studied by
              scientists.  Other webs are built in different  shapes and also catch insects
              differently. Three web types  will be studied:  funnel webs built by the spider
              Hololena,  the cob webs of the b lack widow spider (Latrodectus  mactans), and
              orb webs of Araneus.  Because these webs  capture prey in distinct ways, the
              silk from each web type  is expected to have different mechanical and molecular
               properties.  The various webs and silks will be studied on  five different
              levels.  1.  Computers will be used to model  the vibrations of the webs when
              prey is caught.  2.  The  strength and elasticity of the silks will be
              measured.  3.  The structure of the silk fibers will be studied using a 
              recently developed instrument called the atomic force  microscope (AFM) which
              can image smaller than traditional  microscopes.  4. Nuclear magnetic resonance
              (NMR)  spectroscopy will be used to determine the folding and  twisting of the
              silk proteins that may give the silks their  strength and elasticity.  5.  The
              chemical makeup of the  silk proteins will be found by amino acid analysis. 
              The  understanding of relationships between material properties  and molecular
              structure of silk proteins, in addition to  being scientifically interesting,
              has implications for the  design of new materials.
