Title       : Evolution PDEs in Inhomogeneous Media: Low-Dimensional Dynamics, Computation and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9711224

Award Number: 9711224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yannis G. Kevrekidis yannis@arnold.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kevrekidis  9711224       The investigator and his collaborator Edriss Titi of
              the  University of California, Irvine, study the long-time behavior of 
              solutions to dissipative evolution partial differential equations  under
              perturbations; they undertake a combined theoretical and  computer-assisted
              approach, with a number of illustrative  applications in mind.  These
              spatiotemporal perturbations are  motivated physically by phenomena occurring
              in media with varying  properties, such as reaction and diffusion in
              inhomogeneous media  (leading to PDEs with spatially or spatiotemporally
              dependent  coefficients).  They may also be the result of a feedback control 
              loop on a spatially distributed system.  In the project, they are  interested
              in maintaining / exploiting / prescribing  low-dimensional dynamics through
              large amplitude perturbations  and/or scale variation effects.  The tools they
              build upon are the  global machinery of inertial and approximate inertial
              manifolds,  as well as scientific computing for the simulation and the 
              bifurcation and stability analysis of nonlinear evolution PDEs.  The new set of
              questions they address requires the extension and  combination of these tools
              with aspects of separation of time  scales in control theory (e.g. persistence
              of inertial or  approximate inertial manifolds in closed loop systems) or in 
              homogenization theory (when coefficients in the PDE representing  properties of
              the medium vary on disparate spatial scales).       This project extends,
              develops and implements mathematical  and computational tools that enhance our
              ability to study  reaction and transport processes (modeled by dissipative 
              nonlinear evolution partial differential equations) under  inhomogeneous
              conditions.  Such conditions constitute more the  rule than the exception under
              realistic physical circumstances,  whether due to imperfections in the process
              (in which case we  want to guarantee a certain level of performance) or due to 
              intentional design of composite media, or to fe edback control  (where we
              attempt to optimize a process, like the selectivity of  a chemical reaction). 
              The method and algorithm development part  of the project is applicable to a
              wide class of such systems.  The  particular applications, however, focus on
              the modeling, analysis  and design of novel composite catalysts for
              heterogeneous  reactions, and on the exploitation of modeling for the control
              of  spatially extended systems (such as fluid flows).
