Title       : RPGW: Incorporating Structural Response into the Prediction of Disturbance of a
               Competitive Dominant on Wave-Swept Rocky Shores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9711893

Award Number: 9711893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16435              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily Carrington carrington@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Natural disturbances play a fundamental role in the structuring of ecosystems by
              altering resources, substrate availability, or the physical environment.
              Because the effects of disturbance are typically heterogeneous and patchy, non
              equilibrium states prevail in most ecosystems. The rocky intertidal zone has
              proven to be an excellent model system for the exploration of how disturbance
              and patch dynamics influence non equilibrium ecosystems. This is in part due to
              the fact that disturbance in the rocky intertidal is typically dominated by a
              single physical factor, the hydrodynamic forces generated by breaking waves. 
              Recently, a biomechanical approach has been developed that predicts physical
              disturbance on rocky shores as a function of time and the `waviness` of the sea
              offshore.  Preliminary tests of this mechanistic approach are promising,
              suggesting that such an approach can be a valuable tool for understanding the
              ecological consequences of seasonal and year to year variability in wave
              exposure.  A critical parameter in the biomechanical approach is the strength
              of an organism relative to the hydrodynamic forces it encounters.  There are
              numerous studies indicating that the ability of an organism to withstand wave
              action is modified in response to the flow environment.  Such modifications
              must be taken into account in order to accurately predict rates of disturbance
              in changing environments.  This study will provide a detailed understanding of
              the mechanics which allows this species to dominate wave swept shores, and will
              enhance our ability to predict the rate of disturbance of this ecologically
              important species.  Furthermore, this study allows for the prediction of the
              quantitative response of mussels to any future shifts in wave climate. Given
              current evidence that increases in wave exposure may be common in the near
              future, these estimations are likely to form a valuable test of our ability to
              predict the ecological consequences of climate change.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
