Title       : Hierarchical Modeling for Integrated Environmental Assessments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9711623

Award Number: 9711623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond O'Connor oconnor@umenfa.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deirdre M. Mageean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9711623  O'Connor   The distribution of biotic resources over large spatial
              extents is often a function of   climate, of land-use, and of the demographics
              of the human population but these different   classes of independent variables
              have different spatial scales for their action. One approach   to the
              integration of these effects across scales is to use hierarchical models that  
              incorporate contingencies and constraints in effects. This project seeks to
              develop such a   modeling paradigm by use of classification and regression
              trees (CART). The hexagonal   grid of the U.S. Environmental Protection
              Agency's Environmental Monitoring and   Assessment Program is used as the
              spatial grid, with about 12000 grid points within the   conterminous U.S. To
              test the approach, national Breeding Bird Survey data are used as   dependent
              variables (species richness, abundance of individual species). The independent 
               variables are derived from climate models, from remote sensing of land use
              from   Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometry (the Loveland prototype land
              cover   classification), from National Agricultural  Statistics Service
              statistics, and from Bureau of   the Census data. The CART modeling then
              determines the best combination of predictors   for each hexagon with bird data
              (ca. 1200), and the resulting model is used to predict   values for  all other
              hexagons. One can then map the regions with unique patterns of   environmental 
              effects on birds, can determine the location and degree of species losses  
              associated with the local or regional action of particular stressors,  and
              assess the location   and total impact of the overall stressor load on the
              system. Specific questions that are   addressed in the project include the
              value of different datasets as predictors, the influence   of spatial
              autocorrelation, improvement of model fit and assessment of prediction  
              accuracy,  and methods of visualization of the results.   The effects of
              climate, land-use and human demographics on environmental    resources are
              particularly difficult to estimate in an integrated manner because some  
              effects are broad-scale while others are very localized. If one could do so, a
              national   environmental risk assessment would be feasible in a cost-effective
              manner. Here a new   approach to the problem is tested, using a hierarchical
              model that first adjusts for broad-  scale effects and then assesses regional
              and local effects in turn. As a test, bird data for the   48 conterminous
              states are modeled against national climate data, remote sensing data on   land
              use, and agricultural and Census data. The resulting national map shows on a
              12,000   point grid the extent to which species are lost to particular or to
              all stressors  at each   point, in effect a national risk assessment of
              environmental impacts as experienced by birds   in relation to the stressors
              tested. The approach can readily be extended to other   environmental response
              variables and to smaller or larger scales. This project   systematically
              investigates technical uncertainties that might limit the usefulness of the  
              approach.
