Title       : Efficient Content-Based Image Retrieval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9711771

Award Number: 9711771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda G. Shapiro shapiro@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to design and implement a system for
              content-based image retrieval that can (1) provide a large variety of
              image-distance measures that can be used singly or in combination to satisfy a
              wide range of user needs and (2) provide rapid access to images, even in an
              extremely large database. The focus of the work is the development of a
              general, scalable architecture to support fast querying of very large image
              databases with user-specified distance measures. This includes the development
              of distance-measure-independent algorithms and data structures for efficient
              image retrieval from large databases. Methods for merging the general,
              distance-measure-independent algorithms with other useful techniques that may
              be distance measure specific, such as keyword retrieval and relational
              indexing, are being pursued. The problem of providing users with multiple
              distance measures of many different varieties is being studied. New methods for
              combining distance measures and a language in which users can specify their
              queries without detailed knowledge of the underlying metrics are being
              designed. A prototype system is being implemented to test the developed
              methods, and evaluation is being performed on both a large general image
              database and a smaller controlled database. The results of this research will
              be:  (1) techniques that facilitate rapid retrieval of images by eliminating
              huge portions of the image database from the search, making content-based
              retrieval feasible on very large and growing databases; (2) new, high-level
              methods by which users can combine distance measures to form meaningful
              queries, so that content-based queries can become a standard way to query image
              databases; and (3) a general framework for content-based retrieval that can
              accommodate new distance measures as they are developed by other research
              efforts. The work has application to medicine, art, photography, entertainment,
              and advertising/marketing.
