Title       : Material Characterization of Agricultural and Industrial Solutions and Melts in
               Extensional Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9711109

Award Number: 9711109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Bechtel   (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Gregory Forest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     ABSTRACT      Proposal Number:   CTS-9711109  Principal Investigator: 
              Bechtel,  Ohio State      This is a grant to characterize materials in the
              manufacturing and agricultural processes of fiber spinning and spraying.  This
              is an extension of previous research in which analysis and computer codes were
              created and utilized in  experimental measurements of the material properties
              necessary to characterize behavior in fiber spinning and spraying.  Accurate
              characterization of these properties, specifically dynamic surface tension,
              elongational viscosity, relaxation times, and others, is critical to the
              understanding and modeling of these processes.  To measure the flow properties
              relevant to fiber spinning and spraying processes, the rheometer must measure
              the properties of the fluid in the appropriate state, under the same flow
              conditions and history, and in the same short time scales.    The principal
              investigators now propose to bring this research to bear on applications
              developed with an industrial partner (Hoechst Celanese Corporation) and a
              government agency (US Department of Agriculture), defined by their needs and
              concerns, and with clear engineering emphasis and payoff.  A new rheometer,
              developed by a colleague, Dr. Kurt Koelling will be used to: (1) undertake a
              systematic elongational characterization of polymer solutions, employing the
              technique demonstrated in  1  both to produce the best characterization of a
              fluid within a given constitutive assumption, and to sift through a battery of
              proposed constitutive models to select the best model, (2) extend the
              characterization technique to allow for multiple relaxation times, (3) remove
              the requirement of a force measurement in the technique, (4) adapt the
              apparatus for the dynamic measurement of surface tension of newly formed
              surfaces (on the order of a millisecond), and, on a longer time frame, (5)
              extend the method to unsteady and non-isothermal behavior, and (6) characterize
              the coupling of the development of orientation in t he filament to flow.  The
              collaboration with Prof. Koelling will continue.
