Title       : Electromechanical Wave Propagation in Large Electric Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9711102

Award Number: 9711102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun G. Phadke aphadke@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9711102  Phadke    One of the results of deregulation and the creation of
              large independent system operators (ISO) is that the physical size of the
              system to be operated will be greatly increased.  Systems will be larger both
              in terms of square miles and in electrical dimension.  It is our premise that
              there are effects in such large systems that are not easily understood using
              existing models and that valuable understanding can be obtained by taking a
              macroscopic view of the system.  As the number of buses reach tens of thousands
              and system dimensions are measured in thousands of miles, it is useful to
              imagine a distributed system with a continuum of transmission, generation, and
              load.    The phenomenon of electromechanical oscillations of generator rotors
              caused by faults and equipment outages is one of the most vexing problems
              facing the interconnected network operators.  If the protection and control
              systems do not function as they are designed to do in the face of a
              disturbance, the disturbance can propagate over the network, and expose
              individual generators, or groups of generators to the danger of going
              'out-of-step' with the rest of the network.  If a sufficient number of
              generators lose synchronism in this fashion, a system black-out results, and
              very expensive, disruptive and time-consuming restoration procedures have to be
              followed.  These phenomena familiarly knows as 'transient stability' studies -
              are the subject of the most important investigations in power system planning. 
              The normal techniques for studying electromechanical transient phenomena are
              time-consuming and lead to voluminous outputs, and very often it is difficult
              to grasp the sense of the ensuing phenomena on a global scale.    We propose to
              study the problem of electromechanical oscillations of generator rotors from an
              entirely different point of view.  We consider the electric power system with
              its transmission lines, generators, and loads to be a continuum.  When the
              power system spans entire continents, this  is certainly a reasonable
              extrapolation.  In doing so, we give up the detail associated with the motion
              of each machine rotor.  In return, we gain an insight into the mechanisms by
              which the disturbances initiated by faults and other random events propagate in
              the continuum.  When the problem is cast in this fashion, we find that very
              powerful techniques developed in other fields (wave propagation phenomena in
              plasmas) can be brought to provide important insights and useful results.  One
              of the Co-Principal Investigators has done considerable research in this field,
              and to our knowledge this is the first time that such a cross-disciplinary
              approach to the study of power system transient stability problems has been
              proposed.  The other two members of this team  have a long-standing record of
              having worked in the fields of power system monitoring, protection and control,
              and have made original contributions to the field of computer relaying and
              synchronized phasor measurements.  This last technology will have an important
              bearing on the ideas proposed here.    Power system engineers have long
              recognized that electromechanical disturbances propagate over the power network
              with finite speed, and exhibit dispersion phenomena.  It is only in recent
              years that simultaneous measurement of rotor angles (through synchronized
              phasor measurements) has been made possible with the help of the GPS satellite
              system.  Using these measurements over long distances, we expect to observe the
              traveling wave phenomena in actual power systems in very near future.
