Title       : Dissertation Research: Determinants of Male Reproductive Success in a Baboon
               Hybrid Zone: A Behavioral and Genetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1997  
File        : a9711216

Award Number: 9711216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8295               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Phillips-Conroy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 This project is the first to look at factors determining male reproductive
              success in the Awash National Park (ANP) baboon hybrid zone.  The project
              integrates genetic and behavioral studies of a single group that has mixed
              ancestry from two types of baboons, anubis and hamadryas.  Hamadryas males herd
              females into one male units which they continuously maintain, whereas anubis
              males compete for and guard only estrous females.  Hybrid males exhibit
              intermediate behavior.  The short term reproductive success of different male
              reproductive strategies will be compared by examining the relationship of
              reproductive behavior and number of offspring sired.  Molecular genetic markers
              found in the nuclear genome will be used to assess genetic hybridity and for
              parental analysis.  Mitochondrial DNA sequence data will be collected for
              comparison with the nuclear markers.  Differential success of male reproductive
              strategies affects the dynamics of the hybrid zone, particularly since male
              migration appears to mediate gene flow.  In addition to male reproductive
              strategies and success, the project will also evaluate the effects of female
              ancestry and social structure on the success of one male units.  The knowledge
              gained by this study will elucidate the evolutionary forces acting in the ANP
              hybrid zone and, consequently, contribute to an understanding of the importance
              of social factors in the origin and maintenance of hybrid zones.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
