Title       : Long-Term Changes in California Current Zooplankton Assemblages: A Retrospective
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a9711369

Award Number: 9711369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Ohman mohman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Checkley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Title: Long term Changes in California Current Zooplankton A Retrospective
              Analysis  Project Summary: Marine zooplankton are one of the primary pathways
              through which physical climate signals propagate to marine fish populations.
              Evidence now shows geographically extensive changes of zooplankton biomass in
              concert with variations in the atmospheric and oceanic circulation in the NE
              Pacific. However, such analyses of bulk zooplankton biomass do not distinguish
              among taxa with diverse life histories, some of which are important trophic
              links to planktivorous fishes and others of which are not. The species
              composition of the zooplankton can strongly influence the intensity of
              zooplankton fish linkages, and consequently alter recruitment success.
              Mechanistic understanding    and quantitative modeling   of climate linkages to
              planktivorous fishes will depend upon specific knowledge of the zooplankton
              fauna and the differential responses of different zooplankton taxa to
              variations in circulation and productivity of the NE Pacific.  We propose a
              retrospective analysis of the past 43/a decades of the California Current
              System (CCS). We will use the high quality CalCOFI zooplankton collection,
              together with associated hydrographic data and indices of atmospheric forcing,
              to understand the causes of changes in the zooplankton from 1951 to the
              present. Three aspects of the zooplankton composition will be investigated:
              changes in the high level taxonomic composition of all holozooplankton taxa,
              including gelatinous and crustacean forms; changes in the species composition
              of copepods and selected other taxa; and changes in trophic structure and
              nitrogen economy as inferred from the N stable isotope composition of two
              species of particlegrazing copepods.  We hypothesize that there have been
              differential, taxon specific responses to:  ª Decadal scale changes in the
              climate of the NE Pacific, including the 1976 77 warming event.  . El Nifio and
              other interannual variations in flow from the equatorial region and from the
              Subarctic Pacific.   Regional differences in the intensity of coastal upwelling
              and cross shore transport.  Our studies will provide, for the first time, an
              understanding of multi decadal zooplankton species changes in the Pacific. We
              will uncover the taxa responsible for the longterm 70% decline in CCS
              zooplankton biomass. We will establish the temporal coherence of population
              changes in the central and southern sectors of the CCS, with which to analyze
              the covariation with related zooplankton species in the Subarctic Pacific.
              These studies will form the foundation for the design of new GLOBEC field
              studies and the development of NE Pacific pelagic ecosystem models.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
