Title       : A Planning Grant to Model Peer Review Competitions and Identify Data Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9711064

Award Number: 9711064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley J. Heginbotham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Acad of Sciences
	      
	      New York, NY  11021    /   -

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This planning project will develop a probabilistic model for evaluating results
              from peer reviewed competitions and identify competitions with which to test
              it.  Standard test-retest replications of peer review competitions have limited
              utility in guiding those responsible for the design and conduct of such
              competitions towards cost-effective measures to enhance their reliability. 
              This project uses a probabilistic model, building on a simple but elegant
              approach first presented by Stinchcombe and Ofshe. The model assumes knowledge
              of the `true` distribution of a set of applications with respect to merit and
              then tests for the probabilities of errors (differences between the true and
              the judged distributions) under varying circumstances.   This planning grant
              will allow the investigator to complete the research needed to prepare a paper
              explaining the model.  He will also identify agencies with competitions that
              would provide suitable data with key parameters (inter-judge correlation levels
              and variations in judges' rating standards) that can be used to test the model.
               He will ask program officers for the terms under which they could contribute
              their data to a larger set that can be used for this purpose.  NSF will receive
              an overview report specifying the range of competitions from which data could
              be obtained and the coding format that could make it accessible and useful to
              other scholars pursing peer review issues.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
