Title       : Dissertation Research: A Study of the Reproductive Biology of the Black-Handed
               Spider Monkey (Ateles Geoffroyi): Integrating Behavior and Endocrinology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9711161

Award Number: 9711161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine Milton kmilton@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Little is known about the reproductive biology of spider monkeys (Ateles spp.)
              even though they are a well known and endangered primate.  One of the
              difficulties faced by researchers is that spider monkey females lack an obvious
              visual signal of ovulation, making it difficult to identify stages in a
              female's reproductive cycle.  Advances in laboratory techniques now enable
              researchers to extract hormones from the feces of animals, providing a
              non-invasive method to investigate the reproductive status of wild animals.  I
              propose to study the reproductive biology of spider monkeys  (A. geoffroyi)
              using a combination of hormonal and behavioral data.  A preliminary study will
              measure hormones in urine and feces in a captive group (San Diego Zoo) to
              refine the techniques that will be used in the field component of this research
              project.  During the one year field study, fecal samples as well as behavioral
              and ecological data will be collected from A. geoffroyi  on Barro Colorado
              Island, Panama.  Results from this study will provide:  1) the first systematic
              study of the ovulatory cycle of spider monkey females,  2) information
              concerning possible environmental effects on reproduction in this species, and 
              3) the first test of the presence of estrus in female spider monkeys.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
