Title       : RUI: Experimental Studies on Multi-Species Zooxanthella Communities and Coral
               Bleaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9711977

Award Number: 9711977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Rowan rrowan@uog9.UOG.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Guam
	      UOG Station
	      Agana, GU  96910    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Reef-building corals are obligate associations of heterotrophic animals and
              phototrophic dinoflagellate endosymbionts (zooxanthellae).  Scientists have
              become interested in a conspicuous stress response -- coral bleaching -- that
              involves the `breakdown` of this symbiosis, occasionally followed by
              ecologically devastating coral mortality.  Interest in coral bleaching is
              motivated by the belief that these events are increasing world-wide, and by
              their potential value as a sensitive bioindicator of environmental change. 
              However, large gaps in our understanding of both the ecology and causes of
              coral bleaching remain.  These gaps frustrate attempts to relate coral
              bleaching to environmental issues.  Recently completed studies on the
              Caribbean's dominant and most studied corals, Montastraea annularis and M.
              faveolata, revealed a fundamental misunderstanding that relates directly to
              coral bleaching.  Contrary to the earlier, widely accepted belief that corals
              harbor only one symbiont, these corals host dynamic communities of three taxa
              of zooxanthellae that are primarily organized by gradients of ambient
              irradiance.  This phenomenon explained a longstanding issue in coral bleaching
              ecology -- an otherwise bewildering variation, both among and within coral
              colonies -- in simple terms.  Because it upsets a basic premise on which corals
              have been studied for decades, this discovery also opens up new and unexpected
              opportunities for experimental research.  This project will analyze the
              environmental biology of Montastraea spp. in the explicit contexts of
              multi-species zooxanthella communities and environmental stress.  Previous
              studies of these communities imply parallels with much better studied
              communities of terrestrial plants.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
