Title       : CAA: Socialization of Children's Emotion in Rural Nepali Villages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9711519

Award Number: 9711519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52846              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela M. Cole PMC5@PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Emotions, such as joy and anger, are basic abilities that allow people to
              respond to situations. Such emotions are seen and recognized by all peoples of
              the world but the meaning of an emotion, and the rules of how and when an
              emotion should be communicated, vary across cultures. Early childhood is a time
              when there are many emotional experiences. When those caring for children
              respond to an emotional young child, the child receives implicit messages about
              the emotional significance of the situation and the manner in which emotion
              should be communicated and acted upon. In this way, culture influences
              emotional development. This project extends the PI's work on emotional
              development into the area of cultural variations in the socialization of
              emotion. The cultural settings are remote villages of Nepal, which represent
              cultures that are distinctly different from Western societies in which most
              research on emotional development is conducted. These villages can be
              characterized as `collectivist` societies in which the people regard themselves
              more in terms of their relations to others than in terms of their individuality
              and independence. The residents of the two villages also differ in distinct
              ways that have considerable impact on social behavior. One, a Chhetri-Brahmin
              village, is a high-caste Hindu community that is organized around a strict
              social hierarchy and a high level of awareness about one's self and social
              behavior. The other, a Tamang village, is a Tibetan Buddhist community that is
              organized around principles of social equality and inner quietude. The study
              predicts that each group's beliefs about proper social behavior are associated
              with different socialization practices that influence children's emotional
              development and the ideas children develop about emotion expression and its
              regulation. The project involves the direct observation of the social
              interactions between caregivers and young children (ages 3 to 5 years) when the
              children are expressing emotion.  Also included are interviews with caregivers
              and school age children about the social rules of emotion expression. These
              data will provide some of the first empirical observations on the socialization
              of emotion in rural Asia and on cultural variations in these processes. By
              studying cultural variation, it is possible to learn what is universal and what
              is culturally variable about development.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
