Title       : The Pursuit of Science in a Commercial Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9711172

Award Number: 9711172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Lucier luciep@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah G. Johnson  (Principal Investigator former)
              John A. Schumacher  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses one of the most abiding and important topics in science
              and technology studies - the historical relations of science, technology and
              industry.  Its purpose is to show that a definable and critical phase in these
              relations was marked by the emergence of scientific consulting - a new and
              hitherto unexamined scientific practice of the mid-nineteenth century.  The
              project focuses on the careers of the most prominent consultants of the time,
              geologists and chemists, and their interactions with the development of the
              coal and petroleum industries.  It discusses the scientific and commercial
              contributions of these consultants as well as the ethical and legal
              consequences of this new professional scientific practice.  The results of the
              project will contribute to several areas of scholarship.  In the history of
              geology and chemistry, the project highlights theoretical and empirical
              contributions by American scientists to the studies of coal and petroleum which
              will provide a balance to predominantly European accounts of these sciences. 
              In scientific ethics, the project shows how the norms of professional conduct
              for American scientists were shaped by the commercial practices of consultants.
               In the relations of science and the law, the project outlines the emergence of
              scientific expert witnessing and the changes in the legal code that allowed for
              the patenting of scientific research.  And finally, by systematically
              investigating this new practice of consulting the project explains how science
              became an essential component of technological and industrial development.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
