Title       : Nonlinear Systems Identification for Tracking the Mechanical and Structural
               Status of the Lungs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a9711259

Award Number: 9711259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Lutchen klutch@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bela Suki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9711259  Lutchen  This proposal addresses the following question:  Is it 
              possible to a) routinely track the lung resistance (RL) and  lung elastance
              (EL) for frequencies surrounding breathing;  and, b) determine changes in lung
              structure responsible for  the mechanisms that altered RL and/or EL during
              disease?  We  have developed a new method to reliably measure RL and EL  over
              the range of physiological frequencies and during  typical sized breaths.  The
              method is to apply an "Optimal  Ventilator Waveform" (OVW).  This
              multisinusoidal waveform  simultaneously ventilates the lungs while providing
              flow and  pressures data that allows estimation of RL and EL even if  the lung
              behaves as a nonlinear system.  So far, widespread  practical use of the OVW in
              humans remains evasive because  it does not permit for passive expiration
              (i.e., naturall-  like expiration).  Thus, it cannot yet be applied to 
              ventilator dependent patients.  We now propose a novel  advancement of our OVW
              approach which will permit monitoring  RL and EL for any disease or clinical
              condition.  With these  data we intend to infer the degree and type of airway 
              constriction and tissue changes occurring in the lung.  For  this goal, we will
              develop computational models that are  consistent with the anatomical details
              of a real lung.  With  these models we can directly predict how changes in lung
               structure relate to changes in RL and EL that can influence  our ability to
              breathe.  Finally, with real data we must  apply simpler models to identify
              lung properties and  mechanisms.  We will use this complicated anatomic model
              to  generate computer simulated data for testing simpler models.  ***
