Title       : Temporal Variability of Pb, Fe, and Al in the Subtropical North Atlantic and
               North Pacific Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1999    
File        : a9711814

Award Number: 9711814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Boyle eaboyle@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Studies of biogeochemical processes in the upper ocean are often hampered by
              the large temporal variations in elemental concentrations and our limited
              ability to collect samples on relatively infrequent sampling cruises.  This is
              particularly important for trace elements which have both a highly variable
              eolian source and are involved in biological processes in the euphotic zone. 
              The PI, Boyle, proposes to examine the issue of the temporal variability of Pb,
              Fe and Al using a novel moored in-situ trace element sampler (MITESS) to
              collect high frequency trace metal samples.  Pb has an anthropogenic source
              that is decreasing, and this long term trend is of interest to the PI and the
              environmental sciences community.  Fe is thought to be an essential
              micronutrient and the Fe cycle is currently of great interest to scientists
              involved in understanding present and past ocean productivity and the role of
              the oceans in the global carbon cycling.  Al is being studied to support the Pb
              and Fe work, as it acts as a tracer of natural eolian sources (i.e. dust) and
              scavenging processes.  Sampling would take place in conjunction with ongoing
              mooring and biogeochemisty programs at the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series Site
              (BATS), and the Hawaii Ocean Time-Series Site (HOTS).  As such, the results of
              this trace metal study can be interpreted within the context of concurrent
              biogeochemical rate measurements and physical and optical studies, as well in
              conjunction with time-series atmospheric sampling at Bermuda.  It can be
              expected that the collection of these unique sample sets and their
              interpretation within the context of ongoing programs will lead to many
              advances in our understanding of trace metal cycling, bioavailability, the
              effects of metals on organism growth, and the fate of anthropogenic trace
              metals in the oceans.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
