Title       : Fundamental and Technological Basis of Compliant Universal Substrates for
               Growing Defect Free Heteroepitaxial Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9711208

Award Number: 9711208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu-Hwa Lo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen L. Sass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,1775,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The objectives of the proposed research and education program are: (1) to
              develop a viable technology for compliant substrates which can be used to grow
              defect-free heteroepitaxial materials of large (>15%) lattice mismatches and
              different lattice structures, and (2) to understand the underlining physics of
              compliant substrates and to establish a physical model to quantitatively
              describe the phenomenon of substrate compliance.  In brief, this program aims
              to establish the theory and technology of compliant universal substrates.  As a
              result of this research, one or two types of substrates, perhaps GaAs or Si,
              will be sufficient to accommodate a large variety of compound semiconductor
              epitaxial materials, including those having no proper conventional substrates
              on which to grow.  The proposed compliant universal substrate is essentially
              made of an ultra thin (10 A to 100A) single crystal (e.g. GaAs or Si) bonded to
              a GaAs or Si bulk crystal with a large (> 10 degrees) twist angle.  It is
              believed that the microstructure of the twist boundary and the extremely thin
              bonded layer play a critical role in making the structure compliant to the
              heteroepitaxial overlayer.  We conceive that the twist bonded thin portion of
              the bicrystal behaves somewhat similar to a free standing thin template to
              achieve its compliance.  Our preliminary experimental results show that InGaP,
              GaSb, and InSb, with 1%, 8%, and 15% mismatch to GaAs, respectively, can be
              grown defect-free on the compliant universal substrates.  This proposal brings
              together the expertise of Lo, who has developed the concept of the compliant
              universal substrate, and of Sass, who has carried out extensive studies of the
              structure of grain boundaries contained in bicrystals with the same geometry as
              in the compliant universal substrate.  The research team made of Lo, Sass, 3
              Ph.D. students and at least 4 undergraduates will perform three tasks:
              fundamental materials research, compliant substrate technology development, and
              material and device demonstrations.  Through these efforts, the physical
              mechanisms, technologies, and applications of compliant universal substrates
              are anticipated to be established.  Compliant universal substrates have been a
              dream for many decades for people working on semiconductor materials and
              devices.  The realization of compliant universal substrates will remove one of
              the most serious road blocks in semiconductor research and significantly
              advance the technologies of microelectronics, optoelectronics, and the
              integration of both.  The proposed research will contribute substantially to
              achieving this goal.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
