Title       : The Mechanisms of Crystallization of Copolymers at Atmospheric and Elevated
               Pressures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9711986

Award Number: 9711986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Phillips pphillip@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9711986  Philllips  There are many variables which influence the physical and 
              mechanical properties of crystalline polymers through the  processing and
              fabrication stages of manufacture.  Four of the most  important are
              temperature, pressure, molecular weight and chain  microstructure.  The long
              term objective of the research is to  understand the ways in which all four of
              these variables interact  in determining the details of the basic physics of
              the  crystallization process in polymers of commercial importance.  The 
              synergistic effects of these variables will be investigated for  several
              carefully chosen systems and in doing so will contribute to  the education of
              undergraduate and graduate students.  Whereas past  work has concentrated on
              cis-polyisoprene, polyethylene,  polypropylene and PET, and their copolymers
              with comonomers that  are rejected from the crystals, recent research has added
               copolymers of nylon 6,6.  This latter group includes a copolymer in  which the
              comonomer is incorporated into the unit cell of the  homopolymer.  Preliminary
              results show the behavior of this  copolymer to be quite unexpected and
              different from all others.  Research already begun on the very important new
              copolymers of  ethylene and octene made using metallocene catalysts is
              definitive  and shows them to be very different from matched fractions of 
              similar copolymers made using traditional Zeigler Natta type  catalysts.  For
              the first time, this research has demonstrated the  importance of yet another
              variable on crystallization behavior, the  comonomer sequence length
              distribution.  It is proposed to expand  our studies of the random
              ethylene-octene copolymers and to study  them at elevated pressures.  In
              addition studies of the formation  of the fascinating Y phase in polypropylene
              at elevated pressures  will be continued and extended to copolymers already
              studied at  atmospheric pressure.  Copolymers show this phase at atmospheric 
              pressure despite the fact that it should not be there according to   the phase
              diagram of the homopolymer.  It therefore appears that  the energetics of its
              formation are strongly perturbed by the  presence of an excludable comonomer. 
              %%%  This research will contribute to the understanding of the  crystallization
              behavior of different classes of commercially  significant copolymers under
              conditions of temperature and pressure  normally encountered in the molding
              operations of the plastics  industry, whilst at the same time providing both
              undergraduate and  graduate students with valuable laboratory experience.  ***
