Title       : Adverse Selection in Durable Goods Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9711355

Award Number: 9711355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130304             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alessandro S. Lizzeri   (Principal Investigator current)
              Igal Hendel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Adverse selection is an important source of market inefficiency and markets for
              durable  goods are particularly likely to suffer from adverse selection. 
              Indeed the used car market   is the prototypical example of a market subject to
              adverse selection.  In any of these markets adverse selection is a potential
              problem because first owners learn the quality of the good and then decide
              whether to trade them in the used market.  This research will analyze a market
              where a flow of output of new units arrives every period, consumers self-select
              into buying new or used cars.  Thus, in contrast to the previous literature on
              adverse selection, the ownership of cars is endogenous.  Preliminary results
              indicate that incorporating in the analysis the market for new goods has
              important consequences.  First, the volume of trade in the used market is
              always less than 100%, but the used market never closes.  This is a consequence
              of the fact that, in contrast with the previous literature, in this model a
              seller of a used car gets to buy a new car instead of being left with nothing. 
              Second, this research suggests that there are new dimensions in the analysis of
               social welfare that put in question some `common wisdom` concerning adverse
              selection.  In particular, an example shows that welfare can be higher under
              adverse selection than when  all consumers are required to trade or,
              alternatively, when there is no quality uncertainty.  Third, this framework
              allows consideration of the effects of adverse selection on the market for new
              durable goods and, therefore, on manufacturer incentives to influence the
              behavior of consumers in the presence of adverse selection.  It is possible
              that a worsening of adverse selection may benefit a monopolist, who may then
              produce unreliable cars.  This research will then analyze contractual
              arrangements that the manufacturers can employ to affect the behavior of
              consumers: the transferability of warranty coverage between owners,
              manufacturers refurbishment and certification of the used, and the structure of
              leasing contracts.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
