Title       : Durability Factors for Calcareous Porous Rocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9711087

Award Number: 9711087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: K.Lal Gauri   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9711087  Gauri  This proposal is to develop new durability factors, DF,  based
              on pore-size distribution., for calcareous porous  rocks, limestones and
              dolomites.  Existing criteria for rock  soundness are based upon the damage
              caused by the  crystallization of salt and freezing of water in the pores; 
              however, these criteria have often failed to predict  accurately the actual
              service life.    Wetting, freezing, salt crystallization, and expansion of 
              clays are the major sources of disruptive pressure that  develop in the pores
              of the stone.  The increase in pressure  in the pores given by dp -- 2-y ((dA)
              (dA)R)l where y is the  surface tension and A dV dV and V are the area and
              volume of  small (r) and large (R) pores, suggests that the pore size 
              distribution should be a fundamental factor in the  durability of stone.  Using
              mercury porosimetry to determine  pore-size distributions and by training the
              computational  method of Artificial Neural Network (ANN ), the PI has 
              developed durability factors (DF) for the differentially  weathered strata of
              the Sphinx. These predicted values  correlate well with the present condition
              of the strata  after their exposure to weathering for nearly 5000 years.    The
              proposed research plan will include older rocks, such as  the Mesozoic
              limestones of Texas and the Paleozoic  limestones found in Mid-America older
              rocks, where the  porosity has been altered by a variety of complex processes 
              concerned with the recrystallization of calcite.  Also  included will be even
              younger limestone from Florida of  Cenozoic and Quaternary age.  Dolomite will
              be studied as  representative carbonate rocks where porosity has been 
              completely altered. By extensive field study the PI plans to  develop a column
              or columns of weathered limestone,  irrespective of age, in which the strata
              are ordered  according to their durability and assigned DF from one to  ten.   
              Pore-size distributions will be determined for the  unweathered samples of
              these rocks obtained from the deeper  in terior or from nearby recent roadcuts
              and quarries.  These  distributions will be made the dependent variables while
              the  DF will be the independent variables in the training of ANN.  This
              proposal then aims at developing model equation(s) to  predict DF for many
              types of porosity distributions found in  limestone and dolomite.  ***
