Title       : Toward Measuring in Situ Growth by Marine Synechococcus: Relationship Between
               Biochemical Composition, Cell Cycle Regulation, and Growth Rate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9711306

Award Number: 9711306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Binder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Members of two closely related cyanobacterial groups, Synechococcus and
              Prochlorococcus, are ubiquitous and abundant in the world's oceans, and
              represent a significant fraction of the overall primary producer biomass and
              activity in many marine environments. This study has as its major goal the
              development of non incubation approaches for measuring in situ growth rates of
              natural Synechococcus populations.  Ultimately, the information from such
              studies will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms by which oceanic
              primary producer communities are structured, and help us predict the effects of
              environmental perturbations on those communities.  The development of non
              incubation growth rate measurements requires a thorough knowledge of the
              physiology of cell growth and division in the organisms of interest. A large
              part of this project involves gaining such knowledge for marine Synechococcus
              species.  Representative isolates will be cultured under defined laboratory
              conditions. These conditions will be varied in order to achieve a range of
              growth rates controlled by a variety of environmental factors. For each strain
              growing under each set of conditions, average cellular characteristics (and the
              population distribution of those characteristics) will be measured flow
              cytometrically.  In this way, the relationships between the cell cycle (as
              reflected in DNA distributions), biochemical composition, and growth rate will
              be established.  These data will be used to develop cell cycle or biochemical
              indexes that are robustly related to Synechococcus growth rate.  Finally, these
              indexes will be compared with more traditional methods for measuring growth
              rates in natural samples from the north Atlantic Ocean and Sargasso Sea.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
