Title       : Constraints on the Accretion of the Lower Oceanic Crust: A Quantitative Textural
               and Geochemical Study of Gabbros from the Oman Ophiolite and the Mid-Ocean
               Ridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9711170

Award Number: 9711170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Kelemen peterk@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Gregory Hirth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  We  will conduct a textural and geochemical study of samples  of gabbro
              (igneous rocks crystallized within the Earth) from  different  depths  of  the 
              crustal  section   of  the  Oman  ophiolite  (a  tectonic slice of oceanic 
              crust  exposed  on  land).  The  "stratigraphic  position"  of  samples  in 
              the  crustal  section is well known, and therefore these  samples  provide  an 
              excellent  opportunity  to  determine  vertical  variation  in  igneous 
              crystallization  histories.    After  filtering  out variation that is related
              to composition,  we  will  look  for  systematic similarities or  differences 
              in  cooling  rates  between  upper  and  lower  gabbros,   using  textural  and
              compositional characteristics that may  record  the   initial  stages  of 
              igneous  crystallization.   Image  processing will be used to obtain crystal
              size distributions  (CSD)  to  constrain  nucleation  rates,  growth  rates 
              and  residence times. Analysis of these parameters can be used to  estimate
              cooling rates during crystallization. Additionally,  analysis of textural data
              on EPR and SWIR gabbros will allow  us  to  assess how Oman samples compare
              with those from  two  contrasting mid-ocean ridge environments. Such studies 
              will  provide  constraints on the magma storage,  thermal  history  and 
              structural  evolution of magmatic  systems  at  oceanic  spreading ridges.
