Title       : Automatic Active Vision Based Target Tracking for Recognition in Underwater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a9711528

Award Number: 9711528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246111             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahriar Negahdaripour shahriar@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9711528  Negahdaripour  Vision-based automatic target tracking for recognition
              (ATR)  is an important capability for intelligent or autonomous  robotics
              systems.  Applications include searching for (lost)  objects, localization of
              nearby obstacles, mapping, docking  with structures or moving objects
              surveillance, and  surveying.  Despite progress on the development of vision- 
              based terrestrial and airborne ATR systems, realization of  similar
              capabilities for submersible systems is a  challenging problem due to the
              unique conditions of the  undersea environment.    This research effort
              involves a study of the vision-based  ATR problem using a theory-based
              scientific approach,  resting on physics-based modeling and active sensing 
              paradigms.  The goal is to provide an underwater vehicle  system with the
              intelligence to perform the following  functions autonomously:          
              Explore immediate surroundings without collision with       nearby obstacles.  
                      Locate objects of interest and fixate on them.           Make
              intelligent moves and execute appropriate actions       to efficiently examine
              the target and obtain useful       information for recognition.          
              Construct a knowledge base about the scene by       integration of information
              from multiple views and different       imaging conditions.    Specifically,
              the researchers seek to develop techniques for  obtaining information (e.g.,
              three-dimensional shape, range,  motion, reflectance properties) about objects
              in the scene  from video data, according to:           Physics-based models of
              underwater image formation,       taking into account scene geometry and
              reflectance       characteristics, illumination and viewing geometry, and      
              ocean optical properties.           Novel theories for adaptive online
              adjustment of sensor       parameters (e.g., field of view, focus of
              attention), and       positions and directions of viewing and scene
              illumination,       to optimize data quality and information content.          
              Mathema tical approach to registration and merging of       visual information,
              obtained from various views and under       different imaging conditions.  ***
