Title       : Advanced Integrated Science Modeling Capability for Integrated Assessment
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9711624

Award Number: 9711624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Wuebbles wuebbles@uiatma.atmos.uiuc.educ  (Principal Investigator current)
              Atul K. Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9711624  Wuebbles    The objective of this research is to develop advanced
              modeling capabilities for the   natural science modules to better meet the
              needs of future integrated assessment studies.   The model will be designed to
              better represent spatial variations and to improve the   treatment of processes
              relevant towards evaluating the biogeochemical cycles important to  
              determining atmospheric composition and resulting climatic effects at the
              regional scale.   By extending the process level understanding of regional
              impacts into the Integrated   Assessment (IA) model, the work proposed here
              will substantially improve the   understanding of climate change impacts and
              extend the range of issues, which can be   addressed in an IA framework. For
              specific applications, this effort includes the   appropriate connections with
              a state-of-the-art energy/economics model. The model will   be applied to a
              selected set of studies to address policy related questions on climate  
              change; in particular the role of agriculture, forestry, and land-use for
              future greenhouse   gas emissions and their implications on future climate.  
              Although the primary focus of this model development will continue to be on the
                natural sciences, a much more powerful tool for fully integrated assessment
              will be   achieved through a close interaction with the ongoing
              state-of-the-art modeling of   economic, ecosystem, and social science
              processes.  It will be an important aspect of this   project that it will have
              a well designed modeling tool that can be used in a variety of ways   for
              assessing the relationships between global change and the social sciences. In
              particular,   this modeling tool will allow the exploration of human dimension
              of global change   decision making and policy science in an integrated global
              and regional framework, while   providing fast and efficient first
              approximation answers to pressing policy questions   related to global change.
