Title       : Symposium and Workshop on Ethical, Legal and Social Implications of the Human
               Genome Diversity Project to be held February, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9711287

Award Number: 9711287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20961              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Frankel Mfrankel@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Scientists from several disciplines are planning an international scientific
              initiative known as the Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) to collect,
              analyze, and preserve genetic samples from a wide range of human populations. 
              It is expected that the HGDP will make it possible to reconstruct the origins,
              relationships, and evolutionary history of the different human populations, and
              to help us better understand the hereditary basis for differences in human
              populations and susceptibilities to diseases.  Although its potential
              scientific contribution is considerable, the HGDP is a controversial venture. 
              Significant ethical, legal, and social issues have been raised about the
              design, implementation, and implications of data generated by the Project. 
              These issues include concerns about the selection of populations, the
              possibilities of obtaining meaningful informed consent in non-western cultures,
              confidentiality of data, intellectual property protection, compensation and
              benefits to the research subjects, and ethnic discrimination.  The North
              American Regional Committee of the HGDP has drafted a Model Ethical Protocol
              for Collecting DNA Samples (MEP) to provide a practical guide for addressing
              some of these concerns.  The AAAS Scientific Freedom, Responsibility and Law
              Program, in collaboration with the Center for Bioethics at the University of
              Pennsylvania, is convening a special one-day event at the AAAS Annual Meeting
              in Philadelphia in February 1998.  A morning symposium will discuss the nature
              and goals of the HGDP, the ethical, legal and social issues raised by such
              research, and how the MEP responds to those issues.  With that as background,
              an afternoon workshop will address provisions of and strategies for
              implementing the MEP -- its scope of coverage and content, its usefulness as a
              set of ethical guidelines for HGDP researchers and those who evaluate and fund
              their proposals, and strategies for implementing its specific provisions.  A
              report of the event will be posted on the AAAS Web site.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
