Title       : Reasoning About Scientific Evidence: The Effects of Heuristic Cues, Evidence
               Quality, and Reasoning Ability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9711225

Award Number: 9711225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Bull Kovera koveram@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Kovera  9711225    Although expert evidence is common in civil
              litigation, little is known about how jurors evaluate social scientific
              evidence.  Even less is known about the ability of legal professionals to make
              competent judgments about the scientific evidence they are likely to confront. 
              Methodological reasoning research suggests hat people can be trained to reason
              in a more sophisticated manner, but this research has not investigated which
              factors decision makers use when they find themselves needing to reason about
              the quality of scientific evidence.  Two experiments are conducted to examine
              how judges and attorneys evaluate scientific evidence.  In the first, judges
              read a detailed description of the direct testimony and cross-examination of a
              plaintiff's expert in a sexual harassment cases.  The expert testifies about a
              study she conducted to address a material fact at issue.  Two characteristics
              of the evidence are manipulated: the scientific community's general acceptance
              of the research (a heuristic cue) and the quality of the social scientific
              evidence (e.g., whether the study included appropriate control groups, whether
              there is a confound in the experimental design, or whether experimenter bias is
              present in the expert testimony.  Judges evaluate the scientific validity and
              admissibility of this social fact evidence.  In the second experiment,
              attorneys read the description of the expert's direct testimony.  Attorneys are
              asked to evaluate the scientific validity of the research and indicate whether
              they would file a motion to bar the expert's testimony at trial and if so, on
              what grounds.  The results of this research will advance cognitive
              psychological theory about the  processes used to evaluate scientific evidence
              in a forensic context.  It may suggest the type of training that would assist
              legal professionals in evaluating such evidence, as well.    ***
