Title       : Postdoctoral Fellows at the National Institute of Statistical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9711365

Award Number: 9711365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400253             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome Sacks sacks@niss.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan F. Karr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat'l Inst. of Stat. Sci.
	      PO Box 14006
	      Research Triangle Pk, NC  277094006    919/685-9300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  This award will support a postdoctoral program in cross-disciplinary
              research at the National Institute of Statistical Sciences (NISS).  Six Fellows
              will be appointed, for periods of two or three years, to work on existing or
              prospective NISS projects (located at NISS headquarters or elsewhere), with
              some teaching responsibilities (at a Research Triangle university or
              elsewhere).    The planned program builds on the intensity, depth, scientiflc
              breadth and national scope of NISS' current, NSF-funded Junior Fellows program,
              adding emphases on project development and new forms of institutional support. 
                Junior Fellows will participate in projects that span current and prospective
              NISS interests, including environment, education, transportation, software
              development, large data sets, drug design and insurance.  These projects
              involve virtually all aspects of statistical science.  Participating senior
              researchers and junior scientists are drawn nationwide from the statistics and
              relevant scientific communities, and will serve as collaborators and mentors
              for the Junior Fellows.    Reflecting NISS' close relationship with the
              Research Triangle universities (Duke, North Carolina State and the University
              of North Carolina at Chapel Hill), four distinguished statisticians will serve
              as Liaisons with Department Programs: James 0. Berger (Arts and Sciences
              Professor, Statistics and Decision Sciences, Duke), Peter Bloomfield
              (Professor, Statistics, NCSU), Richard L. Smith (Professor, Statistics, UNC)
              and Francoise Seillier-Moiseiwitsch (Associate Professor, Biostatistics, UNC).
