Title       : Interface Electronic Properties and Growth Parameters of Heterovalent
               Semiconductor Heterojunctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9711851

Award Number: 9711851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Brillson brillson.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Ringel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9711851 Brillson  This project seeks to advance understanding of ZnSe/GaAs,
              GaAs/GeSi, and GaN/Al2O3 interfaces and growth processes with emphasis on
              control of interface band alignment and deep levels. A comprehensive plan is
              presented for optimizing heterovalent heterojunction interface electronic
              properties, including both interfacial band discontinuities and chemical
              stability against defect formation and thermal degradation. The combination of
              molecular beam epitaxial growth, low energy cathodoluminescence and
              photoluminescence spectroscopies of buried interfaces, surface-sensitive x-ray
              and soft x-ray photoemission spectroscopies, and optical trap spectroscopies of
              subsurfaces will be employed to optimize growth processes for both improved
              electrical properties and chemical stability. It is expected to link interface
              chemical and electronic features with the atomic movements leading to deep
              level and dipole formation. Use of altered overlayer, substrate
              stoichiometries, and epitaxial interlayers will be assessed spectroscopically
              to develop general growth principles for optimizing heterojunction interface
              properties. %%% The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of materials science having high technological relevance.  The research will
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to
              important aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  Additionally, the
              fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
              contribute to improving the performance and stability of advanced devices and
              circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
              producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature
              of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
              ***
