Title       : Towards Flexible Teamwork in Complex, Dynamic Environments (FLEXTEAM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1997  
File        : a9711665

Award Number: 9711665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milind Tambe tambe@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Teamwork is becoming increasingly critical in multi-agent domains ranging from
              virtual   environments for training and education, to information integration
              on the Internet, to   potential multi-robotic space missions. The overall goal
              of this research is to develop a   comprehensive model of teamwork, that
              explains the complex phenomena in teamwork,   such as commitments, coordination
              and communication. To this end, this project   investigates flexible
              communication in service  of coordination, to significantly enrich the  
              communication in existing teamwork models, and thus improve teamwork
              flexibility. In   particular, it examines the role of explicit communication to
              improve quality, accuracy or   efficiency of teamwork, as well as the role of
              implicit communication (via plan-  recognition) to maintain teamwork coherence.
              The approach is based on a model of   teamwork called STEAM.  STEAM enables
              agents to explicitly represent and reason with   joint goals and plans, and
              their commitments in team activities. While STEAM's   underlying teamwork model
              is based on the joint intentions theory, it also includes   significant novel
              additions in the form of monitoring constraints, team reorganization  
              capabilities as well as decision theoretic communication selectivity.  STEAM
              has been   implemented --- STEAM agents participate in teamwork in three
              complex domains. The   results of this research will enable significant
              improvement in multi-agent teamwork   flexibility, as well as reuse of teamwork
              capabilities, with possible applications in the   arenas such as education,
              entertainment, training, and others mentioned above.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
