Title       : Random Allocations, Budget Constraints & Walrasian Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9711418

Award Number: 9711418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ennio Stacchetti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract   This grant funds two projects, one concerning economies with
              discrete goods and agents with budget constraints, the other dealing with macro
              policy games. The first is a collaboration with Faruk Gul from Princeton
              University, and the second with Christopher Phelan from Northwestern
              University. The first project builds on earlier work with Gul which concerns
              economies with discrete goods, but without budget constraints, and extends the
              analysis to economies where the agents face budget constraints. These
              constraints introduce a new obstacle for the existence of Walrasian equilibria,
              in addition to the indivisibility problem already present in the previous work.
              To circumvent this new difficulty, we introduce random allocations, and expand
              the commodity space to the space of lotteries. We argue that the resulting
              economy can be viewed as a standard Arrow-Debreu economy with state- contingent
              commodities. Although allowing for lotteries results in a standard convex
              economy, and thus the existence of equilibrium is guaranteed, not every
              equilibrium of this economy can be implemented. It is possible that there is no
              way of randomly allocating the discrete goods among the agents, so that each
              agent's (random) allocation coincides with one of his optimal lotteries.
              Besides competitive markets, we also explore incentive compatible mechanisms,
              including strategy-proofness, (interim) incentive compatibility, the dynamic
              implementation of mechanisms (or Walrasian equilibria), and production in this
              setting. The second project extends earlier work with Phelan concerning a
              Ramsey tax model. Macro policy games confront the theorist with challenging
              technical issues. They involve a continuum of consumers and state variables,
              like capital stock and government debt. Most of the literature has partially
              adapted the strategic dynamic techniques developed for repeated games, and uses
              rather crude punishment strategies in drastically simplified models. We combine
              standard Euler conditions with the dynamic programming techniques for repeated
              games, to develop a new method for a general class of games with strategically
              anonymous players. We establish analogues of the self-generation and
              factorization theorems, which play a central role in the characterization of
              the equilibrium value set of an infinitely  repeated game. Despite the
              complexity of these macro models, the method we develop afford, as in a
              repeated game, a complete characterization of the equilibrium value set.
              Specifically, we are able to study situations in which the first-best
              government policy cannot be implemented. A main focus of the literature has
              been whether readily available punishments can credibly sustain the
              government's optimal policy. Hence, second best solutions have been almost
              totally neglected. Another issue we address with the current method is the
              credibility of the punishments being proposed. In our Ramsey tax model, for
              example, without any institutional constraints, the worst equilibrium has the
              government taxing capital at 100% in every period, and the consumers saving
              nothing. This doesn't seem to us a very credible punishment. In the current
              project we consider the impact of imposing renegotiation-proofness on the
              government's behavior.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
