Title       : Isolation Testing for Transactional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1997  
File        : a9711374

Award Number: 9711374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick E. O'Neil poneil@cs.umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth J. O'Neil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The idea of executing a transactional system under a lower isolation level than
              perfect Serializable isolation was introduced in a 1977 paper by IBM
              researchers, and implemented in IBM's DB2. It is now offered by most commercial
              DBMS systems supporting multi-user applications. Lower isolation levels permit
              more transactional threads to simultaneously execute an application, so
              processor resources are more effectively utilized. The tradeoff is that in
              perfect isolation, no update performed by one application thread can have any
              effect on data read and updated by an independent transactional thread; in
              lower isolation levels this is no longer the case. The intent is to use lower
              isolation levels only for "safe" applications, where the application code will
              not use isolation weaknesses to arrive at erroneous results. But the database
              field has no general method for deciding what applications are "safe". The
              ultimate goal of this project is to develop a method for evaluating large
              transactional application systems to determine what errors can arise at
              different isolation levels in common commercial use. This process of evaluation
              is to be known as Isolation Testing, and provides a list of all isolation
              problems that can occur in the workload. It is then possible to make modest
              changes in the database and application design to eliminate these errors and
              gain the advantage of a lower isolation level. Isolation Testing has the
              potential to make many of the largest commercial applications (e.g., banking,
              airline reservations) more efficient in their use of computer resources.
