Title       : Collabortive Research: Reproductive Ecology in the Blue Crab, Callinectes
               Sapidus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9711522

Award Number: 9711522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Wolcott tom_wolcott@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna L. Wolcott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The investments male animals make in reproduction have profound effects on
              mating systems and individual behaviors.  Sperm generally are considered
              inexpensive relative to eggs, and hence relatively little attention has been
              devoted to their optimal allocation, or the possibility that they become
              limiting.  In `cheap sperm` species (e.g. broadcast spawners), huge numbers of
              sperm are produced.  Nevertheless, adverse physical factors (e.g. dilution)
              often lead to sperm limitation and poor fertilization success.  Among
              `expensive sperm` species that invest heavily in mechanisms to increase the
              reliability of sperm transfer (e.g., courtship, internal fertilization), sperm
              limitation is more likely to be caused by factors that hinder successful
              mating.  These biological factors, acting before sperm are emitted, are subject
              to natural selection and provide evidence of evolutionary principles.  To
              understand how individual behaviors of males affect population-level processes,
              the PIs propose to study an `expensive sperm` species, the blue crab
              (Callinectes sapidus).  They have chosen two widely-separated study sites in
              the crabs' latitudinal range, which impose very different conditions on the
              mating system.  High-latitude (Chesapeake Bay) females have only short
              reproductive seasons and, unless they live very long, can produce only a few
              broods.  Low-latitude (Florida) females can produce as many as 11 broods/year
              in long reproductive seasons.  The probability of sufficient sperm being
              available to realize full potential fecundity in these two environments
              probably is quite different.  Males are subject to disproportionate fishery
              pressure, especially in Chesapeake Bay.  They thus are participants in a
              large-scale experiment that we propose to exploit to better understand sperm
              allocation and limitation at the population level.  The PIs have strong
              preliminary data indicating that in Chesapeake Bay (high latitude, heavily
              fished), female spermathecae receive significantly less sperm, and male vasa
              deferentia are significantly more depleted, than in Florida where fishing
              pressure is lower.  At Chesapeake Bay and Florida sites, biotelemetry will
              verify where pairing and mating occur; field sampling will reveal the ratios of
              mature males to receptive females in mating habitats and how much sperm those
              males have to transfer.  Laboratory and field experiments will test the effects
              of male size and mating history on amount of sperm transferred and on
              competition for mates, whether a subset of sperm-depleted males might dominate
              mating, and how many eggs/broods can be fertilized by a given amount of sperm. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
