Title       : Retrospective Analysis of Northeast Pacific Microzooplankton: a Window on
               Physical Forcing of Food Web Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1997     
File        : a9711273

Award Number: 9711273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48460              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne L. Strom stroms@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Retrospective analysis of Northeast Pacific microzooplankton:  a window on
              physical forcing of food web structure  A retrospective analysis of
              microzooplankton samples from the Gulf of Alaska is proposed as a means of
              relating changes in ocean physics to changes in abundance and distribution of
              taxa at higher trophic levels, particularly copepods. The mechanisms by which
              climate regime shifts translate into changes in copepod and fish production are
              unknown. Many researchers have hypothesized that climate driven variability in
              ocean physics alters resource availability to primary producers, ultimately
              resulting in variation in prey availability to marine animals. Microzooplankton
              are known to be the major trophic link between primary producers and higher
              trophic levels in oceanic subarctic waters, and may play an equally important
              role in coastal ecosystems. We propose that retrospective analysis of this key
              trophic link, when combined with data on meteorology, ocean physics, and
              plankton biology, will provide a window onto the mechanisms by which climate
              shifts may alter food web structure and function.  The sample set consists of
              acid Lugol's preserved 1 liter water samples collected during oceanographic
              cruises along Line P and at Station P (50ÝN, 145ÝW). Vertical profiles ( 8
              discrete depths sampled per profile) are in hand from cruises in 1987, 1988,
              and 1993   1997 (inclusive), with most sampling focused during winter (Feb.)
              and spring (May) months. Additional samples will be collected during 1998 and
              1999. Thus a 13 year time period, with 7 continuous years, ultimately will be
              available for analysis. Abundance, biomass, size structure, and species
              composition of the microzooplankton community (primarily protozoa) will be
              determined. Because quantitative sampling techniques for microzooplankton came
              into consist use fairly recently, the data set ultimately obtained will be a
              rare if not unique view of multi year variation in this important planktonic
              group. Furthermore, all samples were collected during oceanographic research
              cruises, providing an unusually detailed contextual framework for the
              microzooplankton data. Microzooplankton data will be compared to physical and
              biological parameters (e.g. meteorological conditions, ocean temperature, mixed
              layer depth, nutrient concentrations, phytoplankton biomass, size structure,
              and production, and copepod biomass). Analysis of microzooplankton samples in
              the context of related environmental data will increase our understanding of
              the mechanisms linking ocean physics and higher trophic level changes, as
              mediated through the microzooplankton. An understanding of how the food web
              responds to seasonal and interannual shifts in the environment is essential for
              the development and validation of predictive models, a major goal of U.S.
              GLOBEC.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
