Title       : RUI: Influences of Benthic Boundary-Layer Flow on Distributions and Feeding
               Rates of Protists in Subtidal Near-Bottom Water and Surficial Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9711441

Award Number: 9711441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff S. Shimeta j shimeta@acad.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      P O BOX 3003
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Microbial processes at the sediment-water interface (SWI) and in near-bottom
              water are critical for benthic productivity, nutrient cycling, and
              benthic-pelagic coupling in numerous subtidal marine environments, including
              coastal waters, continental shelves, and the deep sea.  The roles of protists
              in the microbial food webs of the benthic-planktonic transition zone, however,
              are poorly understood.  This proposal describes a study of combined field
              sampling and laboratory experiments to elucidate influences of benthic
              boundary-layer (BBL) flow on protistan ecology.  The project is designed to
              answer the following questions:  (1)  what are the vertical distributions and
              abundances of protists at the SWI and in near-bottom water, (2)  to what
              extent, and by what mechanisms, does BBL flow influence these distributions,
              and (3)  to what extent, and by what mechanisms, do variations in BBL flow
              affect feeding rates of heterotrophic protists at the SWI and in near-bottom
              water?  To answer these questions, the objectives of the research are:  (1)  to
              characterize the vertical distributions of protists in the near-bottom water
              and surficial sediment of a coastal subtidal habitat, Buzzards Bay, MA, and to
              relate these distributions to tidal variations in flow speed; (2)  to
              investigate in a laboratory flume the mechanisms by which flow influences
              vertical distributions of cells as seen in the field; and (3)  to measure in a
              flume the influences of BBL flow on feeding rates of heterotrophic protists
              under conditions similar to the field.  The results of this work will provide
              novel insights into physical-biological interactions in benthic microbial
              ecology and benthic-pelagic coupling in coastal habitats.  Through these
              processes, the physical energy level of flow in subtidal coastal habitats may
              have far-reaching influences on microbial trophic dynamics, secondary
              production, and biogeochemical processes in the near-bottom and
              surficial-sedimentary zone.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
