Title       : Electrostatic Bearing for Salient-Pole Micromotors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9711106

Award Number: 9711106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260651             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Garverick slg9@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mehran Mehregany  (Co-Administrator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9711106  Garverick  The project description and work statement for this revised
              proposal is essentially the same as that stated in the original proposal,
              ECS-9711106, with the exception of the summary of specific objectives. 
              Consistent with the reduction in budget, the objectives now include the
              demonstration of a hybrid version of a micromachined, rotating mass gyroscope;
              but the commitment to fabricating a fully monolithic gyroscope has been
              eliminated.  The performance of the hybrid gyroscope will not reach the full
              potential of a monolithic device, but the hybrid device is adequate for proof
              of concept and will serve as an excellent vehicle for continued investigation
              of micromotor technology and application.  The revised statement of Objectives
              and Significance is given below.    Objectives and Significance    The general
              objective of the proposed research project is to investigate the issues and
              advance the technologies that are key to the application of micromotors in
              real-world systems: control electronics, packaging (process integration), and
              reliability.  The focus of the effort is the electrostatic bearing which
              specifically addresses the issue of wear.  A micromachined, rotating mass
              gyroscope will serve as demonstration of the advanced technologies.    In the
              process of achieving these primary objectives, our understanding of micromotors
              will be increased by virtue of the measurements and experiments made possible
              by the closed-loop control electronics.  Analytical models for the new
              micromotors will be developed and experimentally verified.  Simulation models
              will be developed to aid future application of the micromotors.  Specific
              objectives for the three-year project are as follows:    1) a detailed control
              algorithm for the salient-pole micromotor with electrostatic bearing;    2) a
              circuit implementation that is suitable for monolithic integration with the 
              micromotor;    3) a fabrication process for making surface-micromachined
              levitatable discs and micromotors;    4) a hybri d, closed -loop system with
              electrostatic bearing that functions as a rotating mass gyroscope;          The
              achievement of these objectives will lead to motorized systems which are
              significantly faster and smaller than presently realizable.  Potential
              applications areas are widespread, including automotive, consumer, industrial,
              medical, and military.  ***
