Title       : Processing Development for Making High Power Microwave 4H-SiC Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9711128

Award Number: 9711128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alok K. Berry   (Principal Investigator current)
              Venkata R. Mulpuri  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9711128  Rao  This project is aimed at developing processing technology for
              high-power and microwave devices in semi-insulating (SI) and semi-conducting
              SiC.  The N and Al ion implantations in SI 4H-SiC and Al ion implantation in
              n-type 4H-SiC epitaxial layers will be thoroughly pursued in order to develop
              planar selective area doping technology in this material.  Exploratory work on
              As-implantation to obtain donor doping in SiC will be performed.  Due to the
              complementary lattice positions occupied by N and P (As) donors in SiC, N/P and
              N/As coimplantations will be used to obtain highly conductive n( regions in
              SiC.  Results of the coimplantation work will be useful for minimizing contact
              and bulk series resistances of microwave and high power devices, which is
              crucial for obtaining optimal device performance.  Microwave and pulsed
              induction rapid thermal heating set-ups will be developed to anneal 2" diameter
              implanted SiC wafers at temperatures as high as 1700 (C.  The
              implanted/annealed material will be thoroughly characterized by van der Pauw
              Hall, SIMS, Rutherford Backscattering, TEM, and photoluminescence measurements.
               These measurements will be used to gain information about dopant electrical
              activation, dopant thermal stability, doped region lattice perfection, and
              ionization energy of the dopants, etc.    A new ohmic contact metal system
              (Si/Al/Si/Ti/Pt) with different Si and metal layer thicknesses will be tried to
              achieve high performance ohmic contacts on p-type SiC.  Contacts will be
              alloyed at different temperatures using a halogen lamp rapid thermal annealing
              station.  The contacts will be characterized by TLM pattern measurements, SEM,
              Auger electron spectrometry, and x-ray diffraction measurements.  The
              reliability of the contacts for high-temperature and high-power operation will
              be studied.    Schottky and planar p-n junction diodes will be made by
              selective area implantation in SI and semi-conducting 4H-SiC and thoroughly
              characterized for I-V and C-V performance at various  temperatures up to 500
              (C.  DLTS measurements will be performed on the diodes to detect deep levels in
              the implanted region and at the interface of the implanted region and the SI
              substrate.    Using the optimum implantation and ohmic contact conditions
              developed in this work, MESFETs and JFETs will be made in SI and n-type 4H-SiC
              respectively, and thoroughly characterized for their DC, microwave, and
              high-power performance at various operating temperatures and also for extended
              period operation at high temperatures.          The proposed work will be
              performed in collaboration with the scientists at General Electric Research
              Center, Shenectady, NY, Naval Research Laboratory, Oak Ridge National
              Laboratory, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology.  ***
