Title       : Paris Workshop on Visualization of Information and Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9711509

Award Number: 9711509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith R. Brown judy-brown@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Information  visualization is an increasingly important  research  and 
              development area, crucial for the success of the information  revolution.  This
              workshop focuses on visualizing information and  how  users interact with
              digital information. Co-chaired by Nahum  Gershon  (The  MITRE  Corp.)  and 
              Jacques-Emile  Dubois  (CODATA  International) it has an international
              committee of visualization  experts  from nine countries.  The goals of the
              workshop  are  to  bring   together   researchers  and  developers  in  
              information  visualization  from  Europe,  United  States,  and   Canada   for 
              intensive  brain-storming to accomplish  the  following:   survey  current 
              activity in information visualization in Europe and  the  United  States; 
              identify  research  and  development  issues  in  visualization;  and  forge 
              research collaborations  between  the  United  States and Europe.  Although
              there has been a great  deal  of  development of methods for visualizing
              diverse types of  data  and information, few algorithms and methods have been
              implemented  to  solve real-world problems, especially in North America. Since 
              more  research and development have been targeted at solving real  problems 
              effectively in Europe, they are ahead of U. S. research  and   development  in 
              applying  visualization   to   operational  environments.  The focal point of
              this workshop  is  implementing  visualization  methodology.  Combining  the 
              North  American  and  European   expertise   is   expected  to   result   in  
              enhanced  effectiveness of visualization, enabling better communication  of 
              information  and more effective use of the information  highways,  reducing 
              the  number of documents end users such as  journalists  must access.
