Title       : The Economics of Carbon Taxes and Permits: An Integrated Climate Economy
               Assessment of Policy Efficiency Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1999   
File        : a9711607

Award Number: 9711607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95960              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Pizer pizer@rff.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Resources For Future Inc
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The threat of climate change due to man-made emissions of greenhouse gases has
              motivated considerable interest in government policies to reduce or stabilize
              these emissions.  At the same time, it has been argued that such policies have
              the potential to wreak havoc on the economy and should therefore be postponed
              until more is known about the mechanism and consequences of climate change. 
              The essence of these conflicting positions is uncertainty about the cost of
              reducing emissions, uncertainty about the benefits associated with those
              reductions, and the best course of action to balance the two.  This project
              seeks to identify optimal responses to threat of climate change in the presence
              of uncertainty about both costs and benefits.  The first part of this research
              program develops an integrated model of the global economy and climate that
              incorporates uncertainty about both.  Not only are uncertain outcomes modeled,
              but a consistent scheme for comparing these outcomes across policies is
              developed.  The second part of the program uses the model and evaluation scheme
              to analyze different policies -- in particular, taxes and permits -- to
              determine which alternatives do the best job of balancing uncertain costs and
              benefits.  While existing economic theory predicts a difference in efficiency
              between tax and permit policies in the presence of uncertain costs, it provides
              little practical guidance concerning the scale or direction of this difference.
               Simulations of the integrated climate-economy model, however, will generate an
              empirical estimate of this difference.  In addition to advancing the
              methodology of policy simulation and evaluation under uncertainty, the
              resulting analyses can be used by policymakers to make more informed decisions
              about how to best combat climate change.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
