Title       : Incomplete Contracts and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a9711422

Award Number: 9711422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208202             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver D. Hart oliver_hart@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Project Summary  Incomplete contract theory is gradually becoming accepted as
              a useful way to understand the nature of organizations.  This project continues
              my work in this area. The project includes four main topics.  First, I
              investigate why parties typically contract bilaterally, rather than
              multilaterally, and what determines who contracts with whom.  For example, if
              someone wants a house built, they often will sign a contract with a general
              contractor, who in turn will contract with a plumber, an electrician, etc.  Why
              is this preferable to contracting directly with the plumber and electrician? 
              The second topic is a continuation of my work on entrepreneurial debt
              contracting.  So far my theoretical analysis has focused on a two-period
              relationship between an entrepreneur and an investor, although I have
              generalized the analysis to many periods, when there is perfect certainty.  In
              the current project I carry out a generalization to the case of many periods
              where there is uncertainty.  I also include a role for equity.  In the third
              topic, I continue my work on boundaries between public and private
              organizations.  In my work so far, I have developed a theoretical analysis of
              the choice between public and private ownership and applied the analysis to
              understand the case for prison privatization.  In the current project I extend
              the analysis to education and health care.  An important new intellectual issue
              that arises is the role of competition between providers in determining the
              choice between public and private ownership.  Finally, I conduct a theoretical
              analysis of the cooperative form.  Most commercial organizations are owned and
              controlled by people who do not work in them or consume their product. 
              Nonetheless, there are some important exceptions: for instance, in the service
              sector, partnerships or worker cooperatives are quite common; e.g., take the
              case of law firms. My work is an attempt to understand better the costs and
              benefits of cooperatives, and why cooperatives are so uncommon in the
              manufacturing sector.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
