Title       : Dissertation Research: The Political Dynamics of Decentralization and Decline in
               the Black Warrior River Valley of West - Central Alabama.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9711795

Award Number: 9711795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11613              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cameron B. Wesson Cameron.Wesson-1@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Under the direction of Dr. Cameron Wesson, Mr. Mark Rees will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at the
              sites of Fosters Landing and Hills Gin landing, both located in the Black
              Warrior Valley of Alabama. The goal of the research is to understand the 
              processes which lead to the devolution of social complexity. Both sites date to
              the early second millennium AD and are associated with Moundville, one of the
              largest and most impressive prehistoric occurrences in North America.
              Moundville, as its name implies contains large mounds or earthworks which
              required the mobilization of large amounts of labor to produce. Elaborate
              burials with finely crafted grave goods attest to a centralized form of social
              organization with a high degree of social differentiation. After 1,400 AD
              however the central site was abandoned and mound construction ceased. While a
              collapse is clearly documented, secondary villages located in adjacent areas of
              the Valley continued to thrive and Mr. Rees will focus his attention on these.
              He wishes to learn whether power shifted from Moundville to such secondary
              sites and, if such is the case, to understand the processes involved. To
              accomplish this goal he will conduct an auger survey of the sites and make
              controlled surface collection to determine areas of densest materials.
              Extensive lateral excavations shall then be conducted. With the ceramics and
              other remains obtained, he will be able to examine the degree to which elite
              functions shifted to these secondary sites, the extent to which they competed
              with each other and the subsistence strategies employed.  While much
              archaeological attention has focused on the rise of social complexity,
              relatively little has been directed to the opposite or devolutionary process.
              In North America, most aboriginal peoples reached a height of political
              centralization well before the appearance of Europeans in the New World and in
              many regions devolution occurred in pre-Columbus times. Mr. Rees has proposed a
              general model which involves increases in factionalism and changed patterns in
              subsistence and social organization. This project will provide data to test
              these ideas. It will yield data of interest to many archaeologists and assist
              in training a promising young scientist.
