Title       : AMP/ Bridges to Computer and Information Science Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9711504

Award Number: 9711504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony F. Beckman beckman  (Principal Investigator current)
              Meena Shah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis N. Floyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Parkay Louie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter J. Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Houston Cmty College
	      P.O. Box 667517
	      Houston, TX  772667517    713/718-5059

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2886,9178,9218,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9711504  Beckman    In recent years, through a variety of programs, the
              Houston Community College System (HCCS) has  established a number of efforts
              designed to recruit and retain women, minorities, and students with 
              disabilities.  Despite the successes of such programs, the number of minority
              students completing their studies  and transferring to senior colleges and
              universities falls far short of the nation s growing need for minorities 
              trained in computer technologies.    The faculty of the Houston Community
              College System Computer Science Department has planned a broad,  ambitious
              program to attract more students from underrepresented groups to careers in
              computer science.   Using successful models, the plan focuses on building an
              infrastructure of faculty and student support  systems which will assure
              promising potential scholars an outstanding educational program and secure
              their  entry into senior colleges and universities.    Our proposed program
              will touch every sector of the college system and reach into the community we
              serve.   The primary goal of the program is to increase the number of students
              from all underrepresented groups in  the field of computer science, assist them
              to successfully complete their studies at the Houston Community  College
              system, and facilitate their entry into a senior college or university. 
              Underlying this goal is the intent   to foster a fundamental change of
              philosophy throughout the Houston Community College System and the  entire
              community.    The comprehensive plan we have developed provides for the
              building of an infrastructure that will prepare  faculty and students for the
              speed of technological change.  The plan will require an infusion of upgraded 
              hardware and software to help faculty prepare for these changes by revising and
              updating the curriculum  yearly to meet the program s needs, to train faculty
              in current technical advances, and to meet the  instructional needs of students
              brought into the program.  The full program provides for re cruiting and 
              retaining promising students from underrepresented groups who are interested in
              pursuing careers in computer  science.  The plan includes pre-college training,
              two-year training and education at the college level, and  retention support
              programs such as tutoring, mentoring, counseling, and appropriate financial
              support.
