Title       : Bathyal Microaerophiles: Life Positions and Adaptations of the Santa Barbara
               Basin Benthos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9711812

Award Number: 9711812
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Bernhard joan.bernhard@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Despite the fact that mats of the filamentous sulfide oxidizing bacteria
              Beggiatoa are quite extensive below the neritic zone, very little is known
              about the eukaryotic organisms inhabiting these mats. Specimen loss and
              destruction of spatial information are significant obstacles to past approaches
              used to study these fragile sedimentary communities. To overcome these
              limitations, a new sampling technique was developed in which sediment cores are
              incubated with a fluorogenic probe to label the contained biota, and then
              chemically fixed, dehydrated, and embedded with low viscosity epoxy resin.
              Combined with novel thick sectioning methods, confocal microscopy, and state of
              the art digital image processing, this fluorescently labeled embedded core
              (FLEC) technique has provided unparalleled views of the fine scale structure of
              the Beggiatoa mat community in the Santa Barbara Basin (SBB).  Based on initial
              studies using the FLEC method, it is hypothesized that Beggiatoa structures the
              chemical microenvironment to allow microaerophiles to live in close proximity
              to anaerobes and aerobes (i.e., these mats might be considered analogous to
              bacterial biofilms in this respect). To advance this hypothesis, the major
              objective of this study is to correlate meiofaunal life positions and their
              physiological adaptations with finescale chemical and spatial information.
              Furthermore, the initial FLEC studies of SBB Beggiatoa mats yielded two
              undescribed species or higher taxa, as well as three new and unexpected
              bacterial eukaryote symbioses, suggesting that the Santa Barbara Basin provides
              habitat for yet more undescribed species or symbioses. It is hypothesized that
              meiofauna possessing chemoautotrophs inhabit zones below the Beggiatoa mat,
              meiofauna possessing metabolic adaptations or heterotrophic symbionts co exist
              with the Beggiatoa, and meiofauna without special adaptations inhabit space
              available above the Beggiatoa mat.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
