Title       : Variability and the Population Biology of Marine Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9711802

Award Number: 9711802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. Pfister c-pfister@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Many species of marine organisms are characterized by high variation in the
              size of individuals, especially during the early life history.  The objectives
              of the proposed research are to: 1) quantify this variability in natural
              populations, 2) determine whether variability is transmitted through time, 3)
              assess if there are demographic consequences of size and growth variation, and
              4) quantify the effects of size and growth variation on population models.  The
              approach to the problem will be pluralistic, including observations  of
              individuals in the field, experimental manipulation of tractable populations,
              and population modeling where individual traits are included. Observational and
              experimental data will be gathered from several species that differ in their
              taxonomy and life history, including an alga, a limpet and a nearshore fish. 
              Experiments will determine if variation alone can affect future population
              trajectories by manipulating the quantity and type of variability in a
              population.  Throughout the study, information will be gathered at the level of
              the individual by following the fate of marked individuals.  In both
              observations and experiments, the key biological features that will be
              quantified include individual growth, whether growth rates are correlated
              through time, survivorship, and the propensity for all these traits to vary
              among individuals.  The analyses will contrast the outcome of models which
              include variability among individuals (individual based models) versus those
              that use a mean value for organism attributes (matrix population models).  The
              importance of this work draws from a recognition that understanding why
              recruitment varies in marine organisms may require the inclusion of individual
              attributes.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
