Title       : Learning From Demonstration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9711770

Award Number: 9711770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher G. Atkeson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The  goals  of  the  research are to develop new  robot  learning  algorithms 
              for qualitatively more complex robots and tasks  than  have been attempted so
              far, and to greatly increase the level  of  automation  of  implementing robot
              learning.  The  research  will  focus  on:  1: tasks and robots with many
              degrees of freedom,  2:  having  one robot learn to perform multiple tasks, and
              generalize  appropriately between tasks, 3: learning over a long  time  span, 
              in  which the robot, the task, and the environment change, and 4:  combining 
              multiple approaches to robot learning.   The  research  will  contribute to a
              more automatic process for  selecting  task  structure,   representations,  and
               adjustable   parameters   and  functions.   Two  types of learning will be
              emphasized:  learning  from  demonstration, where the robot learns from a 
              demonstration  of  how to perform a task, and reinforcement learning, where 
              the  robot  learns by optimizing a reward function.  Flexible  methods  to 
              represent  knowledge  will be emphasized,  including  locally  weighted 
              learning  and other nonparametric learning  techniques.  The   techniques  
              developed   in  implementing   learning   from  demonstration will form the
              basis of the approach to more general  learning problems, such as reinforcement
              learning.  This research  will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Mitsuo
              Kawato at  the  Advanced Telecommunications Research Human Information
              Processing  Laboratory in Japan.  The expected significance of this  research 
              is  that  it  will make it easier and less expensive  to  program  robots  and
              machine-based systems in general. From an engineering  point  of  view  the 
              goal is to reduce the amount  of  expensive  expert  human input into robot
              programming.  From a psychological  point  of  view the goal is to understand
              how people  learn,  and  this  kind of work leads to models of how learning
              behavior might  be accomplished.
