Title       : The Transition to Adulthood Among Urban Youth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9711406

Award Number: 9711406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl L. Alexander karl@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Doris R. Entwisle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is one wave of a longitudinal study of inner-city Baltimore youth. It
              extends an on-going research project, known as the Beginning School Study
              (BSS), into the post-high school period. Since 1982, the BSS has been tracking
              the life progress of a representative random sample of Baltimore school
              children (N = 790) from when they began first grade. The majority of the BSS
              youth are African-American and/or from poverty-level or near poverty-level
              households, and so fit the "at-risk" profile.          The BSS over the years
              has been monitoring the study group's personal, social and academic
              development, gathering data from them, their parents, teachers and schools at
              closely spaced intervals. This phase of the work extends the BSS cohort into
              the years after high school by conducting a final survey of the group in the
              spring/summer of 1998,  four years after high school for those who graduated on
              schedule.          The 1998 survey will secure the information needed to trace
              out the "natural history" of the group's transition from adolescence to early
              adulthood in terms of family formation, further schooling, and work
              experiences, while information already in the BSS archive could be used to link
              post-high school experiences in these domains to the details of these youths'
              personal development, academic development and vocational development over
              virtually the entire history of their schooling. Being able to trace
              developmental paths from early childhood to young adulthood is an uncommon
              opportunity, and especially so for minority and economically disadvantaged
              urban youth, who are not often the subjects in  long-term developmental
              research. Of particular interest is how the course of development differs
              according to background attributes that limit (or expand) life opportunities,
              comparing African-Americans with whites, males with females, youth from higher
              socio-economic status families with those from lower socio-economic
              backgrounds, and youth reared in different family structures such as so
              lo-parent households versus other configurations.      The completed data set
              will also permit researchers to distinguish groups of youngsters whose starting
              positions are similar in terms of "risk factors" (e.g., African-American youth
              reared in low income, solo-parent households) but whose trajectories in the
              post-high school period span the extremes of favorable and unfavorable
              transition outcomes. With these distinctions drawn, the archived data then
              could be used to examine circumstances of children's upbringing, their school
              and home experiences, and personal resources that appear to have helped the one
              group avoid and the other not avoid the cycle of disadvantage.     This project
              will provide data necessary for researchers to understand in detail how inner
              city youth negotiate the transition to adulthood.  The result will contribute
              to scientific progress in the sociology of stratification, the social
              psychology of child development, and other related fields.  At the same time,
              it will provide information that will contribute to intelligent policy
              formation concerning young people in disadvantaged families and communities.
