Title       : The Measurement of Mass Independent Isotopic Compositions in Atmospheric Species
               as a New Index of Global Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1999   
File        : a9711203

Award Number: 9711203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Thiemens mthiemens@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9711203  Thiemens     This project consists of stable isotope measurements
              (oxygen, sulfur) of atmospheric carbon dioxide, molecular oxygen, water, and
              size separated sulfate aerosols. These measurements distinguish mass dependent
              and independent isotopic compositions as a diagnostic probe of such phenomena
              as the photochemical coupling between carbon dioxide and ozone, the global
              carbon cycle reservoir transfer, stratosphere-troposphere and
              stratosphere-mesosphere mixing, and sulfate aerosol sources and transformation
              mechanisms. A global sampling program will utilize ground, shipboard, and
              aircraft-based, as well as stratospheric balloon and rocket collection.  
              Stratospheric and mesospheric carbon dioxide possesses a large and variable
              mass independent oxygen isotopic composition, which derives from interaction
              with singlet atomic oxygen, whose abundance is not easily measurable. Upper
              atmospheric measurements will be continued to determine the quantitative source
              of this isotopic variation and the seasonal and spatial variations. In
              collaboration with international scientists, samples will be obtained from
              stratospheric balloons, a sampling system in the cargo hold of a commercial
              aircraft, and rockets. Water from samples collected earlier by rockets will be
              analyzed for stable oxygen isotopes, which will provide information on the
              sources of stratospheric water. Water from in situ methane oxidation should
              maintain the ozone mass independent composition, whereas water from the
              troposphere is mass dependent.   The anomalous isotopic characteristic acquired
              by carbon dioxide (mass independent) in the stratosphere specifically tags it
              with respect to tropospheric (mass dependent) carbon dioxide. Therefore,
              isotopic measurements of carbon dioxide, combined with simultaneous
              measurements of a cosmogenic sulfur nuclide, allow the identification of
              stratospheric incursions. Carbon dioxide samples will be obtained from various
              ground-based stations including La Jolla, the Arctic, Antarctic, India, a nd on
              ships in the Indian ocean.    Sulfate aerosols will be collected in six size
              fractions and analyzed for all three oxygen and all four sulfur stable
              isotopes. The isotopic signature possibly reflects homogenous vs. heterogeneous
              oxidation pathways. The sulfur isotopes will also partly define sources. Rain
              samples will be collected and the sulfate analyzed. A short lived cosmogenic
              nuclide will be measured to determine the relative age and deposition velocity
              of sulfur oxides.
