Title       : Adopting Food Production in Mid-Holocene Arabia: ExploratoryResearch into
               Choosing Domesticates in Changing Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9711270

Award Number: 9711270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joy McCorriston   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Joy McCorriston and her colleagues
              will conduct one season of archaeological field research in the desertic Wadi
              as-Shumylya region of Yemen. Based on a brief visit to this rugged and
              inaccessible area Dr. McCorriston discovered a site, WPT 144, which on the
              basis of associated ceramic remains dates at least as early as the third
              millennium BC. In addition to lithics, the site contains stone slabs - remains
              of both a tomb and associated dwellings. The nature of the sediments makes it
              highly likely that both faunal and botanical remains are preserved. Dr.
              McCorriston will conduct exploratory excavation to determine stratigraphic
              relationships through several deep trenches. Broader horizontal exposures will
              permit her to reconstruct the architectural plan and locate refuse deposits
              which are typically rich in animal and plant remains. Material for radiocarbon
              dating will also be collected. The team will also conduct a regional survey to
              locate additional sites and recover rock magnetic and other geological data
              which will permit paleoclimatic and environmental reconstruction.  The
              prehistory of Yemen is poorly known and very little work has been done in the
              Wadi as-Shumylya region. Based on cultural materials from the Arabian peninsula
              it is clear that a Neolithic occupation occurred and thus the region documents
              the transition from hunting and gathering to a settled village agricultural way
              of life. However it is not certain when this took place or what plants were
              cultivated. The region is of great potential archaeological significance
              because it lies at the boundary of three traditions. To the Northwest, a
              Mediterranean series of domesticates includes wheat and barley. Prehistoric
              interaction with Africa was also strong and neighboring Ethiopia was the center
              for the domestication of millet, sorghum and other crops. To the East peoples
              raised rice and pulses. Yemen thus offers an opportunity to examine the role of
              human choice in early agricultural strategy. Because of its geographical
              position it is unique in the range of domesticates potentially available and
              Dr. McCorriston wishes first to determine the range of crops cultivated and
              then ultimately explain the reason for this outcome. Her work will proceed
              within an environmental context.  The research is important because it will
              provide basic data on an essentially unknown archaeological region. It has the
              potential to shed new light on human adaptation to desertic environments and
              may set the stage for a larger research project.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
