Title       : MII: Infrastructure for Research and Training on High -Performance Heterogeneous
               Distributed Database Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a9711582

Award Number: 9711582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Naphtali Rishe rishen@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shu-Ching Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maxim Chekmasov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank K. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              David Barton  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Chungmin Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2886,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              97-11582  Rishe, Naphtali  Barton, David  Florida International University (FIU)
                  CISE MII:  Infrastructure for Research and Training on High-Performance
              Heterogeneous Distributed Database Management.    This award is to be used to
              attract and retain minority students, encouraging high-performance database
              research. Planned is a special mentoring program modeled after the "Affinity
              Groups" of the University of Texas at El Paso. The groups, consisting of
              undergraduate and graduate students, post-docs, and faculty members, provide
              the framework that enables deepening knowledge of a field by procuring a
              physical setting in a cooperative research-engaging environment. Structured
              activities facilitate knowledge transfer and serve to ascertain progress. 
              Summer internships for undergraduates are budgeted to involve them in research
              projects.        The affinity groups, within the FIU High Performance Database
              Research Center at FIU performs research towards the development of a
              heterogeneous distributed database management system (HDBMS) providing fast
              integration of disparate data sources and efficient interoperability through
              the application and utilization of a semantic database management system to
              define a global schema of the heterogeneous data. A semantic interpretation of
              SQL is used for efficient interoperability of relational and object-oriented
              databases. Dynamically-dispatched agent technology is used to interface the
              distributed heterogeneous databases. Query optimization techniques in the
              presence of heterogeneous networks are being evaluated and investigated.
