Title       : Similarity Based Retrieval From Video and Pictorial Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9711925

Award Number: 9711925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342216             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Prasad Sistla sistla@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jezekiel Ben-Arie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop a system for similarity based
              retrieval from video and pictorial databases. The system is based on an
              expressive query language called Hierarchical Temporal Logic (HTL) that
              represents the temporal and pictorial content of video data. HTL predicates are
              then matched with the database using multidimensional similarity measures. The
              approach includes development of representation and preprocessing methods for
              pictorial feature extraction both for generic objects and generic motion. The
              features extracted include spectral signatures of shape and motion, local and
              global color histograms and texture. Articulated motion in video is decomposed
              into basic components using Motion Spectral Signatures (MSS). Generic objects
              are recognized using Affine Invariant Spectral Signatures (AISS) and Expansion
              Matching (EXM) based indexing in the frequency domain. Motion and object
              representations are then utilized to construct a dictionary of HTL atomic
              predicates with multidimensional hyper-regional representation. An on-line
              learning capability for expanding the dictionary is also planned. Improved
              methods for video shot and scene segmentation are to be developed as well. The
              results of this research will provide an efficient means for query retrieval
              from video and pictorial databases. Such a system will have many applications
              in digital libraries and in TV movie industries.
