Title       : Topics in the Organization of Firms and Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9711463

Award Number: 9711463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Asher Wolinsky a-wolinsky@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                PROJECT ABSTRACT  The main project in this proposal explores the organization
              and functioning of firms whose employees have sufficient power to negotiate
              their individual employment terms.  Employment relations of this type are
              obviously widespread.  In many or even most firms, the terms of employment of
              certain key employees are determined in direct bargaining between the employee
              and the firm. But, more importantly, there are many firms in which relations of
              this form encompass a substantial subset of a firm's workforce. The latter
              category includes firms that employ highly skilled labor such as
              high-technology firms, law firms, universities, professional sports teams, and
              perhaps even small firms that employ less-skilled labor. This situation is
              clearly distinct from those addressed by the standard textbook models, in which
              workers are assumed to possess no bargaining power, on the one hand, and the
              fully unionized firm's model, on the other hand. Yet despite the obvious
              relevance of this situation, there is only one theoretical analysis that
              considers it.  The purpose of the proposed research is to develop an
              understanding of how such employment relations work and how their presence
              affects economically interesting magnitudes. Specifically, it explores whether
              and under what circumstances employment relations of this type have a
              systematic effect on the level of employment (and hence production), and how
              they affect the hiring practices and the organization of the work within the
              firm.   A central step in the research entails the development of a new model
              of the firm that combines the dynamic evolution of the firm's work-force with
              the process of contracting and recontracting between the firm and its
              employees. The dynamic nature of the model is necessitated by the recognition
              that the firm's opportunities of replacing employees play a major role in
              shaping the outcomes of such employment  relations.   Preliminary analysis
              establishes that, despite the inherent complexity of the scenarios under
              consideration, it is possible to obtain relatively transparent models that
              capture some of the main ingredients of the situation and can serve as the
              basic framework for empirical investigation.  More importantly, the preliminary
              analysis also shows that the predictions regarding wage and employment outcomes
              are indeed systematically and significantly different from the predictions of
              existing theories.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
