Title       : MMIA: Terrestrial Biospheric Responses to Atmospheric Deposition and Application
               to Integrated Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9711626

Award Number: 9711626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Rastetter erastett@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Prinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiangming Xiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. David McGuire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   ABSTRACT      Rastetter  9711626    Most integrated assessments of climate
              change do not consider the effects of the deposition of atmospheric compounds
              on ecosystem biogeochemistry.  This project will study these effects in
              conjunction with the responses of terrestrial ecosystems to changes in
              atmospheric chemistry and climate and to incorporate these responses into an
              integrated assessment framework.  The work will emphasize the effects of
              nitrate deposition and of ozone and sulfur dioxide exposure on global
              ecosystems.  The MBL Terrestrial Ecosystem Model (TEM) coupled to the MIT
              Coupled Chemistry-Climate Model(CCM).  TEM will be improved to include the
              influence of nitrate inputs and pollutant exposure on ecosystem function.  TEM
              and CCM will enable predictions relevant to future economic viability of
              forests and their uptake of CO2.  Because it is expected that the future
              effects on ecosystems will be sensitive to the relative mix of CO2, NOx, SO2
              and CO emissions, predictions of anthropogenic emissions from the MIT model for
              global and regional economic development (EPPA) will be used as input to the
              CCM and TEM.  The integrated effects and feedbacks of human activity,
              atmospheric composition, climate, and ecosystem change will be studied using
              the MIT Global System Model for Integrated Assessment of which TEM, CCM and
              EPPA are coupled component submodels.  Using sensitivity studies, it is
              expected that the results of this work will help set priorities for future
              research on the effects of atmospheric deposition on ecosystems.
