Title       : Tropical Marine Endemism and Extinction: Biogeographic Relationships between the
               Snapping Shrimp Faunas of the Eastern Atlantic and the Isthmus of Panama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9711525

Award Number: 9711525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65826              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee A. Weigt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The broad biogeographic patterns that characterize the world's oceans have
              been well summarized using classical analyses.  The application of molecular
              techniques, however, can additionally provide an estimate of the time elapsed
              since geographically isolated sister populations or species were last in
              genetic contact.   The purpose of this proposal is to determine the pattern of
              genetic relationships among the snapping shrimp (Alpheus) of the eastern
              Atlantic, western Atlantic, and eastern Pacific.  Snapping shrimp are an ideal
              group with which to characterize biogeographic patterns in the tropics, because
              of their high diversity and well documented patterns of divergence across the
              Isthmus of Panama (eastern Pacific, western Atlantic).  The collected data will
              be used to answer the following questions:  1) is there evidence of recent gene
              flow across the Atlantic, or is the tropical eastern Atlantic fauna endemic, at
              least with respect to close relatives in the western Atlantic?  Understanding
              endemicity is fundamental to the categorization and conservation of marine
              biodiversity, 2)  if divergence across the eastern Atlantic predated that
              across the Isthmus of Panama (minimally 2 3 million years), when did these
              faunas separate based on molecular calibrations using transisthmian data? 
              Dating trans Atlantic divergences allows molecular data sets to be compared
              with reconstructions based on geological or paleoceanographic studies, to their
              mutual benefit, and 3)  do eastern Atlantic taxa reveal evidence of extinction
              events associated with the Isthmus of Panama, e.g. relationships between the
              eastern Pacific and eastern Atlantic that are closer than transisthmian
              relationships?  Such undetected extinctions are a possible explanation for some
              of the variation observed across the Isthmus and, if documented, would usefully
              constrain our estimates for rates of molecular evolution in this model system. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
