Title       : Time Series Particle Flux Measurements in the Sargasso Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9711703

Award Number: 9711703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen H. Conte mconte@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9711703  Conte          Understanding  of  present-day  ocean/climate 
              interactions  based  largely upon time-series data collected as part  of  long-
               term research efforts. The contributions of long-term studies  to  our 
              knowledge  of  how  the ocean works are  numerous  and  far-  reaching. Yet,
              such studies are exceedingly rare-especially those  with   a  biogeochemical 
              focus.  The  OFP  time-series  is   now  approaching   its  20th  year.  It  is
               one  of  the   very   few  oceanographic records spanning more than a decade 
              and,  by  far,  the  longest  time-series of its kind. The  OFP  time-series 
              has  provided  an  unparalleled record of secular changes in  material  fluxes 
              to  the  deep  ocean, and direct evidence  of  the  close  linkages  between
              particle fluxes and upper ocean processes.  The  OFP  record  remains  on  e of
              the main pieces  of  evidence  for  temporal  variability  in  ecosystem 
              functioning  and   in   the  efficiency of the "biological pump". The OFP
              time-series  is  now  becoming  long enough to begin to identify significant 
              long-term  trends in both the magnitude and composition of the material flux 
              which  appear  to be directly linked to variation  in  the  North  Atlantic
              climate system.         The project continues to share its resources- in the
              form of  sample material, data, ancillary shiptime, and use of the mooring 
              platform-  with a large number of researchers to make possible  a  diverse   
              range    of   detailed,   generally   process-oriented  investigations which
              have greatly expanded the scientific results  of  the program.  Synthesis of
              these datasets will lead to  major  and  fundamental advances in identifying
              the upper ocean controls  on the quantity and composition of material flux to
              the seafloor.  The  findings  will be of paramount importance for 
              understanding  and   predicting   the  ocean's  response  to  future,  
              possibly  anthropogenically induced, climatic change and for development of 
              global carbon flux models.
