Title       : Geometric Methods for Analyzing and Controlling Undulatory Locomotion Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9711834

Award Number: 9711834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209312             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Ostrowski jpo@grip.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  research studies the geometric aspects of motion generation  and  control 
              for  a large class of locomotion systems  involving  cyclic   internal   shape 
              changes  (often  called   undulatory).  Particular  emphasis is placed on the
              geometry  and  dynamics  of  robotic  swimming  motions, with models derived 
              from  the  basic  locomotion  mechanisms found in eels, fish, and paramecia.  
              This  requires   investigating  continuous  (in  terms  of  shape   and 
              actuation)  dynamic systems and addressing the associated  design  and control
              theoretic challenges.  Optimal control theory is also  employed  to  study 
              both  the  optimality  of  gaits  found   in  biological systems and to design
              more efficient forms of  aquatic  robotic  locomotion.   Swimming  robotic 
              mechanisms  offer  many  potential   advantages  over  rotor-driven   devices, 
               including  increased efficiency, flexibility, and agility, and can  be  used 
              in  underwater  search and rescue to enter  areas  that  are  not  easily 
              accessible  by  traditional  vehicles.   In  this   work,  theoretical  results
               will be tightly coupled  with  experimental  verification  and  the 
              development  of  robotic  systems.   This  research  also builds a foundation
              for future work in areas  such  as  dynamic  analyses  of  biological gaits 
              and  group  swimming  patterns,  underwater  surveillance  and  detection,  and
               micro-  locomotion.   A long-term goal of this research is  to  fabricate 
              locomotion  devices on the cellular biological scale  using  MEMS  technology.
