Title       : Micropump/Power-relay Based on the Magnetohydrodynamic Principle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9711990

Award Number: 9711990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wanjun Wang wang@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chantal Khan Malek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9711990  Wang  There are two major goals for the research work proposed: (1)
              design, microfabricate, and test a magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) pump which can be
              used for pumping electrically conductive fluids; (2) design, microfabricate,
              and test a power relay using a MHD pump for switching actuation and liquid
              metals, such as mercury, as the conducting medium.    The MHD micropump to be
              developed can be integrated with any of the commonly used chemical and
              biological sensing techniques and may have significant applications in various
              biomedical and chemical analyses.  It can be used to directly deliver
              electrically conductive fluids. For samples with very low conductivity, or even
              non-conductive samples, a "carrier liquid" with higher electric conductivity
              can be used as is commonly practiced in capillary electrophoresis.  Advantages
              of a MHD micropump include: no moving parts; reduced risk of failure due to
              mechanical fatigue; relatively simple fabrication, and therefore potentially
              lower cost; reduced risk of clogging and damage to molecular material being
              pumped; potential for remote or tele-operation by control of an applied
              external magnetic field; potential for massive parallelization for rapid
              processing.  The advantages of a MHD actuated power relay using a liquid metal,
              such as mercury, as a conducting medium include: high current capacity, high
              off-resistance, low on-resistance, low power consumption, and high dielectric
              strength, and elimination of spark corrosion. The downside with using mercury
              is toxicity and handling.  Specifically, the research work in this proposal
              focuses on the following two key areas:    Characterization of the
              magnetohydrodynarnic effect and its applications in micropumping and switching
              applications.  The magnetohydrodynamic principle has been applied for pumping
              liquid metals, as well as in various acoustic transducers and flow sensing
              applications.  However, almost all of the previous studies and applications
              have concentrated in macro-systems.  Different pro blems may be faced when the
              principle is applied to micropumping and sensing.  Effects such as surface
              tension and friction may become important factors.  Fundamental dynamic and
              static modeling and experimental research will be carried out in order to fully
              understand and develop guidelines for optimal designs of MHD-based
              Microsystems.    Suitable microfabrication processes for the proposed MHD
              micropump/relay will be developed and documented.  Thorough experimental
              studies will be conducted on the micropump/relay to be developed and compared
              with the dynamic and static modeling results.  Based on the test results,
              guidelines for the optimal design and fabrication of MHD micropump/relay will
              be developed.  ***
