Title       : MMIA: Quantity and Quality in the Wheat Agroecosystem: Assessment of Climate
               Change in the Great Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a9711628

Award Number: 9711628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Weiss agme011@unlvm.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Shelton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn A. Helmers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kent M. Eskridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry W. Maranville  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Arkebauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Stephen Baenziger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT      9711628  Weiss, et al    This project on methods and models for
              integrated assessment combines enhancement of scientific components.  The
              former category will address modeling ecosystem function, value, and adaptive
              behavior while the latter category will address economic feedback mechanisms
              throughout the agricultural economy.    Quality as well as quantity are major
              components of the wheat agroecosystem.  Evaluating future hard winter wheat
              ecosystems in terms of quantity alone is not adequate, quality must also be
              considered.  Thus, the following objectives have been identified:  To
              quantitatively evaluate hard winter wheat quantity and quality responses to
              climate change scenarios in the Great Plains; to quantitatively determine the
              economic impact of climate change scenarios on future hard winter wheat
              ecosystems in the Great Plains.    An end-use quality submodel based on the
              translocation of nitrogen to the grain will be modified to include protein
              quality, in terms of gliadin and glutenin concentrations and dough mixing
              properties.  Validation of this submodel will be based on detailed field
              experiments existing data sets, and laboratory analyses of protein content and
              dough mixing properties.  This submodel will be incorporated into an existing
              wheat growth, development, and yield model which will be validated from
              existing data sets at selected locations in the Great Plains.  Using generated
              weather data sets representative of different climate change scenarios,
              quantity and quality reponses of different wheat cultivars will be evaluated. 
              These outputs will be used as inputs to the economics analysis.    An
              integrated assessment of the economic impact from projected climate change on
              winter wheat ecosystems requires the inclusion of both wheat quality and
              quantity impacts in the region.  The analysis uses equilibria-imposed feedback
              mechanisms to analyze how projected climate changes impact wheat and other
              agricultural output and input sectors in the Great Plains as well  as other
              regions.  The overall  approach models the resource and output substitution
              phenomena which regularly operate in the economic adjustment process in an
              economy.
