Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Parallel Algorithms for Integer and Mixed
               Integer Nonlinear Programs Arising in the Management and Design of Chemical
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9058073

Award Number: 9058073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Georgia-Ann Klutke                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Pekny   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9227,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   A broad range of chemical process engineering problems                    
              including systematic process design, retrofit design, batch                    
              scheduling, production planning, facility layout, and plant startup            
              may be naturally modeled as mixed integer nonlinear programs                   
              (MINLP).  Although a large number of models have been published                
              for a variety of specific situations, practical application of                 
              MINLP methods has been limited because conventional solution                   
              techniques are effective only on models of limited size.  An                   
              important goal of this long term research program is the                       
              development of highly parallel algorithms for solving MINLP.  In               
              particular, this research seeks to be able to use hundreds of                  
              powerful processors to substantially extend the range of                       
              tractability for MINLP.  The dramatic increase in solution                     
              capability is critical in incorporating multiple objectives,                   
              realistic physics, flexibility, and robustness into engineering                
              design and operation models.  Three important issues that must be              
              addressed in the course of developing effective parallel MINLP                 
              algorithms are: (1) the systematic  exploitation of problem                    
              structure (2) the partitioning of the workload among processors and            
              (3) the utilization of concurrently available information to                   
              improve algorithm performance.  Central to understanding these                 
              issues is the development of special purpose parallel algorithm                
              performance.  Central to understanding these issues is the                     
              development of special purpose parallel algorithms for highly                  
              structured integer programs.                                                   
                   Research will proceed along two complementary paths: (1)                  
              development of general purpose parallel MINLP algorithms (2)                   
              development of special purpose parallel algorithms for highly                  
              structured integer programs.  The underlying goal of both paths is             
              to learn how to effectively use massive amounts of parallelism                 
              while at the same time exploiting problem specific features.
