Title       : PYI: Complexity Uncertainty, Information, and Organization in Control System
               Design for Modern Engineering Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9058397

Award Number: 9058397
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl N. Nett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of our research program will be to                            
              make progress toward the development of control                                
              system design methodologies which support the                                  
              following control system design paradigm: Minimize                             
              control system complexity subject to the                                       
              achievement of a specified control accuracy in the                             
              face of system/environmental uncertainty.  A key                               
              focus of this research program will be the role and                            
              use of information and organization for the                                    
              achievement of this paradigm, as the nature and                                
              use of available information, and in particular how                            
              it is organized, largely determine how effectively the                         
              control system reduces the effects of                                          
              system/environmental uncertainty, and what level of                            
              complexity is required to do so.  The task in our                              
              research program will include the development of                               
              control-oriented system identification methods.  In                            
              this work we have developed methods for                                        
              identification H-infinity; in other words, the                                 
              identified model converges to the unknown system                               
              in the H-infinity norm, and at each step an explicit                           
              bound is given on the H-infinity norm of the error                             
              between the identified model and the unknown                                   
              system.  This bound is precisely the uncertainty                               
              specification required in most currently popular                               
              approaches to robust control system design.                                    
              Applications feedback will be essential for the                                
              achievement of our immediate goal of better                                    
              bridging the gap that currently exists between the                             
              areas of robust control and system identification.                             
              For this purpose we have in mind an important                                  
              application; namely, active control of                                         
              fan/compressor stall phenomena in advanced                                     
              variable-cycle aircraft gas turbine engines.
