Title       : Presidential Young Investigator (PYI) Award - Interstellar Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9058467

Award Number: 9058467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy M. Ziurys   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9227,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Ziurys' Presidential Young Investigator Award will be used to              
              study interstellar chemistry.  In the laboratory she will measure              
              transition frequencies of molecules which are potentially present              
              in interstellar clouds but which have not yet been observed.                   
              With the rest frequencies known, she will then carry out                       
              observations to search for these molecules in selected molecular               
              clouds known to be undergoing star formation.                                  
                                                                                             
              It is currently thought that most interstellar molecules are                   
              formed by gas phase positive ion-molecule reactions.  About 50%                
              of these reactions are exothermic.  They also have negligible                  
              activation energy barriers, and they require only 2-body                       
              collisions.  Thus, they can proceed rapidly in the low                         
              temperature, low density environment of interstellar molecular                 
              clouds.  When stars form in these clouds, however, the physical                
              conditions become altered.  Under these circumstances, activation              
              energy barriers are readily overcome, endothermic reactions can                
              occur, and what is termed "shock" or "high temperature" chemistry              
              takes place.  In addition shocks and elevated temperatures can                 
              cause the destruction of dust grains and release refractory                    
              elements into the gas phase.  It is evident that this "high                    
              temperature" chemistry must be important in the synthesis of                   
              molecules in star forming regions, but its exact role has yet to               
              be determined.  Dr. Ziurys' research addresses both the                        
              laboratory measurement of the properties of molecules which are                
              potential constituents of the "shocked" regions of interstellar                
              clouds and the astronomical observations to search for these                   
              molecules in space.
