Title       : CAREER: Incremental Specification and Experimentation of Collaboration Protocols
               and Infrastructure Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0133871

Award Number: 0133871
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Du Li lidu@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this project, an alternative approach to developing collaborative
              applications will be investigated. In this approach (called "incremental
              specification and experimentation"), the collaboration infrastructure provides
              only the most essential functionality by executing "meta protocols." During the
              course of collaboration, new protocols are discovered and specified as they
              emerge. Both meta and emergent protocol snippets are plugged, unplugged, and
              replaced on the fly. The project includes: (1) domain modeling to find natural
              representations of meta and emergent protocols; (2) multi-user authoring tools
              to support end-user incremental specification of emergent protocols; (3)
              plug-n-play of protocols to support incremental experimentation; and (4)
              execution, monitoring and awareness mechanisms to provide the necessary context
              for coordination. This proposed research investigates incremental specification
              and experimentation of synchronous and asynchronous protocols in the same
              framework and attempts to develop more end-user oriented support. The results,
              when applied, are expected to improve the flexibility, and thus the usability
              and development/deployment costs, of a variety of groupware applications. The
              development of a new graduate course on "collaborative systems and models" will
              give students concrete experience in experimentation with collaboration
              protocols. In undergraduate courses, students will work in teams using
              collaboration technologies to identify and analyze their collaborative
              activities and the underlying "meta protocols" implemented in those systems
              that they would like to change. Through a protocol modeling process, students
              will develop analytic skills and begin to understand the dynamic nature of
              cooperative work and the importance of flexibility in the design of
              collaboration infrastructures.


