Title       : RNA Degradation and Antibiotic Synthesis in Streptomyces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0133520

Award Number: 0133520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Jones gjones@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Streptomyces, Gram-positive soil bacteria, are notable for their ability to form
              dormant cells called spores (sporulation) and production of most of the
              antibiotics used worldwide in clinical and veterinary medicine.  Members of the
              genus Streptomyces produce common antibiotics such as streptomycin, ampicillin
              and tetracycline as natural products.  A considerable amount of information has
              been obtained in recent years regarding the mechanisms that regulate the
              production of antibiotics by Streptomyces.  One possible level of regulation
              that has not been studied in detail concerns the stability of the genetic
              message.  In other organisms, it is known that modulating the stability of the
              genetic message can control the function of genes.  It is proposed to examine
              the role of genetic message stability in the regulation of antibiotic
              production by Streptomyces coelicolor.  S. coelicolor produces four
              antibiotics, two of which, actinorhodin (act) and undecylprodigiosin (red) will
              be examined in this study.  Specific aims of the research are as follows.  (1)
              The genes for two enzymes known to be involved in determining the stability of
              the genetic message in bacterial systems will be cloned.  (2) The effects of
              the expression of those cloned genes (i.e., the production of the gene
              products) on the stability of the genetic message for two proteins known to be
              required for act and red production will be studied.  (3) The effects of the
              expression of the genes that determine message stability on the production of
              the act and red antibiotics will be determined.  If such effects are detected,
              the relationship of those effects to the stability of genetic messages required
              for antibiotic production will be assessed.  (4) Using genetic engineering
              techniques, attempts will be made to artificially increase the stability of the
              genetic messages for the regulators of act and red production.  It is possible
              that increasing the stability of the genetic messages in question will lead to
              increased production of the antibiotics whose synthesis is regulated by the
              proteins encoded by those messages.  It may thus be possible to increase
              antibiotic yields by stabilizing the genetic messages for key genes required
              for antibiotic production.  Thus, the proposed studies may well have
              significant implications for the production of antibiotics. (5) In previous
              studies, a gene designated absB has been identified that controls production of
              all four of the antibiotics normally produced by S. coelicolor.  That gene
              encodes a protein that affects the stability of the genetic message in
              bacteria.  Attempts will be made to identify the genes that are in turn
              affected by absB and to assess further the molecular mechanism by which message
              stability affects antibiotic production.
