Title       : CAREER: Representational Tools to Support Understanding of Complex Biological
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0133533

Award Number: 0133533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $582517             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               
Life science is often about understanding complex systems- from human body
              systems to ecosystems to evolution.  These are hard to understand because it
              requires understanding how structures relate to functions and what the
              behaviors of the system are. Some interactions between parts are invisible and
              have a time sequence that makes them difficult to perceive. Even adults
              struggle to learn about complex systems.  Yet such understanding is often
              critical to scientific analysis. These difficulties may be aggravated by the
              static depictions found in typical textbooks that focus on structures without
              considering the dynamic behaviors and function.  One possible approach to
              teaching about complex systems involves the use of a conceptual representation
              drawn from Structure-Behavior-Function (SBF) theory but we need to first
              investigate how people come to understand complex biological systems. Much of
              life science instruction tends to focus on structural aspects of complex
              systems. I will use this framework to develop both static (hypermedia) and
              dynamic approaches (a simulation construction kit, the virtual construction kit
              - the VCK) to help middle-school students learn an SBF schema, and in
              particular, support their understanding of system behaviors and functions. 
              This research addresses three main questions: 1) What does it mean to
              understand a complex system?; 2) How can providing an explicit conceptual
              representation (i.e., SBF) support learning about complex systems?; and 3)  How
              can dynamic representational tools (i.e., hypermedia and the VCK) support
              learning about this conceptual representation?

The teaching plan has three
              main components.  First, there will be an opportunity for a research mentorship
              for graduate and undergraduate students  as they become involved in research
              and instructional design.  Second, I will contribute to masters and doctoral
              course development through developing and enhancing existing graduate course
              offerings in Cognition and Technology and Model Development and Reasoning in
              Science. Third, there will be an impact on preservice teacher training. Because
              the VCK models can be used as windows into children's thinking, this work will
              provide contexts that will be integrated into preservice teacher
              education.






