Title       : Comparative Arbitration Procedures: The Role of Expectations in Dispute Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0133231

Award Number: 0133231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56239              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Dickinson ddickinson@b202.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bargaining disagreements are often quite costly, and so a thorough understanding
              of the determinants of bargaining failure and the effectiveness of different
              procedures to resolve disputes is needed.  This research will study arbitration
              procedures, and one key objective of this research is to examine dispute
              resolution under different forms of arbitration.  That is, how do different
              arbitration rules affect bargaining outcomes?  This research will examine an
              innovative arbitration procedure as well as currently used procedures.  It is
              important to investigate dispute resolution with this innovative procedure
              because it theoretically promises to resolve disputes more effectively than
              procedures currently used in practice.  This research will also investigate the
              role that bargainer expectations play in disputes.  If bargainers view
              information about likely arbitration settlements in an optimistic way (i.e.,
              each bargainer's perceptions of likely settlements are biased in his/her
              favor), then these optimistic expectations may significantly contribute to the
              likelihood that the bargainers will arbitration rather than negotiate their own
              settlement.  Specifically, one can show theoretically that optimistic
              expectations will likely reverse the ordering of least to most effective
              arbitration procedure from among those studied in this project.  
      This
              research will examine the aforementioned issues using a controlled laboratory
              bargaining environment that allows for manipulation of bargainer expectations
              and arbitration rules used at bargaining impasse.  Paid laboratory subjects
              will negotiate over the value of a generic variable (i.e., the item of value
              created for the lab environment), which generates higher payoffs to one
              bargainer for lower negotiated values but higher payoffs to the other bargainer
              for higher negotiated values of the variable.  As such, the lab creates a
              conflict of interest (i.e., a dispute) in terms of payoff potential in the
              negotiations.  Bargaining rounds of fixed length will utilize different sets of
              arbitrations rules in different rounds to resolve disputes that remain at the
              end of the round.  The experimental environment will also manipulate subject
              expectations by providing a more distilled (and objective) form of information
              about likely arbitrated settlements for bargaining pairs in half of the
              experiments.  Statistical analysis of the results from this research will
              reveal which arbitration procedure is most effective at limiting disputes and
              will also identify the separate contribution of bargainer expectations.



