Title       : CAREER: Optimal Control of Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0133673

Award Number: 0133673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Navin Khaneja navin@hrl.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0133673
Khaneja

Over the past fifty years, there has been a steady
              increase in man's ability to manipulate and control quantum mechanical
              phenomena. Today we are surrounded with technology that owes its existence
              directly or indirectly to quantum mechanical effects. From transistors, lasers,
              compact disc players, optical fibre communications, magnetic resonance imaging
              to scanning tunneling microscopes, the quantum technology has effected every
              aspect of our life. These days the quantum technologists can trap and
              experiment with individual atoms, bounce atoms up and down on carefully
              sculpted electromagnetic fields, and image the structure of a crystal, atom by
              atom. Emergence of the science of quantum information in the last decade has
              added a new dimension to the applications of control of quantum mechanical
              phenomena. There is now an increasing emphasis on harnessing quantum dynamics
              for the purposes of computing, communication, and information storage.  All
              these technologies involve exercising control over quantum mechanical
              phenomena.  A central challenge in the control of quantum dynamics is the loss
              of coherence (decoherence) in system dynamics, due to unwanted couplings to the
              environment.  This issue of decoherence arises in almost all potential
              implementations of quantum information devices and control of quantum systems
              in general.
	
In this project the PI will develop methods inspired by
              geometric control theory for optimal control of quantum systems.  He will
              compute fundamental bounds on the minimum time it takes to produce a desired
              evolution in a quantum system and design time optimal control laws which
              achieve these bounds. These geometric control ideas will be applied to design
              of time optimal pulse sequences for coherence transfer experiments in high
              resolution liquid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, with
              applications to structural biology and NMR quantum computing. Minimization of
              time is important as it reduces the effects of decoherence and increases the
              sensitivity of experiments in NMR spectroscopy. There is a great need for such
              work in the growing field of structural biology, because time optimal pulse
              sequences will significantly reduce the spectrometer time (by days in some
              experiments) leading the way to high-throughput determination of protein
              structures. Time optimal pulses will also help to scale NMR methods for
              processing of larger proteins by minimizing decoherence effects. This effort is
              broad in its scope and applicable to a wide variety of applications involving
              control of quantum systems.


