Title       : Culture in the Balance: The Emergence of a New Model of Equilibrium within
               Medieval Thought, 1225-1375
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0133675

Award Number: 0133675
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Kaye jkaye@barnard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES Proposal 0137158
Culture in the Balance: The Emergence of
              a New Model of Equilibrium within Medieval Thought, 1225-1375
Joel Kaye,
              Barnard College

Despite the central place ideals of equality and equilibrium
              occupied in virtually every discipline within medieval thought, the model of
              equilibrium employed was never brought to the fore as a subject of discussion
              in itself. For this reason, modern historians, too, have so far failed to
              recognize and treat equilibrium as a primary subject of investigation. This
              project brings the history of equilibrium from the periphery to the
center of
              inquiry.

While the same words (equitas, equalitas, aequatio, adaequatio,
              equilibrare, etc.) continued to be used across disciplines throughout the
              medieval period, the definitions and processes denoted by these words changed
              dramatically over the period of high scholasticism, ca. 1250-1375. The
              emergence of a new model of equilibrium in this period had profound
              implications, underlying and making possible a
              thoroughgoing
reconceptualization of the form and functioning principles of
              the cosmos. The historical importance of this creation, little recognized up to
              this point, extends far beyond the medieval centuries. The new model remained
              influential and active for centuries to come, providing the foundation for much
              of what we now consider to be "modern" speculation in a wide variety of
              humanistic and scientific disciplines, from ethical and
political thought, to
              astronomy, geology, physics, and medicine.

The research and writing
              undertaken during the Fellowship year forms part of a larger book project,
              already well underway. The book will trace the emergence of a new conceptual
              model of equilibrium and examine its implications within four intellectual
              areas: scholastic economic thought, political thought, natural philosophy, and
              medicine.  Research during the Fellowship year is focused upon primary sources
              in the area of medieval medicine. Here the language of equality and balance is
              ever present, as definitions of health and sickness, models of the activity and
              circulation of the elements and humours, speculation on the action of plants
              and medicines, and the rich theoretical models of the temperaments and
              complexions, all center on notions of equilibrium. 

The sources can be
              divided into six groups. 1. The early theoretical writings (through the
              mid-thirteenth century) on equilibrium and health found in various works from
              the School of Salerno provide a base line against which to view later
              developments. 2. Avicenna's  great medical textbook, the Canon (particularly
              the opening chapters of book 1) provides a sophisticated discussion of the
              philosophical principles underlying medical thought and practice. Here the
              concept of equilibrium is thoroughly intertwined with the theory of elements,
              humours, temperaments, and complexions, in a manner that remains influential
              for centuries. 3. Thirteenth and Fourteenth-century commentaries on Book I of
              the Canon, particularly those of Gentile da Foligno (c.1340) and Jacopo da
              Forli (c.1385), provide an excellent means of tracing the development of the
              model over time. 4. The writings of Arnald of Villanova. 5. Commentaries on the
              Tegni of Galen. 6. Numerous shorter treatises focusing on the question of
              equilibrium within bodily systems (De complexionibus) and the question of
              medical dosage as a problem in equalization (De gradibus medicinarum). 

