Title       : CAREER: New Directions for Cryptographic Hardware
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0133297

Award Number: 0133297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Berk Sunar sunar@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The research described here addresses information security issues for
              distributed networks and embedded environments.  Embedded applications are
              found in a vast array of existing and emerging technologies, including mobile
              phones, personal digital assistants, smart cards, and remote-controlled utility
              network devices and are distinguished from typical (but far less prevalent)
              PC-level microprocessors in their relatively low power consumption and inherent
              limitations on memory and speed.                                               
                                                                                             
                               It is predicted that the number of applications with embedded
              microprocessors which will be connected to our telephone and computer networks
              will increase dramatically over the next few years.  For instance, it is
              anticipated that within the next few years, 50% of all Internet end-devices
              will have to operate in constrained environments.  At the same time, these
              networks are enabling remote access to, and manipulation of, sensitive
              resources of all sorts, including bank records, medical information, alarm
              system, and industrial machinery.                                              
                                        The need is clear for long-term planning and directed
              research in the area of cryptographic security for these devices. However,
              cryptography has only recently evolved from a discipline confined to the
              special interest of a small, closed community to become a practical and vital
              tool to enable a secure communications and information infrastructure. As a
              consequence, the acceptance of cryptography as an engineering discipline is
              still in its early stages.  The US industry is already experiencing a shortage
              of "crypto engineers".  This negative trend is expected to continue, unless
              serious actions are taken for the education of crypto engineers.               
                                                                    The researchers propose
              an integrated solution for the research and education problems in perspective. 
              To contribute solutions to the security problems in distributed networks, the
              research will  focus on the hardware implementations of public and secret key
              algorithms with challenging new requirements.  The long-term ambition of this
              research is to bring cryptographic security solutions to the market which are
              flexible, low-cost, highly scalable, and power efficient.  The researchers 
              believe that this research will provide graduate and undergraduate students the
              perfect educational setting to explore solid engineering practices of
              cryptography.  A rigorous cryptography curriculum introduced  at the
              undergraduate level, enriched with international collaborations, and cutting
              edge research will create skilled crypto engineers, that will be essential in
              the future development of secured infrastructures.
