Title       : CAREER: Experimental Research on the Runaway Breakdown of Air During
               Thunderstorms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0133773

Award Number: 0133773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Dwyer dwyer@pss.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project consists of observing x-rays, gamma rays, and energetic
              electrons from thunderstorms and in laboratory experiments to study the runaway
              breakdown of air in thunderstorm conditions.  Runaway breakdown is a process in
              which an avalanche of high-energy electrons develops in a strong electric
              field, producing x-rays, gamma rays, and secondary ionization, and transporting
              large quantities of charge great distances.  This process can occur when the
              energy gained by an electron accelerating in a strong electric field exceeds
              the energy lost by collisions.  It may play a part in lightning initiation and
              large-scale charge transport in thunderstorms, as well as in explaining x-ray
              emissions from storms and transient luminous events (sprites and jets) in the
              high atmosphere above thunderstorms.  The goals of the project are to
              demonstrate whether runaway breakdown occurs in the atmosphere, to test current
              models of the mechanism, to understand the importance of runaway breakdown in
              thunderstorm phenomena, and to make experimental scientific research part of
              every student's normal curriculum.  To achieve the goals, the project includes
              the following work:

1. Design and construction of sensitive detectors for
              x-ray and gamma ray emissions, as part of a senior physics laboratory course.
              
2. Observing x-rays, gamma rays, and energetic electrons associated with
              triggered lightning in collaboration with the Lightning Research Laboratory of
              the University of Florida, Gainesville.
3. Conducting laboratory experiments
              with accelerating electrons in strong electric fields to investigate runaway
              avalanche; integrating the work into undergraduate physics labs.

The project
              will provide the first direct evidence of the importance of the runaway
              electron process in air, contribute to the understanding of thunderstorms, and
              provide students with opportunities for instrument development and research in
              atmospheric physics.
