Title       : CAREER: Study of the Mechanical Properties of Thin Metal Films and Shape Memory
               Alloy Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0133559

Award Number: 0133559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joost J. Vlassak vlassak@esag.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims at greater understanding of deformation and fracture
              mechanisms of thin films. It has been known that these mechanisms interact with
              microstructural features such as grain size, grain orientation, interfaces and
              surfaces, and dislocation substructure albeit the nature of these interactions
              is not well established. The project investigates the stress-strain behavior of
              freestanding films using bulge test technique while films on substrates will be
              studied using the substrate curvature method. Another goal of the project is to
              investigate the precipitation hardening and the shape memory effects in Ni-Ti
              thin films. Third objective of the project is to develop micromechanical
              techniques for measuring thin film fracture toughness. These techniques are
              used to investigate sub-critical crack growth under cyclical loading conditions
              and to determine how factors like film thickness, chemical environment, and
              process conditions affect the fracture toughness of thin metal and alloy films.
              A new undergraduate Introductory Materials Science course along with a special
              topics course will serve as the main vehicles for some of the educational
              activities.
%%%
This research develops new and improved understanding of the
              deformation mechanisms that operate in thin films, resulting in better models
              for thin film mechanical behavior that will have an impact on many engineering
              applications where thin films are used, such as integrated circuits, MEMS
              devices, and wear resistant coatings. The fracture toughness and fatigue
              resistance of thin films are applicable from reliability concerns for MEMS
              devices in non-hermetic packaging that is more cost-effective than traditional
              hermetic packaging.

