Title       : Stimulus-Synthesis/Secretion Coupling: The Tilapia Prolactin Cell as a Model
               Osmoreceptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0133714

Award Number: 0133714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307398             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Gordon Grau   (Principal Investigator current)
              Milton H. Stetson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tetsuya Hirano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Prolactin (PRL) is a highly versatile hormone of the pituitary gland of all
              vertebrates.  It has essential actions in the regulation of salt and water
              balance (osmoregulation) in fish, including the tilapia, Oreochromis
              mossambicus, a species which can move freely between fresh water and seawater
              (it is euryhaline).  In the diluting freshwater environment, blood ion levels
              tend to fall and PRL acts to counter this by increasing blood osmolality and
              reducing the water and ion permeability of skin and other osmoregulatory
              surfaces.  Consistent with these actions, PRL cells show greater activity in
              tilapia held in fresh water than in those held in seawater.  Blood PRL also
              rises and remains elevated as blood osmolality declines when tilapia move from
              seawater to freshwater.  The tilapia PRL cell appears to be directly responsive
              to changes in extracellular osmolality inasmuch as PRL release increases as
              medium osmolality is reduced when tilapia pituitary glands are incubated in
              vitro.    
The term "osmoreceptor" refers to cells that respond to osmotic
              signals with an appropriate physiological response that is evoked through
              mechanisms called signal transduction pathways.  Calcium (Ca+2) is widely used
              in these pathways as a second messenger that mediates the induction of cellular
              responses to specific external signals.  The osmoreceptive properties of the
              tilapia PRL cells offer an excellent and possibly unique model system for
              investigating the pathways through which an osmotic signal is transduced into
              an osmoregulatory response (i.e., PRL secretion). In teleosts, unlike in other
              vertebrates, PRL cells are segregated into the anterior portion of the
              pituitary as a nearly homogeneous mass, which is easily separated for organ and
              dispersed-cell culture. This anatomical arrangement greatly facilitates the
              characterization of secretory mechanisms, and provides a highly useful model
              that can augment our general understanding of the regulation of other
              less-accessible osmosensitive (and osmoregulatory) endocrine and neuroendocrine
              systems (e.g. the hypothalamo-neurohypophysial magnocellular systems involved
              in vasopressin and oxytocin release in mammals).
The long-term objective of
              this research is to identify the mechanisms involved in the regulation of the
              production and release of PRL by changes in the osmotic environment of the
              tilapia PRL cell. The present studies build on previous work in this
              laboratory, and are designed to construct a more detailed picture of signal
              transduction in osmoreceptive cells.  The specific aim is to determine whether
              the rise in PRL release in response to reduced extracellular osmolality is
              triggered by an increase in cell size that leads to an increase in
              intracellular free Ca+2 ([Ca2+]i).  The hypothesis is that a fall in
              extracellular osmolality leads to the passive influx of water into the PRL cell
              that increases cell volume; this initiates an influx of extracellular Ca2+ and
              a rise in [Ca2+]i, which triggers the increase in PRL release.  In order to
              address this question, experiments will be conducted to determine: 1) whether
              an increase in cell size leads to an increase in [Ca2+]i;  2) whether an
              increase in cell size initiates a rise in [Ca2+]i and/or an increase in PRL
              release; and 3) whether an increase in cell size and PRL release following
              exposure to hyposmotic medium is dependent on the entry of extracellular
              Ca2+.
To achieve these aims, in vitro perifusion-incubation techniques will be
              used which allow measurements of individual cell size, PRL release, and
              intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i) through video-captured images,
              homologous radioimmunoassays, and microspectrofluorometry, respectively.  The
              general approach for testing the proposed hypotheses consists of utilizing
              endogenous regulators of PRL release and pharmacological agents to manipulate
              the various steps putatively involved in the transduction of the osmotic
              signal. 
The proposed research will provide a better understanding of the
              signal transduction processes involved in osmoreception, a sensory modality
              whose full understanding has been hampered by the lack of a suitable model
              system. The use of the tilapia PRL cell as a model offers distinct
              investigative advantages unavailable to researchers addressing similar
              questions in other vertebrate osmoregulatory systems. 

