Title       : CAREER: Evolution and Constraint of the RNA Polymerase II C-terminal Domain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0133295

Award Number: 0133295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $668978             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Stiller stillerj@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The strongly conserved C-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of
              DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II (RPB1) is essential for mRNA synthesis and is
              present in all animals, plants and fungi that have been examined.  In many
              groups of organisms, however, the RPB1 C-terminus displays no evidence of
              sequence elements known to be necessary for CTD function.  The implication of
              these differences for RNA pol II transcription is unclear.  This research is
              aimed at examining the significance of evolutionary changes in RPB1 C-terminal
              sequences from a functional perspective.  Specifically, questions to be
              investigated are, 1) when in the course of eukaryotic evolution did the CTD
              become fully integrated into the RNA pol II transcription machine, and 2) which
              components of that integrated machine enhanced control over mRNA synthesis
              sufficiently to allow for the emergence of developmentally complex organisms? 
              Special focus will be placed on investigating the molecular biology of red
              algae, both because they are intermediate in developmental complexity between
              unicellular protistan groups and more complex multicellular model organisms,
              and because of their inferred evolutionary history based on RNA polymerase gene
              sequences.  In conjunction with this investigation, a new research-based course
              for upper division undergraduate and graduate students will be developed,
              permitting direct participation in the exploration of the molecular biology of
              diverse eukaryotic organisms.  This course also will serve as a springboard for
              attracting students toward more intensive undergraduate projects relating to
              the research goals outlined.  In addition, it will provide the infrastructure
              for a summer outreach program that will afford area high school students and
              teachers a hands-on introduction to basic molecular and evolutionary research.
