Title       : CAREER:Using Multigene Phylogenies to Solve Early Euascomycete Relationships and
               Reconstruct the Origin and Losses of the Lichen Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0133891

Award Number: 0133891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $680002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois M. Lutzoni flutzoni@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0133891
Lutzoni
Symbiotic associations among distantly related organisms with
              complementary functions provided key innovations for two major biological
              radiations - the mitochondrial eukaryotes and plants (chloroplasts).  Despite
              the indisputable significance of symbiosis as a major evolutionary force, very
              little is known about mutualism and its evolutionary consequences.  One of the
              main reasons for this is the lack of studies that include both mutualists and
              non-mutualists, and that are designed specifically to address evolutionary
              issues associated with coevolutionary processes. The need of analytical tools
              for such comparative phylogenetic studies and a general lack of knowledge about
              the limitations of newly developed statistical methods compound this
              deficiency. This project by Dr. Francois Lutzoni at Duke University aims to
              address these issues by greatly extending previous taxon and gene sampling of
              earlier phylogenetic studies of lichenized and non-lichenized ascomycete fungi,
              developing new analytical tools and assessing their statistical properties
              through computer simulation studies, and training the next generation of
              biologists to take full advantage of new bioinformatic and genomic tools while
              grounded in a solid training in organismal biology and systematics. In recent
              work by the investigator and his colleagues, it was reported that the diversity
              of lichenized and non-lichenized fungi can be best explained by few
              evolutionary gains followed by many losses of the lichen symbiosis, and that
              major lineages of strictly non-lichenized species (including the form genera
              Penicillium and Aspergillus) unexpectedly turn out to be derived from
              lichen-forming ancestors.  The ultimate goal of this study is to better
              understand the mechanisms leading up to the origin and losses of major
              symbiotic associations (ranging from mutualism to parasitism) using the
              lichen-forming and allied derived ascomycetes as a model system. This research
              will be integrated with teaching activities by establishing two new courses
              ("Symbiosis" and "Phylogenetics") and by reshaping one current course
              ("Systematic Biology") at Duke University.
This project will advance our
              understanding of early Euascomycete relationships and will contribute toward
              reestablishing a supraordinal classification of this phylum - an effort that
              was neglected by mycologists for the last 20 years due to the difficulty in
              resolving broad relationships based on morphological characters alone.  This
              phylogenetic framework is essential to reconstruct the evolution of the
              lichen-symbiosis and to assess its impact on the diversification and evolution
              of the Euascomycetes, including the switch to new substrates (including
              vascular plants, animals and humans), changes in biosynthetic pathways leading
              to the production of novel secondary compounds, and transitions to new types of
              interactions to obtain carbohydrates (including parasitism).  The Ascomycetes
              contain the most species that affect the everyday lives of humans by infesting
              crops, degrading textiles, causing human and animal diseases; but the group
              also includes model organisms such as Aspergillus, Neurospora, Saccharomyces,
              and Schizosaccharomyces, and other species indispensable in the production of
              foods and medicines.  Computer simulations, part of this project, will provide
              new insights in choosing and developing statistical tests for phylogenetic
              studies. Interdisciplinary training across traditional organismal evolutionary
              biology and systematics, with new fields of phylogenetics, bioinformatics, and
              genomics is essential to the development of the next generation of systematists
              and evolutionary biologists and will facilitate innovative research on
              symbiotic systems.

