Title       : CAREER: Data-flow Analysis in the Memory Management of Real-Time Multimedia
               Processing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a0133318

Award Number: 0133318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Florin Balasa fbalasa@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on devising novel techniques based on data-flow analysis
              in the memory management of real-time multidimensional signal processing.
              Data-flow analysis is the steering exploration mechanism along this project,
              allowing more exploration freedom than the traditional scheduling -based
              investigation, since the memory management tasks usually need only relative
              (rather than exact) lifetime information. Moreover, data-flow analysis enables
              the study of memory management tasks at the desired level of granularity --
              between whole array and the scalar level -- trading-off computational effort
              and solution optimality.

Part of this project investigates non-scalar
              methods for computing the memory size in real-time multimedia algorithms. This
              research addresses novel memory computation topics: dealing with a large class
              of parametric specifications, and dealing with parallelism in high-throughput
              applications. This project addresses also the problem of deriving a multilevel
              memory architecture optimized for area and/or power, subject to performance
              constraints. Another research direction is the optimized mapping of data from
              an embedded application code into the on-chip SRAM or the off-chip DRAM for
              maximizing the overall memory access performance of the application.

The
              educational component of this research includes (1) the development of a
              graduate course covering algorithmic aspects of high-level synthesis and system
              design methodologies;  (2) the development of a web tool for memory size
              computation.
