Title       : CAREER: Exploring Particle Size Dependent Surface Chemistry on Supported Metal
               Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0133926

Award Number: 0133926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna A. Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Career Award, provided by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              supports the research and educational program of Professor Donna Chen of the
              University of South Carolina at Columbia.  Her research addresses the chemistry
              of metal on oxide surfaces at the atomic level.  Using thermal desorption
              spectroscopy in combination with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and scanning
              tunneling microscopy, the growth and surface chemistry of Ag and Pt
              nanoparticles deposited on titanium dioxide single crystal surfaces are being
              examined.  The oxidation of ethylene to ethylene oxide, and the reduction of NO
              with CO will be used as probe reactions to examine the detailed surface
              chemistry of these metal on oxide systems.  This approach will be extended to
              bimetallic nanoparticles as well.  The integration of undergraduate and
              graduate research participants in this research program forms the focus of the
              educational plan in this Career Award.  Interactive learning using web based
              tutorials and peer study groups are being implemented in the undergraduate
              curriculum, and the integration of research problem solving approaches in the
              courses of the P.I. is being implemented. 

The application of modern
              ultra-high vacuum surface science tools to the microscopic understanding of the
              surface chemistry of metallic nanoparticles on oxide surfaces forms the focus
              of this Career Award.  The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program supports
              the research and educational activities of Professor Donna Chen at the
              University of South Carolina.  Scanning tunneling microscopy and electron
              spectroscopy are the major tools applied to the interactions of Ag and Pt
              particles with oxide surfaces.  Integrating undergraduate and graduate student
              research with the curriculum, and the use of interactive learning methods form
              the focus of the educational aspects of this Career Award.  
