Title       : CAREER: High-Confidence Software for Embedded Aerospace Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2001  
File        : a0133869

Award Number: 0133869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio Frazzoli frazzoli@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Frazzoli, Emilio
CAREER: High-Confidence Software for Aerospace Embedded
              Systems
CCR-0133869

This research project is developing new tools and
              techniques for the design and analysis of high-confidence software for complex,
              distributed, reconfigurable aerospace embedded systems, and to transfer these
              methods to undergraduate and graduate students, other researchers, and
              industry.   Examples of problems of direct interest are those arising in the
              control and coordination of multiple autonomous air and space vehicles, and in
              the detection and resolution of conflicts in Air Traffic Control. The
              techniques developed in this project are also applicable to other systems which
              require similar levels of reliability and performance, such as highway traffic
              automation systems, health care systems, power networks, and financial
              services.

Of particular interest for this project is a better understanding
              of the interactions between real-time software and dynamical systems.  This
              will lead to new and powerful tools and techniques for the design and analysis
              of embedded systems, as well as an improved approach to the requirement
              specification for real-time systems.

The main core of the research project
              is aimed at dramatically reducing the complexity of embedded and hybrid systems
              design and verification by exploiting the geometric structure of the underlying
              physical system in the modelling effort, and by preserving this structure in
              the design of control laws and algorithms. This will make feasible for the
              analysis of the complete system, including its physical and software
              components, otherwise poorly scalable techniques such as abstract
              interpretation and model checking, and will provide the means for the effective
              use of techniques based on compositional
reasoning.

For example, group
              symmetries in vehicle dynamics give rise to families of equivalent controlled
              trajectories: such sets are called motion primitives for single vehicles, and
              motion coordination primitives for groups of vehicles. A maneuver automaton is
              a collection of a finite number of motion primitives. In other words, a
              maneuver automaton is a discrete model of the vehicle dynamics, which leads to
              a dramatic reduction of the complexity of describing and controlling the
              vehicle behavior, by providing a high level of abstraction, and at the same
              time providing invariants which ensure that the physical state remains within
              some known bounds.

The educational part of the project is implemented
              through new course and curriculum development, and student mentoring. The main
              educational objective is  to provide both undergraduate and graduate students
              with the knowledge and the skills to understand the key issues and to ensure
              technical leadership in the current and future aerospace information technology
              arenas.  Finally, a special effort is  devoted to the development of an
              interactive web site, where it is possible to access all the relevant
              information and software developed for the courses, and as a result of the
              research project.

