Title       : CAREER: Optimal Information Extraction in Intelligent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0133996

Award Number: 0133996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia de Sa vdesa@cogsci.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award.  The research will
              explore how an organism extracts information from its environment for learning
              and perception, both to understand human learning and to create better machine
              learning algorithms.  The first objective is to develop and apply new
              algorithms to better understand the mapping in the sensory pathways.  An
              important goal is to understand how the visual pathway computes the invariant
              responses observed in inferotemporal cortex.  The second objective is to study
              the extraction of information from cross-sensory interaction and its role in
              the development of perceptual invariance.  This work will involve integrated
              computer simulations, mathematical modeling, and psychological experiments.  As
              part of this goal, the researcher will study input feature selection, output
              feature selection, and the general problem of how dimensions should best
              interact in machine learning algorithms.  The final research goal is to bring
              together the new knowledge in constructing a better autonomous learning machine
              that can learn to recognize objects.  The algorithm will be more modular than
              current algorithms and will collect its own training data autonomously through
              a camera, microphone, and other sensors.

The educational goal is to train
              students in the lab as well as in the classes to think about problems from a
              variety of approaches.  They will be educated in the advantages and limitations
              of computational modeling, computational analysis, psychophysics and
              electrophysiology.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports the early
              career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to become an
              academic leader of the twenty-first century.  The research will improve our
              understanding of optimal integration between sensory modalities.  This will
              lead to improvement in computer sensing algorithms, including computer vision,
              speech recognition, and any other application where other sources of
              information may be available.  The work is also expected to give insight to the
              general problem of how to optimally combine different sources of information
              for machine learning.  The educational aspects of this project are designed to
              give students a multidisciplinary perspective along with specific skills
              allowing them to use and appreciate a variety of approaches and techniques.

