Title       : CAREER: Lateral Phase Separation of Rafts and Liquid Domains in Lipid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0133484

Award Number: 0133484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $645000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Keller slkeller@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports research in the characterization of "raft" domains in
              lipid monolayers and bilayers.  Rafts are regions in cell membranes in which
              particular lipids and proteins are concentrated, and can play an important role
              in biological functions such as signaling.  This research will test a central
              hypothesis that the phase behavior of raft domains in lipid vesicles can be
              predicted from the phase behavior of the same lipids in monolayers. Specific
              goals of this research include using fluorescence microscopy and 2-photon
              microscopy to identify raft domains in giant unilamellar vesicles using lipids
              known to form liquid ordered domains in monolayers.  In addition, the research
              will test whether changing symmetry from a monolayer to a bilayer alters domain
              formation.  This will be evaluated by searching for raft domains in monolayers
              deposited on a surface patterned with silanes or alkane-thiols.  Long-term
              goals include assessing whether the presence of rafts alters the activity of
              membrane proteins.

Education efforts are focussed primarily on improving
              mathematical literacy of chemistry and biochemistry students. The importance of
              mathematics will be advertised to these students early in their college
              careers.  A mathematics self-tutorial will be developed to clarify areas in
              which students need help.  Resultant data will be used to guide curriculum
              changes.  Study groups and e-mail threads will be instituted to help students
              learn from each other.  Effort will also be directed to increasing departmental
              involvement of graduate students through a student-run colloquium series, and
              training students in the laboratory.

