Title       : CAREER: Soft Instruction Set Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0133188

Award Number: 0133188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Oskin oskin@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With each successive generation of microprocessors designers push the envelopes
              of technology and complexity. But these factors are conspiring to make the
              accepted practice of custom ASICs, and generational processors obsolete.
              Overhead costs such as design, validation, mask-generation, and test are
              growing and will make it prohibitive to continue with the current strategies.
              Concurrent with this trend is the growing realization that we are well past the
              point of diminishing returns for enhancing single-threaded computational
              performance. The future will migrate us towards ubiquitous parallel models of
              execution. Finally, users are starting to demand not just performance but
              reliability and security from their computing infrastructure. While the obvious
              substrates are sea-of-gates FPGAs, they are highly inefficient and do not take
              advantage of the wealth of processor research conducted over the last 50 years.
              Instead, we propose SISC, or Soft-Instruction-Set-Computing. A SISC processor
              is a universal processor, with no fixed legacy instruction set architecture,
              and no fixed interface to the surrounding system envi-ronment. However, it does
              exploit the best features of both fixed-logic superscalar processors and
              fine-grained FPGAs to provide an efficient, generic, computing substrate on
              which to experiment and build the secure, robust and distributed systems of the
              future. We will demonstrate the capabilities of configurable substrates by
              showing that SISC processors provide efficient emulation of existing legacy
              instruction set architectures, a platform to provide peek performance on
              streaming data-flow applications, a unification of single, multi-threaded and
              multi-processor architectures, a computing device on which to provide
              application-specific architecture security, integrated hardware support for
              high-level languages and a flexible substrate for enhanced undergraduate and
              graduate level computer architecture research. These application goals will
              drive our research in the design of a truly universal computing substrate. We
              expect the following products from this career plan:

1.	A configurable
              processor design capable of emulating most modern instruction sets and a
              platform on which to construct new secure application architectures.
2.	An
              infrastructure of simulation tools, emulation techniques, and hardware
              prototypes to demonstrate the benefits of reconfigurable processing
              substrates.
3.	Automated compilation algorithms and tools for runtime
              customization of the SISC architecture.
4.	A set of secure application
              compilation targets and operating system techniques to dynamically apply them
              as a response to network attacks.
5.	Students trained in efficient system
              design and rigorous evaluation methodologies through research, student
              workshops and new courses.

