Title       : CAREER: Software Thread Integration for Low-End through High-End Embedded
               Processors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0133690

Award Number: 0133690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Dean alex_dean@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project investigates embedded systems architectures through the
              application of compiler and architectural techniques which use an existing
              processor more efficiently.  Rather than automatically adopt existing personal
              computer paradigms for embedded systems, the main theme of this research is to
              rethink architectures and compilers in the context of embedded systems and how
              they are designed. 

Software thread integration (STI) is a novel compiler
              technique for automatically interleaving multiple procedures (which implement
              multiple threads of control) into one non-speculative implicitly multithreaded
              procedure. The threads are integrated at the assembly language level; the
              compiler applies transformations to resolve conflicts in control-flow and
              resource sharing. 

This research project uses STI in two ways.  The first
              builds on the extraction of more fine-grain concurrency from a generic
              processor. STI enables switching from one thread to another with negligible (if
              any) performance penalty or delay. This means that some of the hardware
              resources added to compensate for the processor's poor fine-grain concurrency
              are eliminated and the functions move to software. The research is developing
              efficient methods to perform this hardware to software migration efficiently
              and precisely enough to implement network protocol interfaces completely in
              software, reducing size, weight, cost and development time for low-end embedded
              systems.

The second uses integration's augmentation of a thread's
              instruction-level parallelism, leading to faster execution on processors which
              are able to execute multiple instructions simultaneously. Modern digital signal
              processors used in high-end embedded systems are able to do so, yet they are
              poorly utilized because single threads do not contain enough independent
              instructions. STI helps by increasing the number of independent instructions in
              a thread to keep more functional units busy and finish the computation faster. 
              This enables the more efficient use of lower-performance processors, reducing
              system costs and development time. When coupled with power management
              techniques, it also reduces power consumption and increases battery
              life.

The PI is creating a new embedded systems track within the computer
              engineering curriculum at NC State University. Two new hands-on courses on
              processor-based embedded systems are being added to supplement the PI's
              existing embedded system design course. The first is a junior-level course that
              introduces students to microcontrollers, interfacing them to the physical
              environment, and using a real-time operating system with modern development
              tools. The second is a graduate course that covers high-performance embedded
              systems for media processing. Students learn to program and optimize media
              applications (e.g audio or video compression and decompression) on various
              architectures (superscalar, VLIW, chip multi-processor). The PI is also
              involved in outreach activities at the NC School of Science and Mathematics to
              promote interest in embedded systems design and programming.

