Title       : CAREER: Advances in Peer-to-Peer Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0133055

Award Number: 0133055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian N. Levine brian@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Metcalfe's law states that the "value" of a network increases with the
              square of the number of users.
However, for most applications, as the number
              of participants increases, performance degrades, and
so too does the value of
              application to the user. Centralized service and application architectures
are
              most at risk for not maintaining performance with an increasing user base.
              Centralized sites can
represent a processing bottleneck, a single point of
              failure, or single point ofattack. Furthermore,
a single server cannot
              mitigate for client's poor network conditions in third-party domains.
              Repli-
cating and distributing servers is one solution for solving the
              problems of centralized architectures.
     Peer-to-peer services take
              distribution even further by using collaborative clients who are pre-
pared
              and expected to perform some or all the functions of servers. As new clients
              bring new load
to the systems, they also bring new resources. Thus,
              peer-to-peer, collaborative services can be a
powerful paradigm: if on average
              clients bring enough or more than enough resources to balance
the load and
              cost they incur, then peer-to-peer services can increase in value and
              performance with
the number of participants.
     The primary purpose of this
              proposal is to make fundamental advances in the understanding and
design of
              applications and services that make use of replication and collaboration in a
              peer-to-peer
environment. Opportunities for the application of peer-to-peer
              techniques in new disciplines seem
limitless. I propose to examine several
              applications that are only possible, or achieve their best
performance, using
              peer-to-peer architectures and not centralized architectures. These include
              the
novel peer-to-peer applications of anonymity, secure ad-hoc routing,
              mobility-based transport for
wearable computers, cheat-proof serverless
              gaming, and distributed information retrieval.
     There are commonalities to
              all the numerous peer-to-peer applications we will study: the ex-
istence of
              heterogeneous peer resources, redundancy of offered services at peers, and
              replication of
application data and content. By addressing these issues, the
              researcher will make important advances in discovery and understanding of
              peer-to-peer networking  and by applying those results to a diverse set
of
              problem areas, the researcher's work will make a broader impact in in fields as
              diverse as security (privacy, availability, and secure routing), mobile
              computing, wearable computing, multimedia and gaming,
and distributed
              information retrieval.
     The major theme of the researcher's proposed
              educational activities is the involvement of undergraduates
in original
              research. The goal of the  educational proposal is to prepare undergraduate
              students
for graduate school by providing them with an early opportunity
              toperform research. It consists
of an integrated plan of publishable
              undergraduate research projects, new course curriculum, the
development of
              practical lab exercises in networking and network security, distance learning,
              and
minority outreach.
     By focusing the research of undergraduates on the
              themes of this proposal, the researcher is ensuring a
number of benefits.
              First, that the impact of this educational component is tightly integrated
              with
my research objectives. Second, by coordinating efforts with the director
              of the Northeast Alliance
for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
              (NEAGEP), the researcher will improve minority outreach in
the department by
              preparing and encouraging under-represented minority students to continue
              on
for doctoral programs at UMass and other universities. Third, the
              researcher will advance the department's
teaching mission by providing a new
              three-course curriculum of networking and security. Fourth,
the researcher
              will produce a standard set of practical laboratory exercises in networking and
              network security to be used at any university. Finally, the availability ofmy
              curriculum and practical exercises, as
well as UMass's existing Video
              Instruction Program and MANIC distance learning programs, will
increase the
              external impact of the curriculum.
