Title       : CAREER:Life Science Databases: Integration and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2002  
File        : a0133946

Award Number: 0133946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $595144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zina B. Miled   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One central information technology problem of the next decade will be the
              creation of a means through which to query a heterogeneous set of life science
              databases, generally via the Internet. Life science web databases hold
              information that is critical to researchers. Even though, in the above
              databases, data have been collected and automated procedures for data
              manipulation have been provided, user accessibility to such databases is very
              often still inadequate due to the lack of a comparable data representation, a
              unified interface for data exchange among the databases, and a customizable
              infrastructure (i.e. support for views) that addresses the individual needs of
              scientists. The research objective of this career plan is to address these
              issues by developing an information integration system for life science
              databases that supports views (BACIIS+ Biological and Chemical Information
              Integration System Plus -- views). 

BACIIS+ will allow for better
              communication between life science databases, will provide for continuous and
              rapid expansion and adaptation to the evolving biological field, and will
              provide better and more customizable approaches for data access and data
              analysis through dynamic views. The open research issues involved in the
              development of BACIIS+ include : 1) the management of large data sets, 2) the
              interoperability of geographically distributed autonomous databases, 3) the
              seamless semantic-based integration of these databases with total transparency
              to the user, and 4) the support for distributed multi-database views. Semantic
              integration aims at integrating data in a meaningful way while syntactic
              integration consists of just collecting and pasting together data from
              different databases. Static views consist of a limited set of views predefined
              in scope. Whereas dynamic views are created on-demand and their scope is
              completely defined by the user. 

Two new graduate courses are planned: Life
              science information systems, and Computational biology algorithms. The first
              course will cover the complexity of information extraction and management in
              the context of life science data. The second course will cover the foundation
              of sequential and parallel algorithms for sequence similarity analysis. 
              Collaborators from Eli Lilly & Company and Dow AgroSciences are involved in the
              courses, providing industry perspectives. The proposed courses build on a
              current course by the PI that covers advanced molecular biology and includes
              three major sections: bioinformatics, computational modeling, and molecular
              machinery.  The plan actively seeks the participation of undergraduate and
              minority students through senior design projects.  A campus-wide bioinformatics
              initiative includes a newly established School of Informatics and the Indiana
              Genomics Center.  An international workshop on the interoperability of life
              science databases is in development.

