Title       : CAREER: Integrated Stratigraphic and Hydrogeologic Aquifer Analysis: Toward
               Improved Multi-scale Characterization of Alluvial Aquifer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0133666

Award Number: 0133666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Weissmann weissman@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0133666
Weissmann
Accurate modeling and prediction of contaminant transport
              and fate in groundwater systems requires that we produce detailed aquifer
              characterizations.  Recently, the PI and colleagues developed a novel sequence
              stratigraphic approach to characterizing hydrofacies distributions for use in
              groundwater models on a stream-dominated alluvial fan system, thus integrating
              geological and hydrological assessment.  Several questions resulted from this
              work that guides this proposed research project, including: 1) do sequences and
              systems tracts exist in other alluvial fan systems; 2) do sequences, bounded by
              clay-rich mature paleosols, compartmentalize groundwater flow into
              hydrostratigraphic units; and 3) can sequence stratigraphy provide a framework
              for improved groundwater modeling on other alluvial fan systems.  
Through
              sedimentologic, paleopedologic, and hydrogeologic analysis at the Lawrence
              Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), a site with extensive core, geophysical
              well log, and 3D hydrologic test data, we intend to test hypotheses formed from
              these questions.  Preliminary work at the LLNL site indicates that mature
              paleosols may bound hydrostratigraphic units, thus indicating that paleosol
              bounded sequences exist and that sequence geometry may strongly influence
              aquifer hydrodynamics.  Through this work, we will (1) describe about 6000
              meters of previously collected core, (2) assess paleosol morphology and
              chemistry, (3) model the stratigraphy, multi-scale facies distributions,
              groundwater flow, and contaminant transport within this complex aquifer system,
              and (4) assess data value to evaluate minimum data requirements for future work
              in similar geologic settings.  These models will be tested against aquifer test
              and contaminant concentration data.  A major objective of this work is to
              involve many student researchers in this project, thus several students will be
              directly involved in daily research activities.  Additionally, aspects of this
              research will be incorporated into classroom activities, where students in an
              aquifer and petroleum reservoir assessment course will analyze core, construct
              the 3-D stratigraphic framework at a small site, and model the heterogeneity at
              the site.  This will not only expose students to the research project, but will
              provide multiple 'realizations' of the stratigraphic character for uncertainty
              assessment of the modeling results.  

