Title       : CAREER: Product Platform Modeling and Customization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0133923

Award Number: 0133923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Simpson tws8@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research objectives of this CAREER Award are to establish a foundation for a
              decision-based approach to product family design and develop metamodeling
              strategies for web-based product platform customization.  The first objective
              will investigate methods for generating product platform alternatives and
              modeling the associated costs, demand, and uncertainties of the products within
              the corresponding product family derived from each platform alternative.  The
              second research objective will enable rapid customization of platform variants
              via the Internet.  The educational objectives in this CAREER Award will engage
              students in problem-based learning through industry-focused projects in product
              family design and customization and assess the effectiveness of the proposed
              educational activities at enhancing student learning and student's attitudes
              toward lifelong learning.  These educational objectives will be integrated
              within 
three undergraduate courses and one graduate course.  Product
              dissection activities to expose freshmen and women and minority students in
              grades K-12 to design and product families will also be developed.  Three
              industrial partners -- Durametal, Flowserve, and Ivalo Lighting -- will
              collaborate in the proposed research and educational activities.

If
              successful, the results of this research will help companies reduce development
              costs and time-to-market while increasing product variety and customization. 
              Strategies for web-based platform customization will also enhance customer
              interaction and improve customer satisfaction.  The proposed research will
              foster the development of design methods and tools that can be used to design
              families of products that meet a wide range of rapidly changing customer
              requirements.  The educational activities will help prepare students to succeed
              in today's highly competitive digital and global marketplace in which companies
              are constantly striving to shorten time-to-market and increase product variety
              while reducing costs.  The research and educational activities will also
              establish a foundation for a long-term career in engineering design research
              and education.
