Title       : CAREER: A Database for Modeling Protein Spatial Geometry -Discovering Protein
               Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0133856

Award Number: 0133856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $651826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jie Liang jliang@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Many genes in bacteria, plants, fungi, worm, fruit fly, and human have no
              sequence matches, their three-dimensional structures are unsolved, and their
              functional roles are unknown.  Three-dimensional spatial surface motifs of key
              residues can provide critical links connecting gene sequence, protein
              structure, and protein functions.  Surface motifs with complicated geometry are
              difficult to compute, and the key residues are often from distant parts of the
              primary sequences.   The proposed project aims to develop tools using
              computational geometry for discovery of similar protein surface patterns, as
              well as server databases of libraries of similar protein surfaces for
              biological querying and understanding. The search tools will be developed using
              a comprehensive informatics approach for discovery of statistically significant
              similarity relationship of protein surfaces, combining sequence,
              physicochemical, and shape information.  The database of libraries of spatial
              surface motifs will provide organized information 
enriched with functional
              annotation.

By providing quantitative, organized, and understandable
              information of protein surface motifs, the tools and database proposed will
              help to uncover new patterns of key residues in surface motifs important for
              understanding protein functions. It will facilitate the understanding of the
              cellular roles of newly sequenced genes from genomic sequencing and newly
              solved structures from structural genomics.  It will also help to establish
              previously unrecognized functional and evolutionary relationship of protein
              spatial surfaces, and uncover deep evolutionary origins of functionally
              constrained structural elements before the emergence of protein domains and
              folds.  Knowledge and insight gained from protein surface motifs will also help
              to design and engineer novel proteins for new biological functions and for
              novel industrial applications.

The educational component of this proposal
              will be centered on (1) course and curriculum development, (2) student
              mentoring, and (3) outreach.  In addition to curriculum development for the
              newly approved MS/PHD programs in bioinformatics, a new course named "Geometric
              Computing for Bioinformatics" will be developed, which will be tightly linked
              to the research through classroom teaching and class projects designed based on
              the research activities.  The involvement of graduate and undergraduate
              students, as well as postdoctoral researchers provide mentoring opportunities,
              with the goal to pass the knowledge, the computational skill, and the ability
              of critical and creative thinking to the students.  It will also allow the
              students to present their research in national and international conferences. 
              The outreach activities to Chicago high school and junior colleges will be
              focused on high school summer camp activities of bioinformatics research, local
              visits, hosting interns in the PI's lab, school teacher preparation, and
              developing career as well as educational material on bioinformatics (CD-ROM and
              website) to attract students not traditionally represented in this field.

