Title       : CAREER: Perception of Asymmetry and its Role in Evolutionary Behavioral Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a0133449

Award Number: 0133449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $527478             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Swaddle jpswad@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,5946,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Perception of asymmetry and its role in evolutionary behavioral
              ecology
John P. Swaddle

This career development plan integrates research
              and education activities to address a question of broad relevance to
              evolutionary biology while also giving undergraduate students opportunities to
              develop their own independent research skills. The plan adopts a
              multidisciplinary, novel approach to address whether birds can use asymmetries
              (i.e. small differences between the left and right sides of the body) as visual
              cues of fitness (e.g. when assessing each other as potential mates). These
              small asymmetries arise due to accidents in development and are believed to
              reflect how well an individual is adapted to the environment in which it grows.
              As larger asymmetries indicate more accidents, researchers have studied whether
              females preferentially choose to mate with symmetric males and avoid asymmetric
              males.  

If birds use asymmetry as a cue in nature, their key perceptual
              task is to discriminate asymmetry from symmetry. If they cannot do this,
              asymmetry cannot be a direct cue. Hence, this research addresses whether birds
              are capable of detecting symmetry across a range of different perceptual tasks
              that are relevant to the birds' natural ecology. 

Symmetry detection will be
              studied in two common bird species - European starlings Sturnus vulgaris and
              zebra finches Taeniopygia guttata. The experiments are designed to assess what
              forms of asymmetry are relevant to the birds, what magnitudes of asymmetry can
              be discriminated from perfect symmetry, and also explore whether a symmetry
              preference can arise as a by-product of other perceptual mechanisms for object
              recognition (i.e. independent of any association between asymmetry and
              fitness). Hence, this research will contribute greatly to assessing the
              importance of asymmetry to evolutionary processes.

Undergraduate students
              will be involved with all aspects of the work. My educational objectives are to
              grow a strong, productive community of undergraduate scientists through close
              mentorship and opportunities for independent research projects. My educational
              plans include several new initiatives to integrate research activities into my
              undergraduate classes - including problem-solving activities, debates,
              workshops, high-profile guest instructors, and several research visits to
              national museums and academic institutions. Students will also present their
              research with me at national and international conferences, and join me on
              several international research trips. These activities are designed not only to
              arm students with a greater array of research and cognitive skills, but also to
              increase retention in the sciences and help students to pursue future
              scientific careers. The efficacy of my educational plans will be assessed
              through rigorous qualitative and quantitative techniques.


