Title       : CAREER: Signal Processing Approaches for Multimedia Security and Information
               Protection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0133704

Award Number: 0133704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Min Wu minwu@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Min Wu
U of MD College Park
0133704

Having recognized that the advantages
              offered by the information technology era cannot be fully deployed without the
              guarantee on the security and protection of multimedia data, this project
              focuses on the investigation of multimedia security and information protection
              through two types of complementary signal processing techniques, namely,
              multimedia encryption and data embedding.  The main function of multimedia
              encryption is to protect the confidentiality and thus performs access control,
              while data embedding or digital watermarking concerns how to associate a set of
              imperceptible data with the host media in a seamless way.  The embedded data
              can be used to accomplish ownership verification or authentication even
after
              decryption.

The research component of this project involves three parts. 
              The investigator first explores the protection of content confidentiality under
              three different levels of threats by designing and analyzing signal processing
              based encryption algorithms that are computationally efficient and easily
              compatible with lossy communications.  In addition, new challenging problems of
              multimedia data hiding are studied based on a
layered algorithmatic
              architecture, and a software testbed is developed.  Finally, the project
              investigates the joint use of encryption and data hiding as well as their
              interplay for providing comprehensive protection.
The educational component of
              this project focuses on two themes, namely, using multimedia as a powerful tool
              to enhance the productivity of multimedia education, and using carefully
              designed projects to provide
students with hands-on experience that will well
              prepare them for joining the future technical force of information technology.
              In addition to the curriculum development, the investigator makes special
              effort to nurture the under-represented students especially young women and to
              attract them to step into the EE/CS disciplines.

