Title       : CAREER: Harnessing the Power of Computational Intelligence for Infrastructure
               Systems Management and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0133386

Award Number: 0133386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adel W. Sadek asadek@emba.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Computational Intelligence (CI) is an emerging field of fundamental and applied
              research that utilizes a number of powerful computational paradigms, either
              separately or synergistically, to solve problems that defy solutions using
              traditional techniques.  The main paradigms of CI encompass Fuzzy Set Theory
              and Fuzzy Logic (FL), Neural Networks (NN), Reinforcement Learning (RL), and
              Genetic Algorithms (GAs).  In this research, the PI will probe how CI paradigms
              can be utilized to address a number of critical research problems that are at
              the very heart of the infrastructure engineering profession at the present
              time.  This will include the use of CI for: (1) the on-line management and
              control of transportation networks in the context of Intelligent Transportation
              Systems (ITS); (2) determining "optimal" budget allocation in the context of
              integrated infrastructure management systems; and (3) deriving land use limits
              from infrastructure capacity.  

The different research activities of the
              study will complement a corresponding education plan that has the following
              objectives: (1) strengthen the Information Technology (IT) content of Civil
              Engineering (CE) curricula; (2) experiment with learning strategies that
              promote active learning; and (3) undertake high school outreach.  To achieve
              these goals, the study will develop a new course on CI applications in CE, as
              well as develop educational modules on ITS to be incorporated in undergraduate
              transportation classes.  The study will also experiment with the "Just-in-Time
              Teaching" (JiTT) strategy, a pedagogical strategy that works through a fusion
              of high-tech and low-tech teaching elements.  In addition, the study will
              establish an outreach program to local high schools that will provide the
              opportunity to select junior and senior students to work with faculty mentors
              on independent research projects.  


