Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Approach to Predictive Protein-Protein Docking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0133834

Award Number: 0133834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $730378             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiping Weng zhiping@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genomic and proteomic projects have produced a vast amount of biological data:
              fully sequenced genomes, gene and protein sequences, protein structures,
              protein-protein interactions, and gene expression patterns.  The next grand
              challenge in Bioinformatics is to determine the biological functions and
              cellular roles of all genes and proteins, and their interactions with one
              another to form a functional cell.  The research problem aims to
              computationally predict the 3-dimensional structure of a protein complex from
              its components.  This project will provide insights into the functions of the
              interacting proteins and can guide the design of novel reagents to regulate
              protein interaction networks. The research efforts will be integrated with
              Bioinformatics education.  Boston University is among the first to establish a
              graduate degree program in Bioinformatics,  funded by an NSF IGERT grant and
              growing rapidly.   The curriculum development of the Program is a key element
              of this proposal.

This project seeks to build a general system for
              predictive protein docking: to start with the coordinates of the unbound
              component proteins and to obtain computationally a model for the complex
              structure, including the conformational changes upon association.  The research
              team has developed an initial-stage docking algorithm, which compares
              competitively with the best algorithms with a similar goal.  The proposed work
              includes the following components: (1) To improve the existing docking
              algorithm, with the goal of initial screening. (2) To develop a new algorithm
              to refine the structures produced by the initial-stage algorithm.  (3) To
              develop novel target functions for docking algorithms.  (4) To test algorithms
              extensively using a benchmark set and community wide blind tests. (5) To
              establish a web accessible, fully automated, and user-friendly docking server. 
              Results and the protein complex database produced in this project will also be
              available at the server. The results of this project will be integrated into
              two graduate courses (Computational Genomics and Protein Engineering for
              Biomedical Applications) and one Bioinformatics Teacher's workshop.  The
              courses and workshop will also include other state-of-the-art results in the
              fields of structural and functional Proteomics and Bioinformatics.

