Title       : CAREER: Structural Basis of Specificity for Gramicidin A Synthetase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0133468

Award Number: 0133468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $710463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy C. Anderson Amy.C.Anderson@Dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to determine the structural basis of amino acid
              specificity for the non-ribosomal peptide synthesis (NRPS) enzyme, gramicidin A
              synthetase (GrsA). Different NRPS enzymes incorporate amino acid substrates to
              produce a variety of peptides; the long-term goal of this research is to alter
              the specificity of a particular NRPS enzyme to incorporate new functional
              groups into novel peptides. In order to accomplish this goal, the following
              issues will be addressed:  1) The physical arrangement and interactions between
              the three domains (with three concomitant enzymatic functions) of GrsA
              synthetase. In preliminary studies, crystals of the entire GrsA synthetase,
              bound to its substrates, have been grown and they show diffraction amplitudes
              to beyond 3 A resolution; 2) Whether the substrate is transferred between
              domains via a covalently bound cofactor at the second domain. Crystal
              structures of the cofactor-bound and substrate-bound GrsA synthetase will be
              determined; 3) The rules of recognition for acceptance of the substrate amino
              acid, since the initial aminoacyl adenylation domain is the primary determinant
              for specificity. The crystal structures of three adenylation domains that bind
              distinctly different amino acids, D-alanine, L-proline, and a-aminoadipine will
              be solved and compared  with the structure of the previously determined
              L-phenylalanine adenylation domain.  Novel computational algorithms will be
              used to search mutation space and conformation space to propose possible
              mutants that will reprogram the L-Phe adenylation domain to accept a new
              substrate amino acid. Biochemical assays, along with crystal structure
              determination of the modified A domain, will be part of an iterative cycle to
              incorporate a non-native amino acid in an NRPS peptide product.

 Reflecting
              a strong movement toward multi-disciplinary research, today's chemistry
              education should also be multi-disciplinary, incorporating fields such as
              biology, physics and computer science. An integral interdisciplinary approach
              will be applied to newly developed courses in biophysical chemistry bringing
              structural biology to the forefront of the biophysical chemistry curriculum at
              Dartmouth College. It is also important to attract younger children to science.
              Through a partnership with a K-12 outreach program at a neighboring science
              museum, young children are learning the relationship of basic science
              principles to current research. Using interactive demonstrations of the
              properties of light with matter, children learn that the three-dimensional
              structures of proteins can be determined. 

