Title       : CAREER: Correlating Metalloenzyme Structure with Reactivity By Tunneling
               Electrons in Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0133564

Award Number: 0133564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian R. Crane bc69@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ultimately, the essence of life is the controlled movement of charge.  The vast
              number of conformational and chemical states available to the polypeptide chain
              allows nature to tune the reactivity of metal centers and direct electron flow
              within and between proteins. The goal of Dr. Crane's research is to develop and
              apply new photochemical methods for studying the structural basis of redox
              chemistry and long-range electron transfer (ET) in biology.  Photosensitizers
              will be used to initiate long-range ET in single protein crystals, where
              structure can be precisely defined by X-ray crystallography.  Designed crystal
              systems that fix donor and acceptor orientations allow effects of intervening
              protein and water structure on electron tunneling to be probed by mutagenesis
              and isotopic substitution.  ET rates will be determined directly in crystals of
              metal-modified azurins and crystals of complexes between cytochrome c and
              cytochrome c peroxidase.  Redox reactions at protein metal centers will be
              driven in crystals by photoinduced ET so that structures of activated states
              important for catalysis can be determined by cryo-crystallography or
              time-resolved diffraction techniques.  Structures will be determined for
              peroxidase peroxo-iron and oxo-iron species, important intermediates in
              biological oxygen activation, and for tryptophan and tyrosine radicals,
              emerging players in a wide variety of high-potential, biological redox
              chemistries. Atomic structure will be correlated with electronic structure
              probed with magnetic and optical spectroscopies to understand the reciprocal
              tuning of reactivity between metallocofactors and the polypeptide chain. The
              results of this research will provide sets of long-range ET rates for
              structural states defined in detail, new structures of hitherto unobserved
              metalloprotein catalytic species, and new techniques for studying protein
              dynamics by X-ray diffraction.

Educational activities connected with this
              research aim to relate fundamental concepts in structure, kinetics,
              thermodynamics and chemical reactivity to complex biological processes such as
              energy transduction, signal transduction, environmental sensitivity and
              response. Effort falls into two general categories:  1) mentoring high-school,
              undergraduate, and graduate students in research; and  2) the development and
              teaching of new undergraduate and graduate courses  at Cornell University.
              Discovery-based learning at the K-12 level will also be promoted.  The research
              described above is designed to provide projects appropriate for students of all
              levels. A new graduate course, " the physical chemistry of proteins" is now
              being taught and a second "Bio-inorganic chemistry" will be presented in 2003.
              Other course activities include development of an introductory course for
              freshman chemistry majors in chemical structure and bonding, and an
              interdepartmental short course in enzyme kinetics. A playful approach to
              addressing problems will be emphasized in all activities.

