Title       : CAREER: Fast, Predictive Modeling and Simulation in Computer Graphics:
               Theoretical and Computational Foundations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0133983

Award Number: 0133983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mathieu Desbrun desbrun@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0133983
Desbrun, Mathieu
U of Southern California

The primary research
              objective in this project is to develop new mathematical and computational
              tools for irregular sampling in Computer Graphics. Digital geometry is rapidly
              emerging as a new ubiquitous medium, complementing the previous electronic
              datatypes for sound, images and movies. However, geometry requires to deal with
              irregular, non-uniform sampling living on curved manifolds, a radically
              different problematic that calls for novel, fundamental tools. Thus, this work
              is targeted towards a better understanding and handling of irregular sampling.
              Building on our theoretical results, we will develop new practical algorithms
              for fast and predictive modeling and/or simulation. We will establish a unified
              foundation for discrete/differential geometry, defining mimetic discretizations
              of the continuous case.

This project will provide both theoretical
              foundations in the nascent field of Computational Differential Geometry, and
              robust, reliable tools that will advance the field of Computer Graphics. These
              foundations and computational tools will facilitate and accelerate the
              expansion of 3D models in our everyday life, be it in software products
              (ranging from games to computer-aided segmentation of MRI data), on the web for
              downloads, or even on small PDAs with 3D scanning abilities. The large number
              of immediate applications demonstrates the significance of this research:

-
              Compression of 3D objects for optimal storage and transmission;

- Modeling
              of 3D objects, including texturing, editing, smoothing;

- Haptic rendering
              and sculpting of virtual objects;

- Realtime virtual surgery training and
              planning.

The educational aspect of the project includes initiatives
              designed to incorporate the project advancements in the graduate and
              undergraduate curriculum. The long-term impact of this work will likely be seen
              in fields that have significant geometric and computational components, such as
              biology, medicine, and geology.
