Title       : CAREER: Theoretical Studies of the Non-Linear Transport Properties of Molecular
               Wires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0133075

Award Number: 0133075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Massimiliano Di Ventra diventra@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1652,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a CAREER award which combines research and educational activities.  The
              goal of the research component is to use newly developed atomic-scale
              first-principles approaches to address some of the most fundamental issues in
              transport in molecular wires that can have impact on the development of
              molecular electronics.  Issues that will be studied include: (1)
              current-induced forces; (2) local heating and heating dissipation; (3) shot
              noise; and, (4) interference effects at the molecule-leads contact.  The work
              will proceed in concert with experimental studies of leading groups in the
              field.  The goal of the educational component is to integrate the research
              activities into undergraduate and graduate education with the development of a
              new course: "Career Development for Physicists."  This course will give
              undergraduates and graduate students an appreciation of the new career
              possibilities other than the academic one.  Also, it will create the tools and
              specific problem-solving stategies to make the transition from student life to
              professional employment.  Career options in nanotechnology will be the leading
              theme, but the scope of the course will be wider in range.  
  
This is a
              CAREER award which combines research and educational activities.  The goal of
              the research component is to use newly developed atomic-scale first-principles
              approaches to address some of the most fundamental issues in transport in
              molecular wires that can have impact on the development of molecular
              electronics.  Issues that will be studied include: (1) current-induced forces;
              (2) local heating and heating dissipation; (3) shot noise; and, (4)
              interference effects at the molecule-leads contact.  The work will proceed in
              concert with experimental studies of leading groups in the field.  The goal of
              the educational component is to integrate the research activities into
              undergraduate and graduate education with the development of a new course:
              "Career Development for Physicists."  This course will give undergraduates and
              graduate students an appreciation of the new career possibilities other than
              the academic one.  Also, it will create the tools and specific problem-solving
              stategies to make the transition from student life to professional employment. 
              Career options in nanotechnology will be the leading theme, but the scope of
              the course will be wider in range.  

