Title       : CAREER: Scalable, High Performance Network Simulations Using Reverse Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0133488

Award Number: 0133488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Carothers chrisc@cs.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Internet data traffic is doubling each year. If this rate continues,
data
              traffic will surpass voice traffic around the year 2002. However,
not included
              in the Internet traffic growth rate estimates are the
potential data generated
              by web phones and mobile web-enabled PDAs,
nor are the effects of future,
              unforeseen ``killer apps'' that may
great increase the current demand for
              bandwidth. Thus, the data growth
rate could be significantly higher in the
              aggregate and at the very
least, some ``hot sites'' may experience a
              quadrupling of traffic each
year.  Unfortunately, due to technological
              barriers, bandwidth growth
rates per fiber will be limited to only doubling
              per
year. Consequently, short falls in available bandwidth may result,
thus
              placing the burden to effectively manage bandwidth on overworked,
network
              management teams. Network managers will require techniques and
tools that
              enable them to "nowcast" not only their local network, but
surrounding
              networks as well in order to ensure, stable, effective
bandwidth allocation in
              the face of dynamic, high-bandwidth, next
generation ``killer web
              apps''.

To address this "nowcasting" problem, we propose the use of a
              new
parallel simulation modeling technique called "reverse
computation".
              Here, network models designed for parallel execution are
able to execute both
              forwards and backwards in simulated time. For
simplistic network models,
              reverse computation has been shown to
reduce the state memory requirements of
              parallel optimistic
simulations by a factor of 100 and increase the overall
              speedup by a
factor of 6 when compared to classic state-saving techniques used
              to
support rollback processing in optimistic simulations. We also
              believe
reverse computation will allow large-scale network models to scale
              to
much larger processor configurations as well as enable a more
efficient
              design of simulation experiments.

The overall goal of this project is to
              understand the fundamental
functional and performance limits of reverse
              computation when applied
to the modeling of large-scale systems. Because of
              its importance and
impact, we have selected network models as our driving
              application.
To achieve this goal, we propose to investigate reverse
              computation in
the following five major research thrust areas:

1. the
              design and implementation of perfectly reversible computation
algorithms for
              event-list management, and time management to enable
scalable, efficient
              optimistic event processing,

2. the development of processes and techniques
              to effectively model a
large-scale, multi-protocol network scenario in a
              parallel simulation,
reverse computation framework,

3. the comparison and
              contrast of reverse computation performance to
state-of-the-art conservative
              synchronization techniques,

4. the creation of new methods and techniques
              for the design of
simulation experiments that take advantage of reverse
              computation,
and

5. the exploration of the linkages between reverse
              computation,
quantum computing and classic parallel/distributed computing
              that
could lead to a more unified view of these disparate classes
              of
computation.
