Title       : CAREER: Flexible, Large-Scale Best-Effort Quality of Service in the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0133829

Award Number: 0133829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Rubenstein danr@ee.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   For the majority of its users, the Internet remains a best-effort network
              and provides no direct means for
meeting specific network Quality of Service
              (QoS) requirements of applications, such as fixed bandwidth
rates or bounds on
              propagation delay and loss rates. Most previous work that addressed improving
              QoS
capabilities of networks focused on mechanisms and techniques that require
              a combination of resource
reservation, admission control, and wide-scale
              modifications to the network and transport layers of the
protocol stack. These
              mechanisms and techniques are difficult to deploy in practice because a) they
              require
changes and new standards within already operational lower layers of
              the protocol stack and b) they restrict
competing sessions' access to basic
              network resources.
     Recently, as an alternative, researchers and network
              practitioners have utilized distributed mechanisms
implemented within the
              network's application layer to compensate for the QoS limitations of the
              underly-ing
best-effort network infrastructure. These mechanisms provide
              services such as alternate path routing,
network-internal transcoding of data,
              content replication and caching that improve session quality. Communication of
              both data and state information between the network points that implement these
              distributed mechanisms is performed upon network overlays: virtual networks
              that directly connect these points to one another by tunneling transmissions
              across the underlying network.
     The research described in this proposal
              develops and analyzes a Best-Effort QoS service for the wide-area
Internet.
              This service automates the procedure used by applications to draw upon these
              distributed
application layer mechanisms to improve the perceived quality and
              capabilities of the network. An application initiates the service by placing a
              specific QoS request at a network endpoint. A best effort is then made by the
              service to locate and instantiate the necessary distributed mechanisms to meet
              the QoS requirement.  The service is best effort in that there is no
              reservation or admission control phase that restricts or denies other sessions'
              access to network resources. Hence, there is no guarantee that the QoS
              requirement will be met, nor is there a guarantee that once met, the
              requirement will be satisfied for the remainder of the session. The only
              guarantee is that as long as application layer resources can be located and
              effectively applied to meet the requirement, then the service will do so.
    
              The work in this proposal will evaluate this service in three broad areas: (i)
              techniques for locating
available application layer resources, (ii)
              coordinated selection of these resources, and (iii) controlling how
competing
              applications share these resources. Our evaluation is performed mainly via
              mathematical analysis
and simulation upon a generic service. However, we also
              demonstrate the practicality of the service by
extending the analysis to two
              specific applications as well as developing and using a testbed for
              experimental
purposes.
     The researcher's teaching efforts focus on the
              intertwining of analytical and experimental aspects of networking research. To
              this end, he proposes to develop courses in networking that (i) teach
              fundamental approaches to modeling and performance evaluation of networking
              systems, (ii) develop a wide-area classroom laboratory atop the Internet2 that
              can be used by students across the world to implement wide-area experiments,
              and (iii) teach students how to integrate experimental and theoretical
              approaches to networking issues.
