Title       : CAREER: Shared Scientific Sense-Making and Bilingual Student Advancement in
               Science: Linking Family and School Learning Through Informal Learning Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0133662

Award Number: 0133662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $588000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doris Ash dash5@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,7259,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This CAREER grant interweaves research and teaching focused on understanding
              how social groups construct meaning during scientific conversations across
              different learning contexts, such as classrooms, museums and the home.  This
              work will be translated into formal educational settings and used to inform
              teaching practices within pre-service University and in-service school district
              settings.  The research and educational emphasis will be on creating conceptual
              links between social learning in diverse settings and the creation of corridors
              of opportunity between formal and informal learning institutions.

To date
              there has been little research with families from cultural and linguistic
              minority populations, such as Latino families, at informal learning settings
              and virtually none that integrates formal and informal learning, or impacts
              teaching. The five-year project will:
1. Conduct Study 1, aimed at making
              fundamental cross-cultural comparisons of family conversational meaning making
              at the Monterey Bay Aquarium and linking this work with  family interviews,
              reflective conversations and visits to family homes;
2. Review the theoretical
              framework and conduct Study 2, which  will incorporate lessons learned from
              Study 1, and linking this research to formal classrooms; and 
3. Use the
              findings (at each stage) to inform teaching practice with UCSC undergraduate
              (Science majors) and graduate (Science credential, MA and Ph.D.) students, and,
              in collaboration with teacher research groups for new and experienced teacher
              in schools that serve predominantly Latino students.

This research plan
              provides an opportunity for viewing several inter-connected mechanisms,
              including family interactions and conversations, compelling science content,
              naturalistic learning in museum settings, and, finally, analyzing these factors
              in order to inform teaching practices that promote bilingual minority students
              to the rank of scientists.







