Title       : CAREER: The Dynamics of IP3-Sensitive Calcium Release Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0133132

Award Number: 0133132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Smith greg@as.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1108,1136,1187,1266,1271,9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This faculty early career development award supports integrated research and
              educational activities in the interdisciplinary area of computational cell
              biology at the College of William and Mary.  Professor Smith is developing a
              computational model of the dynamics of Ca2+ regulation at IP3-sensitive Ca2+
              release sites that includes both 1) stochastic activation and inactivation of
              IP3Rs consistent with current knowledge of IP3 diversity and 2) a realistic
              account of the buffered diffusion of intracellular Ca2+ leading to cooperative
              IP3R activity.  This model will be used to test four specific hypotheses. 
              First, an optimal density of type 1 IP3Rs leads to maximum release site
              activation (but not so for type 2 IP3Rs).  Second, Ca2+ buffers influence
              release site activation in a manner dependent on density and subtype of IP3Rs. 
              Third, release sites exhibit distinct kinetics of activation and inactivation
              depending on IP3R subtype.  Fourth, the dynamics of Ca2+ regulation at release
              sites with tightly clustered IP3Rs are well-approximated by reduced models
              utilizing steady-state Ca2+ microdomain theory.  In addition, Prof. Smith is
              directing several interdisciplinary graduate/undergraduate research projects
              related to the statistical properties of IP3-sensitive Ca2+ release sites and
              the effect of IP3R clustering on global Ca2+ responses.  Educational activities
              include curriculum development intended to increase the exposure of graduate
              and undergraduate students at William and Mary to quantitative approaches in
              cell and molecular biology.  A new course entitled "Cellular Biophysics and
              Modeling" emphasizes diffusion, membrane transport, mass action kinetics,
              single channel recording of voltage- and ligand-gated ion channels, whole cell
              currents, compartmental modeling, plasma membrane electrical excitability, and
              dynamics in cell signal transduction.  A second new course, "Introductory
              Bioinformatics," exposes biology majors (with minimal background in computer
              programming) to the basic algorithms of computational molecular biology
              including sequence comparison, fragment assembly, phylogenetic tree
              construction, and secondary structure prediction.  Both courses include an
              integrated computer laboratory. 

This faculty early career development award
              supports computational cell biology research and education at the College of
              William and Mary.  In most cell types an organelle called the endoplasmic
              reticulum (ER) has integrative and regenerative properties analogous to the
              excitable membranes of neurons.  While insight into ER "Ca2+ excitability" has
              been obtained through the development of whole cell models of Ca2+ handling
              that are based on molecular mechanisms, a limitation of whole cell models to
              date is the assumption that IP3 receptors (IP3Rs) are globally coupled by the
              bulk (or average) cytosolic Ca2+ concentration.  In order to overcome these
              limitations, Prof. Smith is developing computational models of the dynamics of
              Ca2+ regulation at IP3-sensitive Ca2+ release sites that focus on local
              coupling of IP3Rs mediated by the diffusion of intracellular Ca2+, a
              fundamental and significant aspect of cell signaling.  Prof. Smith is also
              directing several interdisciplinary graduate/undergraduate research projects
              related to the statistical properties of IP3-sensitive Ca2+ release sites and
              the effect of IP3R clustering on global Ca2+ responses.  Educational activities
              include curriculum development intended to increase the exposure of graduate
              and undergraduate students at William and Mary to quantitative approaches in
              cell and molecular biology.  Two new courses are being developed: "Cellular
              Biophysics and Modeling" and "Introductory Bioinformatics," both of which
              involve an integrated computer laboratory. 




