Title       : CAREER: Expanding the Applicability, Utility and Popularity of Item Response
               Theory Models for Unfolding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0133019

Award Number: 0133019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Roberts jr245@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program will develop and apply new measurement methodology in the
              domain of item response theory (IRT) models for unfolding.  An unfolding IRT
              model is a probabilistic model that simultaneously estimates each respondent's
              latent trait along with the characteristics of each item using the responses to
              a test or questionnaire.  In contrast to traditional IRT models that implement
              cumulative item response functions to measure traits like ability and
              proficiency, unfolding IRT models incorporate single-peaked, nonmonotonic item
              response functions to measure constructs like attitudes, preferences and
              individual locations within certain developmental processes that occur in
              stages.  This research program will expand the applicability, utility and
              popularity of a particular unfolding IRT model for polytomous responses known
              as the generalized graded unfolding model (GGUM).  These goals will be achieved
              through an integrated sequence of educational and research projects.  Research
              projects will include:
1) An investigation of alternative indices of model,
              item and person fit that can be utilized with the GGUM - the results will
              enable practitioners to better identify when the GGUM is and is not appropriate
              for a given set of item responses. 
2) An exploration of Bayesian estimates of
              GGUM parameters derived from a Markov chain Monte Carlo method - this technique
              will potentially improve the accuracy of GGUM parameter estimates in situations
              with sparse data and will better represent the uncertainty inherent in those
              parameter estimates.
3) The development of a new multidimensional extension of
              the GGUM - this model will allow for the measurement of multidimensional latent
              traits that are of interest to social scientists in many substantive areas like
              psychology, marketing, political science, etc.  
4) The development of a new
              mixture model that is based on the GGUM response function - this mixture model
              will estimate latent traits of conscientious respondents while
              probabilistically culling unconscientious respondents from the measurement
              portion of the algorithm.

The educational component of this program includes
              a series of both introductory and intensive workshops on the application and
              benefits of the GGUM family of models.  Workshops will be developed and
              presented to applied measurement practitioners across the U.S. and Europe.  The
              refinement and subsequent distribution of free, user-friendly computer software
              that estimates GGUM parameters will complement these educational activities.
              

Recent psychometric research suggests that responses to typical attitude
              and preference questionnaires are more appropriately described by unfolding
              models rather than cumulative models.  Indeed, the use of cumulative models in
              these situations can lead to invalid measures.  Unfolding IRT models will
              promote more valid measurement in these situations while also providing other
              benefits commonly associated with cumulative IRT models.  These include the
              ability to build item banks that maintain a common scale of measurement, the
              ability to estimate the precision of each respondent's latent trait estimate,
              and the ability to measure attitudes, preferences and other constructs in the
              social sciences using computerized adaptive testing methods.  Consequently, the
              results from this research can improve the quality of measurements that are
              developed in many social science disciplines while simultaneously expanding
              applied measurement practices in ways that are both technically sound and
              practical.  The educational component of this program will provide measurement
              practitioners with the requisite knowledge and tools to effectively use this
              growing methodology. 

