Title       : CAREER: A Keystone Species Approach to Determining Post-fire Successional
               Influence on Cavity user Communities in the Black Hills, South Dakota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0133854

Award Number: 0133854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerri T. Vierling kerri.vierling@sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              PI Name: 			Vierling, Kerri
PI Institution: 		South Dakota School of Mines and
              Technology
Proposal Number:		DEB-0133854
Proposal Title:	               
              CAREER: A keystone species approach to determining post-fire successional      
                                                               influence on cavity user
              communities in the Black Hills, South Dakota

A keystone species is a species
              whose effects on a community are much larger than would be predicted from their
              abundance.  Identification of keystone species within a system is critical to
              understanding how communities presently function and how they might respond to
              future environmental changes.  Fire is a natural process in western Ponderosa
              pine (Pinus ponderosa) forests, but human activities (i.e. logging and fire
              suppression) have altered fire frequencies and intensities.  This project will
              address the influence of fire on the relative importance and possible keystone
              function of different woodpecker species on the secondary cavity user (SCU)
              community in pine forests in the Black Hills of South Dakota.  Secondary cavity
              users do not excavate the cavities that they occupy for nesting and roosting. 
              I will examine woodpecker and SCU communities in three types of treatments:
              unburned (i.e. control), prescribed fire, and old burn treatments.  The
              prescribed fire treatments will undergo two years of pre-burn analysis before
              application of a prescribed burn.  The focus of forests in different stages of
              post-fire succession will allow for an examination of the dynamic influence of
              fire on the woodpeckers and the SCU communities. The relative importance of
              individual woodpecker species to the SCU community will be determined by
              monitoring the use of woodpecker cavities during both the breeding season and
              non-breeding season.  Wind Cave National Park will be the primary site for
              field research and for a field ecology curriculum to be taught to American
              Indian students.  This study provides a unique opportunity to integrate
              research and ecological educational activities with American Indian students by
              combining a culturally relevant field site (Wind Cave) with culturally relevant
              animals (woodpeckers). The field ecology experiences will be the result of
              collaboration between the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T),
              Oglala Lakota College (OLC), and the SDSM&T Scientific Knowledge for Indian
              Learning and Leadership (SKILL) program.  The combination of research
              activities and educational activities at Wind Cave will provide excellent
              opportunities to integrate research and education to a group that has
              traditionally been underrepresented in the sciences.  

