Title       : CAREER: Traffic congestion on freeways: using probe vehicle data to understand
               bottlenecks and mitigate the resulting problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0133278

Award Number: 0133278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin A. Coifman coifman.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Freeway traffic congestion impacts the movement of most people and goods in the
              United States. This congestion is due to a small number of points on the
              network where demand peaks or capacity drops. Although these bottlenecks
              typically occupy a short distance of roadway, the resulting queues can extend
              for several miles. Most freeway queues are characterized by slow and stop waves
              propagating upstream from a bottleneck. The changing speeds give rise to an
              increased probability of accidents and the frequent accelerations increase
              vehicle emissions. Although the propagation of these waves can be predicted
              once they form, it is not known how they originate and debate continues as to
              whether they impact capacity. To date, these issues have been studied with
              point detectors, which are capable of monitoring traffic at fixed
              locations.

The proposed work will equip two probe vehicles with GPS
              receivers and distance sensors to monitor adjacent vehicles. The probe vehicles
              will collect data throughout bottleneck regions and observe important signals
              that may not propagate all the way to point detectors. These probes will be
              used to identify which factors influence bottleneck capacity, and identify how
              the signals and waves form in freeway queues. These efforts should lead to
              additional benefits including improved car following and traffic flow models.
              The work is interdisciplinary, drawing on electrical engineering for sensor
              technologies, and civil engineering for traffic flow theory. This proposal
              forms the cornerstone for a new course, cross-listed between the two academic
              departments and taught with a teamwork environment that is found rarely in
              coursework. In this integrated environment, the students will push the
              boundaries of knowledge by the end of each quarter.

