Title       : CAREER: Design and Analysis of Photonic Packet-Switched Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0133899

Award Number: 0133899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason P. Jue jjue@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The growth of the Internet in recent years is resulting in a rapid increase
              in the demand for network bandwidth. As this growth continues, the Internet
              will be expected to support an increasing number of high-speed real-time
              applications, such as Internet telephony, video conferencing, and video
              distribution, which not only require significant bandwidth, but also have
              quality of service requirements with respect to delay and reliability of
              transmitted data.
     Recent advances in optical transmission technology and
              wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) systems have enabled the development of
              advanced communication systems which are capable of providing large amounts of
              bandwidth in the core of emerging telecommunications networks. Similar advances
              in optical switching technologies will enable the deployment of highly flexible
              all-optical networks in the near future. Existing optical switching technology
              allows for the creation of networks in which all-optical circuit-switched
              connections can be established end-to-end.  As optical switch technology
              evolves, networks in which packets are switched optically at each node will
              become possible, offering an even greater degree of flexibility. Through the
              intelligent design of switch architectures and dynamic protocols, these
              photonic packet-switched networks have the potential to fulfill the diverse
              requirements of emerging broadband applications. This proposal outlines a
              career development plan for research and education in the area of photonic
              packet switching.
     The research plan will investigate the feasibility and
              suitability of photonic packet-switched networks for supporting the traffic
              requirements of emerging Internet applications. Emphasis will be placed on the
              design and evaluation of protocols and architectures for improving photonic
              packet network performance, while also addressing the unique physical-layer
              properties of optical networks. The specific objectives of the research project
              will be to 1) investigate protocols for resolving contention and providing
              differentiated levels of service in photonic packet-switched networks, 2)
              investigate new techniques for contention resolution in optical burst-switched
              networks, 3) investigate static and dynamic approaches for avoiding contention
              and for reducing congestion in photonic packet-switched networks, and 4)
              develop an integrated framework for evaluating the performance of these
              networks on both the physical layer and network
layer in terms of metrics such
              as delay, packet loss, and signal quality. This research will provide a
              foundation for the deployment of high-speed photonic packet-switched networks,
              and will identify key design parameters and trade-offs associated with the
              implementation of such networks.
     The education plan will focus on 1)
              developing new networking and telecommunications curriculum at both the
              undergraduate and graduate level, 2) organizing activities such as seminars and
              workshops to facilitate the transfer of knowledge from the university to
              surrounding industry, 3) developing new methods for providing education over
              the Internet, and 4) developing an outreach program to encourage
              under-represented minorities to seek careers in science and engineering.
