Title       : CAREER: Energy Efficient Mobile Wireless Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0133761

Award Number: 0133761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajarathnam Chandramouli rchandr1@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile wireless networking is experiencing a tremendous rate of growth. Many
              traditional wireline based applications are going wireless. Among other issues,
              one core issue that needs to be addressed for the success of future mobile
              wireless communications is energy-efficient wireless networking. Currently, the
              re-chargeable battery energy capacity of most mobile devices is limited due to
              a variety of reasons. It is also known that the rate at which battery
              technology is
progressing is rather slow compared to the advances in wireless
              technology and applications. Therefore, it is important to optimize the
              networking algorithms, protocols and parameters for energy efficiency.
              Especially, this may be essential to support next generation high speed
              wireless networking.

Energy minimization is of two types: communication and
              computation energy minimization. There has been significant progress in
              designing energy-efficient physical layer algorithms and hardware
              architectures. But, the goal of this project is to investigate energy
              optimization and control policies at higher layers of the network protocol
              stack. Towards this objective a new layer called Control Layer is proposed. A
              rich set of mathematical tools and stochastic control algorithms are
              incorporated in this layer to predict, estimate, and control the time-varying
              parameters such as battery capacity, rate of transmission, error control,
              routing, transport protocols, and application requirements. This layer enables
              the other protocol layers to be energy-aware.

In summary, the proposed plan
              for this inter-disciplinary research project and the educational initiatives to
              integrate research with teaching at both undergraduate and graduate levels are
              as follows:

1) Energy-efficient link and MAC layer protocols for
              time-varying wireless links. Stochastic control of the tradeoff between
              communication versus computation energy. New probability based MAC protocols
              that attempt to schedule users such that energy is minimized.
2) Theoretical
              analysis of stochastic control algorithms that react to the bursty nature of
              traffic and link errors.  Experiments to validate and test these control
              algorithms for real-life channels.
3) Stochastic minimum energy routing
              algorithms that account for the current battery state of a mobile node and also
              the network state.
4) Energy-aware transport control protocols that
              distinguish between the good and bad states of a wireless link and act
              accordingly.
5) Stochastic dynamic programming based rate control techniques
              at the application layer to save energy.
6) Implementation of project based
              learning and active learning techniques in the class room. Motivate
              undergraduate and graduate student research through this NSF CAREER
              project.

A matching grant of $100,000 from Stevens Institute and $100,000
              from New Jersey state have been committed to this project. Supporting documents
              have been attached as supplements.
