Title       : CAREER: Model-Based Design and Verification of Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0133583

Award Number: 0133583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Radu Grosu grosu@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1667,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Model-Based Design and Verification of Embedded Systems
Radu
              Grosu
State University of New York at Stony Brook

Computer aided
              verification (CAV) and embedded software design automation (ESDA) emerge
              from
academia and industry respectively as two promising approaches to
              developing the high-confidence
software demanded by embedded-system
              applications, including those found in the
              telecommunications,
aerospace/military, medical-device, and automotive
              industries. CAV and ESDA advocate the same
methodology for system design: (1)
              define the requirements, (2) construct a model and (3) analyze
the model with
              respect to the requirements. The difference is essentially that: (1) CAV uses
              more
sophisticated requirements, (2) ESDA uses more sophisticated models and
              (3) CAV performs a more
sophisticated analysis.  While ESDA analysis reduces
              to manual, pointwise simulation of the model,
CAV analysis is automatic and
              exhaustive.  This is made possible by a mathematical formulation of
the
              requirements, models and analysis problem that is far beyond the precision
              currently supported
by ESDA.  The goal of this research is to: (1) push the
              limits of CAV to capture and analyze
ESDA models; (2) increase the confidence
              in ESDA by applying CAV techniques.  This goal is pursued
with following
              research and education objectives:

1. Support the design methodology for
              discrete, time-triggered and event-triggered embedded
systems with:

  -
              Hierarchic reactive modules (HRM), a state-based modeling language that
              supports
    architectural and behavioral hierarchy together with powerful
              time and space abstraction.
    
  - Concurrent class machines (CCM), an
              action-based modeling language that directly
    incorporates object-oriented
              features like classes and inheritance, objects and object creation,
   
              methods, method invocation and exceptions, threads and thread creation.
    

               - Shared variables interaction diagrams, a scenario-based language that
              adequately
    captures requirements of embedded systems communicating via
              shared variables.
    
  - Hermes}, a modeling, simulation and model checking
              tool for HRM that efficiently
    exploits the hierarchical structure to prune
              the state space. We also consider a variety of
    other CAV techniques and
              support for CCM.
  
2. Support the design methodology for embedded systems
              with tightly coupled discrete and analog
  behavior with:

  - Hierarchic
              hybrid machines (HHM)}, a hierarchic, state-based modeling language that
   
              allows to capture both discrete and analog behavior.
    
  - Charon, a
              modeling and simulation tool for HHM that exploits hierarchic structure for
  
               efficient multi-rate integration.
    
  - Different approaches to
              simulation, reachability analysis and modular reasoning.
    Application of
              hybrid systems to modeling cell behavior.
  
3. Publish a textbook providing
              a comprehensive, formal treatment of the unified modeling
  language UML for
              Real Time to reduce the gap between ESDA and CAV.
  
4. Integrate formal
              concepts in the undergraduate education at Stony-Brook by proposing changes
 
              for the courses in software engineering, theory of computation and operating
              systems.
