Title       : CAREER: Characterization of Hybrid Resin Systems Based on Epoxy and Acrylate
               Functionalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0133133

Award Number: 0133133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie L. Jessop julie-jessop@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Photopolymerization has experienced tremendous growth within the film, coating
              and ink industries and is leading to new applications in the biomedical,
              communications, automotive, and aerospace fields as well. The advantages of
              using light to initiate polymerization rather than heat
include significant
              savings in energy costs and processing space and time, solvent-free systems,
              and increased control over the production of initiating species. Of the
              possible propagation mechanisms, those that are driven by free radical active
              centers are the most prevalent; however, these polymerizations are plagued by
              oxygen inhibition. This has increased interest in using cationic
              photpolymerization schemes, although these suffer from inhibition by moisture
              and slower cure rates. In order to address the limitations of these
              polymerization mechanisms, hybrid
resin systems have been designed within the
              past few years to cure using a combination of cationic and free-radical
              mechanisms under ultraviolet light. These systems exhibit lower sensitivity to
              oxygen and moisture and offer advantages such as increased cure speed and
              improved film-forming properties. To date, most studies have focused on the
              development of
these systems; thus, there is a definite need for in-depth
              studies in order to create a fundamental base of knowledge that allows the
              impact and utility of these systems to be optimized.

This research will
              investigate hybrid resin systems based on formulations that contain both an
              epoxide moiety, which undergoes cationic ring-opening photopolymerization, and
              an acrylate moiety, which undergoes free radical photopolymerization. The goal
              of this research is
to characterize the fundamental kinetics of these hybrid
              resin systems and to correlate the chemical distribution of the species with
              the resulting physical properties. This goal will be accomplished by:

1.
              Investigating the photopolymerization kinetics of the hybrid 
       resin
              systems.
2.    Determining the microscopic composition of the hybrid
              polymers.
3.    Evaluating the mechanical properties of the hybrid
              polymers.

The conversion and rate data for these hybrid systems will be
              obtained using in-situ Raman experiments and corroborated with
              photo-differential scanning calorimetry experiments.  Raman spectroscopy
              provides a highly sensitive means of following both cationic and free-
radical
              reactions in real time by monitoring the depletion of the epoxide rings and the
              acrylate double bonds as they are consumed during the polymerization. The
              physical nature and properties of the resulting polymers will be investigated
              with Raman microscopy and dynamic
mechanical analysis. Results from this
              research will address important issues on the interactions  between the two
              polymerization systems and will provide guidance that will aid in the design of
              these reaction systems for established radiation cure industries, as well as
              provide opportunities for growth in new areas.

This research program will
              also have a direct impact on the educational experience of students at various
              levels, including those in junior and senior high school. The Engineering
              Awareness for Students and Teachers program will be developed to introduce
              secondary students
and teachers from an urban school district to engineering
              concepts and college preparation strategies through a summer program and
              classroom activities. Economically disadvantaged students and female and
              minority students will be recruited in order to increase the opportunities
of
              these underrepresented groups in engineering. This two-pronged approach seeks
              to increase the impact of the program beyond the students who attend the summer
              program by supporting their teachers, who will return to their classrooms with
              materials to introduce all their students to
the excitement and challenges of
              engineering.

