Title       : CAREER: Detecting Interchangeability Relations in Constraint Satisfaction
               Problems and Exploiting them in Problem Solving and Interactions with Users
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0133568

Award Number: 0133568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Berthe Y. Choueiry choueiry@cse.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award.  This project will
              improve our ability to solve problems in constraint satisfaction, which is a
              central paradigm for modeling and solving various problems in computer science,
              engineering, and management.  It will do so by designing and evaluating
              algorithms that discover and exploit the structure embedded in the model of a
              decision problem formulated as a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP).  In
              particular, the work will investigate how symmetry relations, specified as
              interchangeability, can be used to build compact and faithful abstractions of
              CSPs.  The goal of these investigations is not only to enhance the performance
              of solving CSPs, but also to support interactions with human users by allowing
              them to build and navigate over landscapes of solution spaces.  Such techniques
              will institute a new paradigm in problem solving by making a computer perform
              as an active, informed assistant rather than as a passive black box.  The
              project's education plan combines curriculum development, course teaching, and
              individual mentoring of students.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports
              the early career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to
              become an academic leader of the twenty-first century.  Constraint satisfaction
              is most commonly used in scheduling and resource allocation applications, as
              well as in artificial intelligence planning and collaborative problem-solving. 
              Therefore, this research will improve the techniques available to solve very
              difficult practical problems in a variety of fields.

