Title       : Toward a Unifying Theory of Social Evolution: Testing Competing Models of
               Reproductive Skew in an Avian Cooperative Breeder
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0133795

Award Number: 0133795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Emlen ste1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              

TOWARD A UNIFYING THEORY OF SOCIAL EVOLUTION: TESTING COMPETING MODELS OF
              REPRODUCTIVE SKEW IN AN AVIAN COOPERATIVE BREEDER.

STEPHEN T.
              EMLEN

PROJECT SUMMARY (IN LAY TERMS)

The family (defined as a
              multi-generation assemblage of genetic relatives) is among the least understood
              of all forms of social organization.  Yet, because it is the basic social
              organization of our own species, it is arguably the most important for us to
              understand.  Only about 3% of birds and mammals live in family-based societies,
              and only a few of these have been studied in detail.

Families come in
              various sizes and forms.  The most common form in both birds and mammals is the
              nuclear family, formed when grown young remain with their parents, but only the
              parents reproduce.  Most so-called 'cooperative breeders' fit this category,
              with grown sons and daughters remaining as helpers at the nest or den of their
              parents.  Less common, but of greater interest, is the extended family, formed
              when reproduction is shared among many family members.  When multiple pairs
              within a single family breed, the result is a mixture not only of parents and
              offspring, but also of grandparents, uncles and aunts, nieces and nephews, and
              cousins as well as unrelated in-laws.  Until very recently, we humans lived
              predominantly in groups comprised of such extended family units. 

The
              difference between extended and nuclear families is one of shared versus
              monopolized breeding.  A rapidly growing number of evolutionary models, known
              collectively as reproductive skew theory, attempt to explain the variability of
              reproductive suppression found in nature.  Skew models incorporate a small
              number of factors (two ecological, one genetic, and one social) to predict 1)
              when stable family groups will form, 2) what their stable size will be, and 3)
              how reproduction will be shared among family members.

Reproductive skew they
              is generating considerable interest among behavioral ecologists and
              evolutionary biologists because it links many major features of animal
              societies to their ecological, genetic, and social underpinnings.  Because of
              this breadth, some workers believe that skew theory may provide a unifying
              framework for viewing much of social evolution.  However, the development of
              the theory has far outpaced the testing of its assumptions and predictions with
              real animals in the field.  There is an urgent need for detailed observational
              and experimental studies of skew theory on birds and mammals that live in
              family-based societies.

The proposed research will provide such a test.  The
              study species is the Grey capped social weaver (Pseudonigrita arnaudi), a
              common inhabitant of the whistling thorn savanna of East Africa.  This species
              was chosen because it lives in both extended and nuclear family units,
              background knowledge of its behavior and ecology is already well-known, and it
              possesses many features that make it logistically easy to collect data and
              perform experiments.  A study population of over 50 family units has been
              captured and the birds individually marked.  Molecular markers (microsatellite
              loci) have been developed that will allow genetic determination of family
              structures (e.g. who is the father, or aunt, of whom).  The research program
              will help to train numerous Kenyan professionals in modern methods of
              behavioral research.  It will also combine the talents of several senior
              investigators whose expertise ranges from field studies of behavior, to
              molecular studies of social organization, to theoretical modeling of social
              evolution.  As such, it constitutes one of the first integrated tests of the
              applicability of recent skew models to a complex vertebrate society.

The
              results should enhance our understanding of 1) the factors that favor the
              evolution of family groups, 2) the reasons why extended families develop when
              they do, and 3) the behaviors that family members use in their cooperative and
              competitive interactions with one another (so-called 'family dynamics').  This,
              in turn, should provide insights into the conditions that favored the evolution
              and maintenance of extended family groupings in our own species as well.



