Title       : CAREER: The Biomechanics of Chromosome Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0133659

Award Number: 0133659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Hunt ajhunt@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The scientific goal of this project is to understand, model, and manipulate the
              biomechanics of chromosomal separation during cell division. Eukaryotic mitosis
              depends on molecular machines that move chromosomes along a network of long
              cylindrical microtubules. This process must be precisely performed and tightly
              regulated; lack of precision, leading to unequal distribution of genetic
              material between daughter cells, can result in cell death or other
              abnormalities. This project approaches this problem from two fronts: 1)
              computational modeling to predict the character, speed, and dynamics of
              interactions between chromosomes and microtubules; and 2) biophysical
              experimentation to test and refine the models. The former approach starts with
              a simple stochastic, thermodynamic model that describes the origin and
              coordination of the forces that move chromosomes. Guided by the model, the
              latter activities focus on the origin and physical properties of chromosome
              movements. Using an advanced optical gradient trap (optical tweezers) to
              manipulate microtubules interacting with chromosomes in vitro, forces and
              mechanical properties will be measured. Complementary experiments will examine
              chromosome movement in vivo by applying technology in which an ultra-short
              laser pulse creates targeted, localized disruptions within the mitotic
              apparatus. The changes that result from severing chromosome-bound microtubules
              and fragments of chromosome will be compared with modeling predictions to
              elucidate mechanical properties. These experiments will quantify mechanical and
              force generating properties that allow chromosomes to: 1) bear and respond to
              tensile loads to maintain connections with microtubules; 2) move along
              microtubules; 3) move to appropriate location during the different phases of
              mitosis; and 4) form and maintain connections with the mitotic spindle. 
              

Educational goals include integrating research and teaching to encourage
              students with strong quantitative skills to pursue cell biology problems, and
              to provide them with a rigorous interdisciplinary background so they excel at
              this pursuit. Principal aims are the continued development of classes in
              Quantitative Cell Biology and Cellular and Molecular Biomechanics, developing a
              laboratory segment to accompany Quantitative Cell Biology, and developing new
              teaching resources. This includes continued development of an extensive set of
              Internet resources, which will evolve into the framework for a new
              undergraduate text in Quantitative Cell Biology, which will be constructed with
              input from other investigators. This educational plan will have a significant
              impact on universities' efforts to expand undergraduate training in Biomedical
              Engineering. A major long-term benefit will be improved transfer and
              application of engineering and physics approaches to cell biology and
              biotechnology research.

