Title       : CAREER: The Limits of Mendelian Genetics: Sperm Influences Female Meiotic
               Segregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0133526

Award Number: 0133526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $535078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando Pardo Manuel de Villena fernando@med.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Males from several laboratory inbred strains produce a sperm factor that is able
              to interact with the female meiotic spindle apparatus at the second meiotic
              division, disrupting the random segregation of chromatids between the zygote
              and the second polar body.  On the other hand, the male sperm from other inbred
              strains do not interfere with the expected random segregation of chromatids. In
              hybrid males generated by crossing animals from these two types of inbred
              strains, the phenotype appears to segregate as a single locus that is expressed
              at the haploid stage of spermatogenesis.  The objective of the project is to
              characterize this unusual effect of the sperm in nonrandom segregation of
              maternal alleles during female meiosis.  This research project has two aims: i)
              characterize the mode of inheritance of the sperm factor and ii) identify the
              molecular nature of the gene, or genes, responsible for this phenotype using a
              combination of positional cloning, comparative genomics methods and functional
              assays. 
The characterization of true exceptions to Mendel's laws of
              inheritance has been a highly successful approach in uncovering general
              principles in genetics.  The phenotype to be studied in this project, nonrandom
              segregation of chromatids during female meiosis that is driven by the genotype
              of the fertilizing sperm, represents a true violation to Mendel's law of
              segregation.  In addition, it also violates the basic assumption of Mendelian
              genetics that the segregation of alleles during meiosis in one sex is
              independent from the segregation of alleles in the other sex, i. e., the
              inheritance of genetic information from one parent is independent of the
              inheritance of genetic information from the other parent.  The information
              gathered in this research has great potential to provide new insights in the
              mechanisms of control of chromosome segregation during meiosis and to refine
              the standard models commonly used in the fields of genetics and evolutionary
              biology.   
In the past decade a trend has become apparent in the curricula of
              genetics at graduate and undergraduate levels.  An increasing emphasis has been
              placed in the molecular aspects of gene action and gene regulation, while basic
              aspects of transmission genetics are briefly summarized and often presented as
              a complete body of knowledge. Although one may argue that this approach has
              been exceedingly successful in the characterization of the molecular basis of
              disease, it is also clear that some observations violate the most basic
              assumptions of Mendelian Genetics.  These observations reject the commonly held
              opinion that transmission genetics was essentially solved in the past century
              and exemplifies the open-ended nature of the quest to fully understand the
              principles and mechanisms governing the transmission of genetics information. 
              The underlying rationale of this research project (i. e., testing the validity
              of basic assumptions of genetic models) and the results generated have a great
              educational significance that will be integrated within course design, teaching
              and supervision at the high school, undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
              levels.  

