Title       : CAREER: Studying Cell-to-Cell Signaling in Microbial Biofilms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0133833

Award Number: 0133833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Parsek m-parsek@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the research plan is to further our understanding of the
              relationship between two aspects of community behavior in Pseudomonas
              aeruginosa-the formation of complex, surface-attached communities called
              biofilms and a cell-to-cell signaling regulatory mechanism called quorum
              sensing.  It is known that quorum sensing is required for normal P. aeruginosa
              biofilm communities to form, but what quorum sensing regulates during the
              development of a biofilm is unknown.  How quorum sensing functions in biofilm
              community is also unknown.  Here is a summary of the project: 1) Identify the
              gene or set of genes regulated by quorum sensing that play a role in the
              development of biofilm communities; 2) Study signaling patterns in biofilms-
              what constitutes a quorum in a biofilm?; and 3) Examine signal diffusion in a
              biofilm- concentrating both on the roles of mass transport and the chemistry of
              the extracellular matrix of the biofilm. Here is a list of the goals of the
              project:
Develop a detailed understanding of quorum sensing in a model
              microbial biofilm system
Develop interdisciplinary collaborations to address
              interdisciplinary questions
Cultivate an appreciation for the
              multidisciplinary approach to science needed to ask questions about
              environmental microbiology
The educational plan mirrors the research plan in
              the need to incorporate a multidisciplinary approach to the complex
              environmental systems where microbes are found.  There are three specific goals
              for the educational plan:
Design and implement a basic microbiology course for
              undergraduate engineers.
Design and implement a microbial ecology course for
              graduate level engineering students.
Provide research experiences for high
              school, undergraduate, and graduate students in environmental microbiology,
              emphasizing the need to approach scientific questions in a multidisciplinary
              fashion
The first goal is designed to give undergraduate engineers a
              foundation in biology.  The need for engineers and scientists to interact with
              people outside their own discipline is clear- this course is intended to give
              the biological background needed to facilitate these interactions.  The second
              goal is to develop a microbial ecology graduate course with the theme of
              biofilms, where the focus will be on systems and the need to bring different
              tools from different fields to bear on the system in order to understand it. 
              The last goal is to provide a positive research environment where students can
              be trained in and exposed to cutting-edge research.


