Title       : CAREER: Rational Design in Chemical Engineering, From Polymerization Catalysis
               to Product Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a0133209

Award Number: 0133209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher W. Jones chris.jones@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to design porous silica catalysts with isolated
              organometallic surface species and to assess their efficacy as olefin
              polymerization catalysts.  These metallocene catalysts have been successfully
              used as homogeneous catalysts.  The aim of this project is to prepare
              corresponding heterogeneous catalysts that will overcome the difficulties
              (e.g., reactor fouling) associated with the homogeneous form.  The distribution
              of sites in heterogeneous industrial catalysts causes the selectivity of these
              materials to be lower than for their homogeneous counterparts, but the proposed
              synthesis of a heterogeneous form is expected to overhome this problem.  The
              approach involves functionalization porous silica followed by a novel technique
              for binding the catalyst to the surface to produce only one type of site.  The
              resulting catalytic material will be characterized with a number of surface
              techniques followed by characterization of the polymer formed in model
              reactions.  The educational plan includes the development of a course to
              intorduce the rational synthesis of materials and the introduction of this
              topic into an existing catalysis course.  Participation in a program to help
              middle school and high school teachers become involved in research during the
              summer will be part of an outreach effort.  This work could lead to a novel
              technique for heterogeneous polymerication and may have broader applications in
              creating well defined, spatially isolated, organometallic species on support
              surfaces for a variety of novel catalytic process.
