Title       : CAREER: Algorithmic Semi-Algebraic Geometry and Its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0133597

Award Number: 0133597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saugata Basu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0133597
Saugata Basu
Georgia Tech

CAREER: Algorithmic Semi-algebraic
              Geometry and its Applications

Algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry lies at
              the heart of of many problems in several different areas of computer science
              and mathematics including discrete and computational geometry, robot motion
              planning, geometric modeling, computer-aided design, geometric theorem proving,
              mathematical investigations of real algebraic varieties,  molecular chemistry,
              constraint databases etc.  A closely related subject area is 
quantitative
              real algebraic geometry. Results from quantitative real algebraic geometry are
              the basic 
ingredients of better algorithms in semi-algebraic geometry and
              play an increasingly important role in several other areas of computer science:
              for instance, in bounding the geometric complexity of arrangements in
              computational geometry, computational learning theory, proving lower bounds in
              computational complexity theory, convex optimization problems  etc.

The
              first goal of this project is to design optimal algorithms for several
              important problems of semi-algebraic geometry including the problems of
              computing the homology groups and stratifications of semi-algebraic
              sets.
Secondly, the methods and techniques of algorithmic real algebraic
              geometry will be applied to investigate 
several open  problems in discrete
              and computational geometry and to explore new connections, especially 
in the
              area of computational topology.  At the same time, several emerging
              applications of algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry will be investigated,
              especially in the area of constraint databases.
Additionally, practical
              implementations will be undertaken, in order to build a system able to compute
              topological invariants (such as the number of connected components, the Euler
              characteristic, the Betti numbers, the full homology groups) of given
              semi-algebraic sets. This will aim at bridging the current gap between the
              theoretically best algorithms, and the best practical implementations
              available.

The educational component of the project consists of developing
              an integrated cross-disciplinary 
curriculum suitable for advanced
              under-graduate and beginning graduate students in mathematics and computer
              science.  This would require no pre-requisite beyond college-level calculus and
              linear algebra, so that that the students can quickly absorb the mathematical
              background necessary for this line of research, and at the same time be in a
              position to make efficient implementations, which would make them
attractive
              to both industry and academia.


