Title       : CAREER: Controlling Solid State Reactivity via Linear Templates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0133138

Award Number: 0133138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $506000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard R. MacGillivray len-macgillivray@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to develop an approach for conducting solid state
              chemical synthesis that provides the degrees of synthetic freedom of the liquid
              phase. The method utilizes molecules, as linear templates, to direct alignment
              of reactive sites using the strength and directionality of hydrogen bonds. The
              goals include: (1) expanding the methods to reaction homology by developing
              families of templates and reactants and (2) applying products of the approach
              for the design of a class of porous crystalline materials known as inverted
              metal-organic frameworks. These materials will be engineered to possess tunable
              pores of nanoscale dimensions lined with organic functionality. The ability to
              synthesize the organic building blocks of these materials in the solid state
              means that access to porous solids not achievable by other synthetic methods
              may be realized. The program seeks to integrate research ideas with education
              at the local, regional, and national level through events such as campus
              workshops that introduce students to green chemistry and materials
              science.

Solid-state chemical techniques provide an
              environmentally-friendly, or 'green' alternative to synthetic processes that
              rely on toxic organic solvents or routes to new molecules and materials with
              unique properties. For example, strategies for the design of porous crystalline
              solids are of much interest owing to their promise to deliver materials with
              properties that improve upon traditional and industrially important inorganic
              solids such as zeolites, a class of materials i

