Title       : CAREER: Mechanistic Studies on Cyclopropane Fatty Acid Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0133826

Award Number: 0133826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $524725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Squire Booker sjb14@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9138,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) is one of the most versatile
              cellular
metabolites used in enzymatic catalysis. Until relatively recently,
              it has been
appreciated primarily as a cellular methylating agent, since it is
              the primary
source of methyl groups for a broad spectrum of biological
              compounds,
including DNA, RNA, proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and a diverse
              array of
small molecules. AdoMet is also involved in a variety of other
              interesting
transformations. In one class of enzymes, it functions in concert
              with iron-sulfur
clusters to generate enzyme-bound radicals that are
              intermediates in certain
enzymatic reactions. In the project described herein,
              it functions as a donor of a
methylene group rather than a methyl group, in a
              fascinating reaction catalyzed
by the enzyme cyclopropane fatty acid synthase
              from Escherichia coli. The second
substrate is an isolated and unactivated cis
              olefin present in the unsaturated fatty
acid acyl chains of phospholipids. In
              contrast to methyl transfer, there is very
little precedent in the biochemical
              literature for methylene transfer from
AdoMet. All polar mechanisms for the
              reaction would be expected to involve
intermediates that are very high in
              energy. In addition, since most cellular
phospholipids are constituents of
              phospholipid bilayers, wherein their fatty acid
chains are sequestered from
              the aqueous milieu, it is unclear how this enzyme
catalyzes a reaction between
              two substrates of opposing solubilities. The goal of
this project is to
              address these intriguing questions using a variety of kinetic,
mechanistic,
              and physical techniques, which if successful, will contribute
significantly to
              the general understanding of enzyme reaction mechanisms.
