Title       : Purchasing Power Parity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0133921

Award Number: 0133921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247415             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Papell dpapell@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Purchasing Power Parity 
Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) is one of the most
              enduring topics in international economics, and the question of whether PPP
              holds both over long horizons and during the post-Bretton-Woods system of
              
flexible nominal exchange rates has been extensively analyzed. All variants
              of PPP postulate that the real 1 exchange rate reverts to a constant mean.
              Evidence ofPPP can be provided by tests of a unit root in the ! real exchange
              rate. If the unit root null hypothesis can be rejected in favor of a level
              stationary 
alternative, then there is mean reversion and, therefore, PPP.
              Most of the existent work on purchasing power parity focuses on the narrow
              question of whether or not unit roots in real exchange rates can be 
rejected.
              The purpose of this proposal is to go beyond the narrow statistical focus to
              consider what can be learned about the behavior of real exchange rates from the
              results of unit root tests. 
Recent work has begun to appear which reports
              strong rejections of unit roots in real exchange 
rates for panels with
              quarterly data. The first part of the proposal investigates whether these
              results really 
provide evidence of purchasing power parity. Using panel
              methods, unit roots in post-1973 real exchange rates with the U.S. dollar as
              the numeraire currency can only be consistently rejected if the sample
              
extends to 1997 or beyond. This leads to the question of what, if any, data
              generating processes for real exchange rates are consistent with both the
              recent rejections of unit roots with data extending through 1997 and the
              earlier failures to reject unit roots with shorter spans of data. Preliminary
              work indicates 
that the evidence is not consistent with real exchange rates
              being a stationary autoregressive process with high persistence, a combination
              of a stationary and a unit root process, or a nonlinear mean reverting
              
process. The evidence is more consistent with a process of reversion to PPP
              restricted structural change. 
The second part of the proposal focuses on the
              speed of mean reversion. The half-lives ofPPP deviations, the expected number
              of years for a disturbance to the real exchange rate to decay by 50 
percent,
              are generally calculated to be between three and five years with univariate
              methods. The use of median unbiased estimation methods with long-horizon and
              post-1973 data, however, shows that these estimates are biased downwards. More
              strikingly, the confidence intervals of the half-lives, especially with the
              post-l 973 data, are so wide as to make the point estimates virtually
              uninformative. This work will be extended in two directions. First, applying
              median unbiased estimation techniques to panel 
methods, the half-lives ofPPP
              deviations from panel unit root tests can be investigated. Preliminary
              
results indicate that, while (as with the univariate tests) the point
              estimates are biased downwards, the 
confidence intervals from the median
              unbiased estimates (in contrast with the univariate case) are tight enough to
              be informative. Second, median unbiased estimation techniques can be applied to
              a recently developed univariate unit root test that has more power than the
              conventional tests. This creates the potential for tighter confidence intervals
              of the estimated half-lives. 
The third part of the proposal focuses on the
              behavior of long-horizon and post- World War II real exchange rates. Using long
              spans of data and sufficiently powerful techniques, unit roots can be rejected
              
in favor of level stationarity (PPP) for most real exchange rates. An obvious
              econometric point, however, is that rejection of a null hypothesis in favor of
              a particular alternative hypothesis does not necessarily 
mean that the
              alternative is correct. In this case, there are other alternative hypotheses,
              including regime- wise level stationarity and regime-wise trend stationarity
              (both with and without PPP restrictions), that 
may provide better
              characterizations of real exchange rates. For long-horizon data, multiple level
              changes appear to be the most promising hypothesis. For post-World War II data,
              a combination of level changes (to account for the devaluations and
              revaluations at the end of the Bretton Woods period) plus slope 
changes (to
              account for the appreciation and depreciation of the dollar in the 1980s)
              appears to be most promising. The proposed research first involves conducting
              unit root tests with different alternative 
hypotheses. Depending on the
              results of these tests, simulation evidence can help uncover which data
              generating processes are most congruent with the results. 

