Title       : Sensory Exploitation of Prey Escape Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0133874

Award Number: 0133874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr Jablonski piotrjab@neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1185,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Sensory exploitation of prey escape circuits

One of the mechanisms of natural
              selection that evolutionary biologists study is the  "arms race"  between
              predators and prey. Predators evolve various adaptations to capture the prey,
              and the prey species evolve more and more sophisticated ways to avoid being
              killed. Who wins this arms race? This proposal focuses on predator-prey
              relationship in which the predator, the Painted Redstart (Myioborus pictus),
              exploits properties of a simple pathway in the nervous system of its insect
              prey to win the race. 
Flies possess a specific cluster of neurons, the Giant
              Descending Neuron Cluster, which triggers an escape reflex when a conspicuous
              image of an approaching predator is expanding on the fly's retina. Such neural
              pathways and their properties have evolved millions of years ago, and
              undoubtedly before the evolution of fly-eating birds. This escape reaction is
              believed to be a general antipredatory adaptation against all sorts of
              predators. This research project will test the idea that the Painted Redstart
              is now exploiting the properties of this simple neural pathway in flies.
              Birdwatchers are well acquainted with the very conspicuous tail fanning and
              wing spreading employed by foraging redstarts to show off their white and black
              plumage pattern. The idea is that redstarts use these displays to activate the
              escape reflexes of flies and other insects making them easier for the birds to
              detect. Redstarts have specialized in capturing such escaping insects in
              mid-air. 
This research will consist of three components. First, a comparison
              of Painted Redstart's diet with the diets of several other insectivorous birds
              will show whether flies with well-developed Giant Descending Neuron Clusters
              are more common in the diet of redstarts than in the diet of other
              insect-eating birds that do not use this exploitative hunting technique.
              Second, electrophysiological studies of the neurons in the Giant Descending
              Neuron Cluster will be used to test whether these neurons are especially
              sensitive to the redstart's displays. Third, a field study of the foraging
              performance of redstarts with experimentally enlarged and reduced white patches
              will show whether the arrangement naturally present in redstarts is optimal for
              flushing their insect prey. 

