Title       : Fundamental Studies of In Situ Biosurfactant Production and the Attendant Impact
               on Metal Interactions with Soil Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0133237

Award Number: 0133237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raina M. Maier rmaier@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia K. Larive  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne E. Pemberton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professors Raina Maier, an environmental microbiologist, Jeanne Pemberton, a
              surface chemist (both of the University of Arizona) and Cynthia Larive, an
              analytical nuclear magnetic resonance expert (of the University of Kansas) are
              funded by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities for the investigation of microbial surfactants and
              their role in the surface chemistry of soils.   This problem is to be addressed
              in an extensive interdisciplinary research program involving batch and
              flow-through column and micro-organism culturing, and analyses including FTIR,
              NMR, XPS, AFM and PCR.  The goal is to sort out the interaction of
              biosurfactants in natural and model soil systems that are both contaminated and
              uncontaminated.  

Biosurfactants released by microbes play an unknown role
              in the transport of metals in the soil environment.  In addition to aiding in
              questions of transport of metals (both natural and pollutants), the work may
              help provide new methods for bioremediation and/or elimination of contamination
              in soils.  A unique cross-training of graduate and undergraduate students is in
              place in conjunction with the research.

