Title       : CAREER: Priority Users and Applications on the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0133605

Award Number: 0133605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376893             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cory Beard beardc@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This work seeks to build a foundation for an academic career that is
              distinctive, has an impact on the lives of students, and makes a lasting and
              valuable contribution to society. It seeks to accomplish these objectives using
              the following approach.
   -This project proposes the development and
              performance evaluation of mechanisms for the support of high
priority users
              over public broadband TCP/IP networks (i.e., "the Internet"). Support for these
              types of users will enhance Internet service provider (ISP) revenue
              opportunities as well as support activities of importance to society, such as
              military, national security, and emergency response operations.                
              -Impacts will be made on the lives of students through the development of
              innovative internship and
entrepreneurial training opportunities for
              undergraduate and graduate students. New courses and curricula will also be
              developed to teach principles and new knowledge gained from this project's
              research work. Students will actively participate in this research, including
              undergraduates and those from underrepresented groups.
  - This academic
              career will only be successful if it passionately pursues research which goes
              beyond technology development to make a difference in the lives of people. This
              work provides the PI a vehicle and opportunity to build an academic career that
              pursues such a passion.
      It is important to note that the research focus
              of this project will be on priority users, more than on the traffic they
              generate or the services they are seeking to use. Priority users may or may not
              expect high quality of service (e.g.,low delay, high data rates) or
              applications that place high demands on the network (e.g., interactive video).
              Without fail, however, all priority users will expect network services to be
              available to them and to perform reliably, regardless of the state of the
              network or the context in which it is operating (e.g., after a natural
              disaster). National security/emergency preparedness users are of particular
              interest because they frequently need to perform their activities when it is
              most difficult for networks to support them due to failures and overloaded
              traffic.
The primary requirements for priority users are as follows.
   -
              Availability - Immediate access to network resources whenever needed.
  
              -Dependability - Ability to carry out and complete a communication session, no
              matter what is happening in the network or social context.
    -Stability -
              Priority users must be able to trust the technologies they use, even as those
              technologies evolve.
     In addition, packet-level quality of service and
              preferential treatment may be important to some priority users, but all
              priority users expect the above three primary requirements to be met.
    
              This work proposes four project tasks that are staged over five years. The
              first three tasks will develop mechanisms for supporting high priority users in
              best effort, connection-oriented, and connectionless (i.e., Differentiated
              Services) environments. Task 4 will assess performance expectations across
              multiple types of networks on a full end-to-end path. These four tasks are as
              follows.
    -Task 1 - Endpoint Traffic Control for Best Effort Environments -
              Mechanisms will be developed for end    users to control the performance they
              receive in best effort networks. This is accomplished using         forwarding
              hosts which serve as intermediate destinations for traffic. The presence of
              multiple forwarding      hosts gives end users choices of paths over which to
              test and send traffic.
    -Task 2 - Integrated Routing and Connection
              Admission Control - Connection admission control (CAC) is very useful in
              connection-oriented environments to limit the amount of traffic from low
              priority users. New CAC functions will be developed through simulation
              experiments that integrate efficiently with dynamic routing.
    -Task 3 -
              Priority Treatment in Diff-Serv Domains - In Differentiated Services domains,
              traffic is handled in an aggregated, connectionless manner. New traffic
              identification techniques, per domain behaviors, traffic engineering
              guidelines, and service level agreement templates will be developed to
              specifically address the requirements of high priority users in such
              environments.
    -Task 4 - End-to-end Priority Treatment - The ultimate
              research mission of this project is finally     accomplished in Task 4, where
              priority users will be able to have their network activities supported
              end-to-end through new mechanisms to understand and influence performance in
              the different types of networks along a data path.
