Title       : CAREER: Techniques for Separations and Inclusions of Complexity Classes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2001  
File        : a0133693

Award Number: 0133693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dieter van Melkebeek dieter@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,2860,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computational complexity is the study of the inherent difficulty
              of
computational problems. The theory considers various models of
              
computation, such as classical computers, probabilistic computers, 
and
              quantum computers. For each of these, it aims to describe how many 
resources
              are needed to compute the solution to a problem as a function
of the problem
              size.

The most prominent open question in complexity theory is whether
              the
ability to efficiently verify the validity of a candidate solution
              
implies the ability to efficiently compute a valid solution (assuming
one
              exists). The question is usually stated in terms of the 
corresponding classes
              of computational problems: Is NP contained in P? 
Lots of computational
              problems from virtually any discipline fall in
the class NP but are not known
              to be in P. Therefore, a positive answer 
to the P versus NP question would
              have tremendous algorithmic implications. 
It would also imply a way to break
              any public-key cryptographic system, 
as the security of such systems rests on
              the assumption that a particular 
problem in NP does not belong to P.

This
              research project aims to develop techniques for determining the 
relationships
              between complexity classes like P and NP: separations 
and inclusions. On the
              separation side, the investigators focus on 
techniques that do not suffer
              from the known pitfalls of relativization 
and natural proofs. In particular,
              they concentrate on indirect 
diagonalization and exhibiting distinguishing
              properties of complete 
problems. On the inclusion side, the emphasis lies on
              efficient 
classical simulations of time and space bounded probabilistic and
              
quantum computations.

The educational goal consists of the development of
              graduate courses 
on pseudo-randomness and derandomization and on quantum
              computing. At 
the undergraduate level, the investigators plan to further the
              
integration of discrete structures in the core curriculum.
