Title       : CAREER: Genetic Dissection of Mitochondrial Morphogenesis During Drosophila
               Spermatogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0133335

Award Number: 0133335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen G. Hales kahales@davidson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Davidson College
	      Box 5000,
	      Davidson, NC  280355000    704/894-2000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mitochondria are the organelles in which the energy from food is harnessed into
              ATP. In many cell types, mitochondria undergo dynamic shape changes and
              regulated movement, events which are thought to coordinate delivery of ATP to
              subcellular regions with highest energy demand. Mechanisms by which
              mitochondria are moved and shaped have been partially characterized in
              single-celled eukaryotes, but not all of these mechanisms are conserved in more
              complex organisms. The scientific goal of this project is to elucidate
              molecular mechanisms of mitochondrial dynamics during spermatogenesis in
              Drosophila melanogaster. An undergraduate research program will be established,
              and students will identify and characterize genes associated with mitochondrial
              morphogenesis. The educational goal is to incorporate experimental questions
              from the research into a genetics laboratory course taught annually at Davidson
              College.  
Spermatogenesis in Drosophila is an ideal metazoan model system for
              genetic analysis of mitochondrial morphogenesis, since 1) mitochondria normally
              aggregate, fuse, and elongate beside the flagellar axoneme in spermatids, and
              2) genetic defects in mitochondrial morphogenesis can lead to sterility, a
              phenotype for which many genetic screens have been performed. Students will
              take both forward and reverse genetic approaches to characterize gene products
              that are required for mitochondrial movement and shaping in Drosophila
              spermatids. These approaches interweave many classical and molecular genetic
              techniques, such as recombination mapping, transposon mobilization,
              complementation, polymerase chain reaction, DNA subcloning, blotting and
              hybridization, and immunolocalization. Sequence analysis using online tools and
              computer databases will be an essential component of the research. Students
              will benefit from the connections they observe between classroom learning and
              laboratory discoveries, especially as they see the integration of classical and
              molecular genetics. Undergraduates in independent projects and in the genetics
              laboratory course will be particularly motivated by the prospect of
              contributing original findings to the scientific literature. 
Sperm cells
              require a great deal of energy; the structures within each cell that generate
              and provide usable "fuel" are mitochondria. During sperm cell formation,
              mitochondria undergo shape changes essential for sperm cell motility. In this
              project, undergraduates will perform studies of sterile mutant fruit fly
              strains that show mitochondrial defects. Students will identify and
              characterize genes which control the movement and shaping of mitochondria. This
              project will expand knowledge of mechanisms of mitochondrial dynamics. 

