Title       : CAREER: Exploring Representations of Structure: The Impact of Visualization on
               Conceptual Understanding in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0133989

Award Number: 0133989
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $531093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Gonzalez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The broad aim of this project is to conduct research over a five-year period
              that investigates the link between visual representations and conceptual
              understanding of atoms and molecules in simple inorganic and organic molecules.
               Specific goals of the project are to investigate learners' understanding of
              simple inorganic and organic structures at the atomic and molecular levels,
              explore how visual spatial-ability relates to the formation of representations
              of atomic and molecular structure, and develop an Internet-deliverable,
              multimedia package that has instructional and assessment functions in promoting
              conceptual understanding of atomic/molecular structure through visualization. 
              Specific objectives of the study are to survey student understanding of the
              difference between atoms and molecules at the microscopic level in relation to
              their understanding of elements and compounds at the macroscopic level,
              determine the conditions under which learners invoke the particle nature of
              matter when explaining chemical phenomena such as phase changes or chemical
              reactions, describe the nature of students' two-dimensional and
              three-dimensional understanding of atomic and molecular structure in simple
              molecules, determine the nature of the relationship between visual-spatial
              ability and the formation of representations of atomic and  molecular
              structure, investigate the efficacy of visual-spatial training in the
              development of the particle nature of matter using handheld models and
              molecular modeling applications, and examine the effect of visual-spatial
              training using handheld models or molecular modeling software on the ability of
              students to alternate between two- and three-dimensional representations of
              molecules. Research methods include semi-structured interviews, paper-pencil
              and on-line tasks, and video recording of student performance.  Subjects will
              be enrolled in chemistry courses for majors, non-majors, and for future
              elementary teachers.  Results from the research will lead to a better
              understanding of the relationship between cognitive skills and conceptual
              development leading to improved curricular design and pedagogy in the chemistry
              classroom.
