Title       : CAREER: Next Generation Micromachined THz Circuits for Communication, Radio
               Astronomy and Biological Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0133514

Award Number: 0133514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Papapolymerou papapol@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0133514
Papapolymerou

The electromagnetic spectrum between 0.5 THz to 10 THz
              is scientifically rich and possesses a number of advantages: strong molecular
              absorption, wide bandwidth, very small sized circuitry, improved spatial
              resolution, faster switching speed and compactness. Applications in this
              frequency range include radio astronomy and atmospheric observations, detection
              of DNA mutations, detection of viral/chemical agents, high-resolution imaging,
              ultra-wideband and covert satellite communications, electronic countermeasures,
              signature acquisition radars and electronic/optical links in high-density
              integrated circuits. However, this region of the spectrum is relatively
              technologically poor due mainly to the unavailability of low loss and low cost
              transmission lines and other circuits such as antennas, filters and local
              oscillator sources. Traditionally, the vast majority of THz components utilize
              waveguide structures. Unfortunately, at frequencies above 1 THz waveguides
              become so small that fabrication utilizing conventional machining and
              electroforming techniques becomes extremely difficult, expensive and/or
              impossible. As a result, the PI is currently technologically limited from the
              production of low cost, low loss and reliable THz components above 1 THz that
              can be integrated within semiconductor-based circuits.

In this project, the
              PI proposes to further advance the state-of-the-art by designing and studying
              (both theoretically and experimentally) novel low loss, low cost and reliable
              Silicon micromachined THz circuits for communication, radio astronomy and
              biological/chemical applications above 1 THz. This will be achieved by
              utilizing a unique laser micromachining technique capable of producing
              three-dimensional structures of any shape with an accuracy of 1-3 um, as well
              as state-of-the art active devices (e.g. monolithic membrane diodes).  The
              investigation will include the development and characterization of the
              following structures: (1) micromachined conical and corrugated horns, as well
              as arrays of those radiating elements at 600 GHz, 1.2 THz, 2.4 THz and 4.8 THz;
              (2) micromachined cavity based band-pass and band-stop filters with coupling
              irises or slots at 600 GHz, 1.2 THz, 2.4 THz and 4.8 THz; (3) micromachined
              balanced doublers at 1.2 THz and 2.4 THz with membrane diodes and corrugated
              horns at the input/output; (4) the first ever doubler at 4.8 THz and (5)
              micromachined doublers at 1.2 THz coherently combined with a magic-Tee for
              increased output power. All of the above structures will be implemented in a
              "split-block" configuration where the circuit is split along a center/symmetry
              line into two components that are fabricated and then bonded together to form
              the entire structure. Bonding and self-alignment issues and their implications
              on circuit performance will be explored extensively in order to produce
              guidelines for micromachined THz circuits.

Along with the proposed research
              program, the PI is firmly committed to pursuing several related educational
              goals. These will include: (1) the revitalization of the existing microwave
              engineering curriculum at Georgia Tech; (2) the active involvement of senior
              undergraduate students in the proposed research, as well as in the creation of
              a website database for published papers on micromachined microwave and THz
              circuits; (3) community outreach and mentoring activities to involve students
              traditionally underrepresented in engineering and to attract high-school
              students into engineering; (4) summer internship with the major microwave/THz
              companies in the country and with national labs and (5) the organization of
              seminars with related topics, presented by invited speakers from academia and
              industry. The PI believes that the above educational activities will benefit
              his research efforts in microwave/THz circuits; expose students to a new world
              of circuits, interdisciplinary problems and opportunities; provide a strong
              linkage between them and the industrial/research community; and attract more
              underrepresented groups into engineering.

