Title       : CAREER: Genetical Theory of Population Subdivision and Divergence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a0133760

Award Number: 0133760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Wakeley jwakeley@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Basic and Applied Aspects of the Work (Wakeley)
Career: Genetical Theory of
              Population Subdivision and Divergence

This work will enhance our ability to
              use DNA or other genetic 
data to make inferences about population structure
              and population 
history.  It will allow us, for instance, to answer questions
              
like "How much migration has occurred between these populations?" 
or "When
              did these populations diverge from each other?"  In order 
to do this, a body
              of mathematical models that are used to describe 
patterns of genetic
              variation within and between populations will 
be extended.  Thus, a secondary
              impact of the project will be an
advance in the fields applied mathematics and
              probability theory.  
Further, two books and an interactive web site will be
              produced.  
The aim of these is to promote the teaching of the branch of
              
population genetics used by most workers but rarely taught, called
              
coalescent theory.  

The theoretical aspects of the work will focus on the
              analysis 
of population models in which different events happen at vastly
              
different rates.  For example, if migration rates are high, then 
migration
              events will happen much more often than mutation events 
which tend to be very
              rare.  When such differences in time scale 
occur, the analyses are simpler
              and the mathematical models have 
properties that make them interesting in
              their own right.  These 
simplifications will be used to produce a battery of
              methods and 
tests which empirical population geneticists can employ to study
              
the history of natural populations.  The books will bring the 
teaching of
              population genetics up to date with current research 
methods and ideas. 
              Specifically, they will use and advocate the 
modern genealogical, or
              coalescent, approach to the subject.  The 
coalescent approach considers the
              genealogical history of a sample 
of genetic data, and thus can be better
              suited to empirical work 
than classical population genetic approaches which
              model entire 
populations.  

