Title       : CAREER: Active System Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0133092

Award Number: 0133092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488188             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Arbaugh waa@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   A fundamental fact in computer and network security is that there never can
              be a one hundred percent assurance that a computer system is trusted. The term
              trusted is used heavily in Computer Security.  Unfortunately, the term has
              several definitions depending on who uses it and how the term is used.
              Throughout this proposal, a definition which is a slight modifications of Peter
              Neumann's, is used. Based on this definition,  an object is defined as trusted
              when the object always operates as expected according to design and policy.  A
              stronger trust statement is when an object is trustworthy. A trustworthy object
              is one that has been shown in some convincing manner, e.g. a formal code-review
              or formal mathematical analysis, to operate as expected.
     Ken Thompson
              described very clearly one of the many issues involved in determining if a
              system is trusted in his Turing Award speech in 1984.  For over twenty-five
              years, the security community has focused on technology, and yet information
              systems remain as vulnerable as ever (perhaps more so). However, a significant
              improvements in security lie in another area-the secure management of
              technologies and the systems that implement them. In this proposal, the PI
              demonstrates the need for intensive research on the secure management of
              distributed heterogeneous networks and systems, and describes a novel research
              plan using active system management to address this area.
     The tremendous
              growth of the use of information technology has exacerbated the problem of
              effectively managing and securing the resultant information infrastructure.
              This coupled with the fact that the current state of the art in security is
              essentially "penetrate and patch" has created a situation where information
              technology is more vulnerable than ever. The vulnerability of information
              technology is demonstrated by the large number of news stories relating to
              wide-spread computer intrusions and network scanning that are published each
              week. The big question is "how do we improve the situation?"
     While
              studies, anecdotal evidence, and press reports have demonstrated the increasing
              vulnerability of information technology, information security research is
              currently primarily focused on the underlying security technology rather than
              the secure management of the information technology. Yet, the tremendous growth
              in the use of information technology and its rate of change creates a
              configuration and system management nightmare that amplifies existing security
              problems. Unfortunately, current approaches for solving this complex problem
              are ad hoc, do not scale, and have not focused on security.
     In this
              research, the PI proposes a broad examination of distributed heterogeneous
              configuration and security management of network elements and hosts from both a
              theoretical and a systems approach. The proposed  research provides the
              formalism, mechanisms, and protocols so that enterprises can implement and
              utilize a very small, or quick, management loop, i.e. the tools to allow the
              defenders to react faster than the attackers.  Doing so eliminates one of the
              principle advantages of attackers, and dramatically increases the work factor
              of successful attacks- providing one of the first real improvements in computer
              and network security.

