Title       : CAREER: Associative Overlay Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0133811

Award Number: 0133811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497869             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ion Stoica istoica@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Indirection plays a fundamental role in today's Internet. Existing
              solutions to provide mobility, anycast and multicast at the IP layer, and to
              provide web caching and server load balancing at the application layer, are
              based on indirection. In particular, these solutions assume a physical or
              logical indirection point that redirects the traffic to the destination(s). For
              instance, mobile IP assumes a home agent that hides the end-host mobility,
              while IP multicast assumes a logical indirection point (address) that hides the
              number of receivers and their locations. Unfortunately, the fact that IP does
              not provide efficient support for indirection makes it difficult and complex to
              deploy these solutions.
     The proposed research addresses this problem by
              developing a novel network architecture around the in-direction principle. In
              particular, the researcher proposes to replace the point-to-point communication
              abstraction used in today's networks with a rendezvous-based communication
              abstraction: instead of explicitly sending a packet to a destination, each
              packet is associated with an identifier, which is then used by the receiver to
              get the packet. This level of indirection decouples the sender and the receiver
              behaviors. The fact that the receiver is moving or that there are multiple
              receivers getting the same packet is transparent to the sender. Similarly, the
              fact that the sender is moving or that there are multiple senders sending
              packets with the same identifier is transparent to the receiver. This
              decoupling allows rendezvous-based networks to provide natural support for
              mobility, anycast and multicast. To demonstrate the feasibility of this
              approach, the researcher proposes to build and deploy an overlay network,
              called Associative Overlay Network (AON), that implements the rendezvous-based
              communication abstraction.
     The main goal of this research is twofold.
              First, the researcher  aims to demonstrate the power and the flexibility of AON
              by showing that it can support the basic communication abstractions (e.g.,
              multicast, anycast), and that it can greatly simplify the deployment of
              distributed applications such as service composition and reliable multicast.
              Second, the researcher plans to demonstrate that AON allows a scalable and
              efficient implementation, while offering performance similar to the overlay
              network systems designed around the traditional point-to-point communication
              abstraction. The researcher's solution leverages the previous work on the Chord
              lookup system [40], which is used as a building block to implement AON. This
              proposal discusses several possible approaches to achieve the goals of
              scalability, efficiency, and robustness, and formulates the main open problems.
              Among these problems are providing load balancing accross AON nodes, supporting
              large scale multicast groups, and protecting against distributed denial of
              service attacks.
     The proposed research will make significant
              contributions to network architectures. The rendezvous-based communication is a
              fundamental departure from the point-to-point communication abstraction
              implemented by today's Internet. The researcher hopes that this change will
              trigger new and exciting research in computer networks similar to the way that
              tuple space abstraction did in distributed systems. We plan to deploy AON
              locally on the Millenium testbed and on the Internet-2 testbed, making it
              possible for other research groups to experiment with AON and implement
              applications on top of it.
