Title       : CAREER: Multi-antenna Communications: Information Theory, Codes and Signal
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0133818

Award Number: 0133818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392838             (Estimated)
Investigator: Babak Hassibi hassibi@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              It is now widely recognized that multiple antennas will figure prominently
in
              future wireless communications systems, since they can significantly
boost the
              channel capacity, as well as lower the probability of error, of a
wireless
              communications link. However, before the above promise can be
realized in a
              practical communications system, there are several key
research challenges
              that must be addressed. This research studies several of
the
              information-theoretic, coding-theoretic, and signal processing
challenges
              encountered, as well as the impact of integrating their solutions
into a
              multi-user wireless network. A common thread encountered throughout
is that
              the tools developed, as well as the results obtained, have
implications well
              beyond multi-antenna communications--both in terms of the
introduction of new
              mathematical methods, as well as in terms of their
applicability to more
              general communication problems.

The first research challenge addressed is
              information-theoretic: the actual
channel capacity of a multi-antenna wireless
              link is known only under
certain idealized conditions. For most realistic
              conditions, the channel
capacity is unknown and it is not clear how it depends
              on the speed of the
fading, the number of antennas, and the SNR. Nor is it
              clear what the
optimal transmission strategies should be and what the
              performance of
training-based schemes are. This research will focus on these
              problems for
continuously- and block-fading channels, where the analysis
              appears to be
tractable and where the theory of random matrices plays a major
              role. The
second challenge is that of designing space-time codes that deliver
              on the
high data rates promised by theory, have good error performance, and
              that
lend themselves to efficient encoding and decoding. Compared to
              conventional
codes, the added spatial dimension adds a whole new twist to the
              code design
problem, and a variety of information-theoretic, linear-algebraic,
              and
group-theoretic ideas play a prominent role. The signal processing
              research
challenge is to devise algorithms that are efficient, so that all the
              processing can be done
in real time. Recent work by the researcher has
              analytically demonstrated
that, for a wide range of rates and SNRs,
              polynomial-time maximum-likelihood
decoding of several classes of space-time
              codes is possible. This research
will fully pursue the implications of this
              result, both in terms of the
design of new algorithms and codes, as well as in
              terms of understanding the
tradeoffs between maximum-likelihood performance
              and computational
complexity.

