Title       : CAREER: Error Correction and Concealment for Wireless Video: An Integrated and
               Adaptive Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a0133221

Award Number: 0133221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yucel Altunbasak yucel@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0133221
Altunbasak, Yucel
GA Tech Res Corp

As wireless networks become more
              pervasive, there is a great need for wireless multimedia with quality and
              reliability levels that are characteristic of wired networks. It is clear that
              wireless communications will include image, video and data applications. 
              Furthermore, spectral limitations dictate that transmission
resources be used
              efficiently. To this end, image, video and other mixed media encoding
              algorithms need to be designed to overcome the types of channel errors that are
              likely to occur. Noting the wireless channel characteristics and the
              requirements of real-time video applications, the investigator offers
              solutions
that are novel in two aspects. First, the investigated methods are
              adaptive with respect to variations in bandwidth and channel error statistics.
              This flexibility should prove to be critical in heterogeneous wireless
              environments. Second, the error correction and concealment methods are not only
              technology advances by
themselves, but they also function together in
              innovative ways.

More specifically, the contributions of this research
              include: (1) a coordinated multiple description coding and error concealment
              procedure where the smoothness of the video signal helps to compensate for the
              loss of descriptions, (2) a multiple description coder that adapts to
              variations in data rate and packet loss statistics, (3) a new multi-frame
              boundary matching algorithm that utilizes the boundary smoothness property not
              only
in the decoded frame but also in the successive frames, thereby
              minimizing the error propagation, (4) a new multi-frame blocking artifact
              reduction algorithm that uses the spatial correlations that exist between the
              successive frames to define constraint sets at multiple frames and provides a
              projections onto convex
sets based solution, (5) a transport protocol that is
              specifically designed for real-time multimedia communications, and (6) a
              testbed to integrate all the aforementioned methods into a system-level
              wireless video streaming solution. On the educational front, the investigator
              plans to develop a comprehensive program in multimedia signal processing and
              communications. The investigator will make every attempt to meet
the original
              scope and level of effort of the project.  
