Title       : Craniofacial Muscle Fiber Specializations: A Comparative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0133613

Award Number: 0133613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $451000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Reiser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Craniofacial muscles collectively serve an extremely diverse set of functions.
              This set of muscles includes extraocular muscles which are responsible for
              highly precise eye movements during visual tracking of a moving object,
              laryngeal muscles that serve vocalizations and airway protection, and
              mandibular muscles that drive mastication. These muscles are highly complex
              with respect to structure, biochemical properties and physiological properties
              and, as such, are markedly different from limb muscles that serve locomotion.
              The overall goal of this project is to acquire a more comprehensive
              understanding of the molecular and cellular properties of craniofacial muscles
              that allow these muscles to serve such a vast array of functions and to do so
              with an extraordinary level of precision. Myosin is a large protein, being
              composed of two heavy chain and four light chain subunits, and is a key
              regulator of contractile properties of muscles. Whole craniofacial muscles
              which express "superfast" and "extraocular/laryngeal" myosin isoforms are well
              recognized as having distinct contractile properties. However, the specific
              functional significance of superfast myosin and of extraocular/laryngeal myosin
              remains unknown, in contrast to a large body of literature describing the roles
              of limb muscle myosins in the regulation of physiologic properties. The project
              aims are designed to test whether mammalian skeletal muscle fibers that are
              identified as expressing either "superfast" myosin, found in carnivore
              jaw-closing muscles, or "extraocular/laryngeal" myosin, expressed in
              extraocular and intrinsic laryngeal muscles, have distinct contractile
              properties. The contractile properties to be measured in single muscle fibers
              include the maximal velocity of shortening, the rate of tension redevelopment
              following a rapid slackening and re-stretch, tension-generating ability,
              stiffness and myofibrillar ATPase activity. The myosin heavy chain and light
              chain isoform composition of each fiber will subsequently be determined using
              an ultrasensitive gel electrophoresis protocol. The results will be utilized to
              calculate the rate constants for crossbridge attachment and detachment in
              fibers that are identified on the basis of their myosin isoform composition.
              The primary objective is to test whether crossbridge kinetics differ
              significantly between superfast, extraocular/laryngeal and limb muscle myosins.
              The results are expected to provide a mechanistic understanding of differences
              in crossbridge properties in fibers that express different myosin isoforms
              through the determination of fundamental crossbridge rate constants. This
              project will be based, in part, on a comparative approach. Single muscle fibers
              from jaw-closing muscles of carninvores (dogs, cats) will be compared to those
              from an omnivore (pig) that is known to not express superfast myosin.
              Differences in contractile properties between these two sources of muscle
              fibers will illustrate the unique properties imparted by superfast myosin to
              accommodate the feeding behavior of carnivores. This project will result in a
              more comprehensive understanding of a highly specialized group of muscles that
              has thus far received relatively little attention. In particular, the results
              are expected to provide valuable cellular and molecular insights into the
              function of muscles that serve the aggressive feeding style characteristic of
              carnivores and underlie the extremely precise motor functions associated with
              eye movements, vocalization and airway protection. Understanding the cellular
              and molecular bases of contraction in these highly specialized muscles will
              greatly expand our understanding of the complexity of muscle fibers among
              vertebrates and broaden the known repertoire of their contractile properties.
