Title       : Identification and Characterization of Cell Survival Genes from Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0133078

Award Number: 0133078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin B. Dickman mdickman@unlnotes.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An emerging question in plant biology is whether plants display analogous
              elements of mammalian-programmed cell death (apoptosis) during development and
              pathogen attack.  With respect to plant-pathogen interactions, cell death
              occurs in both susceptible disease and resistant host responses.  For example,
              in resistant reactions, specific recognition responses in plants trigger
              formation of the "hypersensitive response" (HR) and activation of host defense
              mechanisms.  HR triggers a cell death pathway resulting in restriction of
              pathogen growth and disease development.  Historically HR has been considered a
              product of necrosis, but several studies have suggested that cell death during
              HR involves activation of a plant-encoded program for cell suicide that may
              resemble apoptosis.  Susceptible interactions also result in host cell death
              although it is unclear to what degree (if any) the host participates in this
              response.  Recent data obtained in my laboratory strongly suggest that during
              disease development in pathogen infected susceptible tobacco plants, apoptosis
              is occurring.  Hallmark characteristics of apoptosis, including discrete DNA
              fragmentation (e.g., DNA ladders) and nuclear condensation have been observed. 
              These apoptotic responses do not occur in the transgenic, disease resistant
              tobacco.  Based on these data, as well as reports from other laboratories, it
              appears that elements of animal cell suicide are functionally conserved in
              plants.  The central hypothesis of this research is that plants share certain
              features of apoptosis with animals.  The goal of this project are: (I) to
              identify and characterize plant genes which functionally resemble those found
              in animal apoptosis pathways and evaluate these genes in resolution, the cell
              death process in plants.  An understanding of how plants regulate cellular
              suicide will provide information regarding plant response to environmental
              stress and have the potential to generate effective disease resistant plants.
