Title       : Transcriptional Repression by Histone Amino Termini in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0133399

Award Number: 0133399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall H. Morse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term goals of this project are to understand the extent to which the
              histone amino termini, especially that of histone H3, contribute to
              transcriptional repression in vivo, and to determine the mechanisms by which
              they do so.  Eukaryotic DNA is packaged into chromatin, and the fundamental
              unit of chromatin, the nucleosome, consists of about 146 base pairs of DNA
              wrapped around a core of histone proteins.  Somewhat surprisingly, modification
              of the unstructured amino termini of the histones, which are not an essential
              structural component of the nucleosome, has turned out to be a widely used
              means of gene regulation.  Numerous studies have implicated transcriptional
              regulation via modifications of the histone amino termini in diverse cellular
              processes, including cell cycle control, hormone response, and development.  In
              spite of this progress, little is known of the mechanisms by which the histone
              amino termini influence transcriptional regulation.  The principal investigator
              has discovered two examples in which the histone H3 amino terminus is critical
              for transcriptional repression in yeast.  In the first example, the H3 amino
              terminus prevents activation by the CHA4 activator at the CHA1 promoter in the
              absence of inducer.  In the second example, the INO1 gene is strongly
              derepressed in the absence of the H3 amino terminus, although little is known
              about the mechanism at present.  The principal investigator has also found,
              using micorarray technology, that the H3 amino terminus exerts a broad,
              genome-wide repressive effect on gene expression.  These findings serve as a
              basis to determine specific mechanisms for repression by the H3 amino terminus.
               In addition, experiments will be done to examine the contribution of the amino
              termini of histones H3 and H4 as targets in repression mediated by the histone
              deacetylase RPD3.

DNA is the master controller and information reservoir for
              all of life.  In non-bacterial cells, DNA is bound to histone proteins in
              chromatin.  These proteins help the DNA fit inside the cell and participate in
              regulation of many processes that use DNA, including the transcription of DNA
              into RNA-the "readout" of the information in DNA.  Studies by the principal
              investigator, using baker's yeast, are aimed at understanding how specific
              parts of the histone proteins prevent particular genes from being transcribed
              when they are not supposed to be.  Because the basic mechanisms of
              transcription and components of chromatin are very similar in yeast and higher
              organisms, these findings will shed new light on transcriptional regulation in
              all non-bacterial organisms.
