Title       : CAREER: Genetic and Proteomic Analyses of MAP Kinase Pathways in Plant Disease
               Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0133220

Award Number: 0133220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shuqun Zhang zhangsh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1136,1145,1187,9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER program is designed to integrate research into teaching and to
              promote the incorporation of biochemical/proteomic methods into
              molecular/genetic research among students and post-docs.  Increasing evidence
              from biochemical and molecular studies implicated SIPK and WIPK, two tobacco
              mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) in plant disease resistance
              signaling.  However, genetic evidence is lacking.  Activation of endogenous
              SIPK and WIPK by expressing the active mutant of their upstream kinase,
              NtMEK2DD leads to the induction of defense genes and hypersensitive response
              (HR)-like cell death.  The identification of the homologous pathway in
              Arabidopsis, AtMEK4/AtMEK5-AtMPK6/AtMPK3 permitted genetic screens for
              modifiers and downstream components of this MAPK pathway, which is one of the
              major goals of this project.  Activation tagging, T-DNA, and EMS mutant
              populations have been generated in steroid-inducible transgenic Arabidopsis. 
              Mutants that lose cell death phenotype after steroid treatment,
              MAPK-activation-no-death (mand) will be isolated from T1, T2, or M2 population.
              Genes responsible for the phenotypic alterations will be cloned, which could
              be: 1) AtMPK6 and AtMPK3 themselves; 2) the substrate(s) of AtMPK6 and/or
              AtMPK3; 3) extragenic suppressors and negative regulators of AtMPK6/AtMPK3
              pathway such as MAPK phosphatases and scaffold proteins; and 4) other
              components involved in the regulation and execution of HR cell death.  In
              addition, proteomic approaches will be employed to identify the in vivo
              substrates of these two MAPKs.  The other major goal of this project is to
              integrate research into classroom teaching and to promote the use of
              multi-dimensional approach to study a physiological/morphological phenotype,
              which is critical for the advance of post-genome biology.  Undergraduate
              students, especially those from under represented groups will be actively
              recruited by participating in institutional programs that reach out to
              minorities. The concept and techniques of proteomics will be incorporated into
              the Advanced Biochemistry Laboratory course during the tenure of this program.
              In an era of significant technological advances, it is important for classroom
              teaching to absorb these advances and to prepare students with the most updated
              information.  The identification of MAPK substrates and the
              regulators/executioners of HR would be a significant contribution to the study
              of plant programmed cell death.  One practical extension of this work is that
              the identification of important regulatory components in plant defense
              signaling pathway may allow the generation of crops with enhanced disease
              resistance, which is important for sustaining agricultural production and
              improving our environment.
