Title       : CAREER: Roles of hippocampal/neostriatal systems in multiple forms of memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0133734

Award Number: 0133734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560097             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Colombo pcolomb@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,1192,9150,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT Proposal # : IBN-0133734		PI Name: Paul Colombo

This career
              development plan integrates teaching, mentoring, and research goals within the
              context of Tulane University's mission to promote neuroscience research and
              education.  The educational goals include development of lecture and laboratory
              curricula for the new undergraduate neuroscience major, and recruitment of
              undergraduate students from groups traditionally underrepresented in the
              neurosciences to participate in research training internships during the summer
              months. The broad research goal of this project is to systematically define
              relationships between two brain regions known to support different types of
              memory among mammalian species: the neostriatum and the hippocampal formation. 
              Although the roles of these two systems have been dissociated experimentally,
              the extent to which they function independently, cooperatively, competitively,
              or in temporal sequence is not known currently.  Moreover, the time courses and
              cellular mechanisms of memory formation supported by these two systems are not
              well understood.  Memory formation is accompanied by brain region-specific
              changes among neurons involved in information processing.  Hypotheses that
              these changes are memory- and brain region-specific will be tested: 
              neostriatal activation supports response, nonspatial, and procedural memory,
              whereas hippocampal activation supports place, spatial, and declarative memory.
               The current proposal employs two primary research strategies.  The first
              strategy is to use behavioral manipulations to induce learning-related changes
              in cellular mechanisms of memory formation and to quantify those changes within
              the neostriatum and hippocampal formation. The second research strategy is to
              test the effects of highly selective protein inhibition on acquisition and
              retention of neostriatal- and hippocampal-dependent memory.  By combining these
              research strategies,  relationships between the hippocampal formation and
              neostriatum will be elucidated during multiple types of memory formation at the
              behavioral, brain systems, and neuronal levels of analyses.

In addition to
              the research goals of this proposal, two additional goals both involve
              integration of research, teaching, and mentoring.  The first of these goals is
              to increase opportunities for neuroscience education and research experiences
              for students from groups traditionally underrepresented in the neurosciences by
              mentoring students in the laboratory during the summer, and by outreach visits
              to colleges in the area.    The second goal is to continue to develop the
              undergraduate major in Neuroscience at Tulane University.




