Title       : CAREER: Algorithms for Efficient Bandwidth Utilization in the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0133664

Award Number: 0133664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Micah A. Adler micah@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There is a growing scientific community working to provide solid
theoretical
              and algorithmic foundations for the study of communication
networks.  This
              project furthers this goal through a combination of
research and education. 
              In particular, it addresses theoretical and
algorithmic issues that arise in a
              central area of networking: the
efficient utilization of communication
              bandwidth.  The research
component of this project addresses several different
              approaches for
the succinct representation of information in communication
              networks.
This includes the investigation of (a) the efficient use
              of
communication bits to provide accountability in the Internet (which is
a
              means of combating cyber-terrorism), (b) new approaches to
compression that
              arise in new communication technologies, and (c)
minimizing the amount of
              control information required to make
communication robust with respect to
              network faults.  The integrated
educational objectives of this project include
              both graduate student
collaboration and curriculum development.  The former
              consists of
student involvement with the research component of the project,
              as
well as organization of summer schools and workshops.  The later
includes
              the incorporation of networking topics into a graduate level
algorithms
              course, as well as the development of a new advanced
graduate course
              addressing the algorithmic and theoretical challenges
and achievements in the
              area of networking.

For the research question of providing accountability in
              the Internet,
this project studies the IP Traceback problem: given a stream
              of
packets arriving at a node of the Internet, determine the source of
those
              packets.  This is an important tool for dealing with denial of
service
              attacks, since accountability discourages such attacks and
provides an
              automated mechanism for halting attacks in progress.  This
project studies
              probabilistic packet marking schemes for this problem,
with the goal of
              determining the optimal tradeoffs between the number
of marking bits used per
              packet, the number of packets required to
reconstruct the source information,
              and the number of simultaneous
sources of attack that can be dealt with.  A
              number of new
technologies also present us with entirely new approaches
              to
compression.  The resulting compression problems are fundamental,
              but
since the motivating technologies have a short history, these
              problems
have not been considered previously.  In this project, we
              consider
compression problems that arise from three such
              technologies:
asymmetric communication channels, networks that are able to
              multicast
information efficiently, and the compression of the World Wide
              Web.
Finally, we also consider reducing bandwidth utilization by
              minimizing
the amount of control information required to make
              communication
robust against faults.
