Title       : CAREER: Investigating Epithelial Tube-Size Control Mechanisms Using the
               Drosophila Tracheal System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0133411

Award Number: 0133411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $632613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Beitel beitel@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	The proposal outlines an integrated plan of teaching and research that will
              provide a solid foundation for the awardee's future contributions to education
              and science.  The first undergraduate educational aims are to develop the
              awardee's teaching skills and to improve the current undergraduate cell biology
              course using the resources of Northwestern University's Searle Center for
              Teaching Excellence.  The second undergraduate educational aim is to provide
              undergraduate research opportunities by having some of the proposed research
              aims performed by summer undergraduate researchers.  The graduate education
              aims include organizing a new developmental genetics course and a new
              presentation series.
	The proposed research focuses on understanding the
              mechanisms underlying morphogenesis of epithelial and endothelial tubes. 
              Despite the importance of correct tube diameter and length to the function of
              organs such as the vascular system, lung and kidney, there is little
              understanding of the complex cytoskeletal and extracellular matrix changes,
              dynamic rearrangement of cell-cell junctions, or coordinated cell shape changes
              that create tubes of particular sizes.  To identify and study the functions of
              genes required for tube-size control, the proposed research will use
              molecular/genetic approaches to investigate morphogenesis of the Drosophila
              tracheal system, a ramifying network of epithelial tubes that functions as a
              combined pulmonary/vascular system.  Previously, mutations in a group of eight
              genes that specifically control tracheal tube size have been identified.  It
              has now been determined that one of these genes encodes a b-subunit of a Na+ K+
              ATPase transporter and that mutations in the Na+ K+ ATPase a-subunit
              a-ATPase(93A) cause similar tracheal tube-size defects.  Preliminary data
              suggests that the Na+ K+ ATPase is required to organize tracheal cell
              junctions, a novel role for a Na+ K+ ATPase.  To better understand the
              mechanisms of epithelial tube-size control and the roles of the Na+ K+ ATPase,
              the genetic and cell biological functions of a-ATPase(93A) during tracheal tube
              morphogenesis will be investigated.  In addition, the tracheal tube-size
              control gene varicose that genetic epistasis experiments suggest acts in
              parallel to the Na+ K+ ATPase will be cloned and characterized.  Together, the
              analyses of a-ATPase(93A)and varicose will improve the understanding of the
              basic cell biological and molecular mechanisms of epithelial and endothelial
              tube-size control.

