Title       : Analysis of Microbial Communities Using a DNA Array Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0133265

Award Number: 0133265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $584907             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Borneman james.borneman@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tao Jiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Crowley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marek Chrobak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. James Press  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microorganisms are crucial components of ecosystems and human civilization. They
              play prominent roles in processes such as the formation and maintenance of
              soil, and the detoxification of environmental pollutants. Microorganisms also
              possess an immeasurable store of useful items ranging from enzymes for food
              processing to pharmaceuticals. Until recently, our understanding of this group
              of organisms has been limited by the small percentage of microorganisms that
              can be identified through traditional methods. Such methods involve growing the
              organisms in the laboratory. In the 1980s, new approaches were developed that
              allow organisms to be identified without the need to grow them in the lab. Such
              approaches identify microorganisms through the analysis of specific genes
              (ribosomal RNA genes). This development was a major breakthrough, which has led
              to the identification of thousands of novel organisms. Yet, despite this
              advance, current strategies to analyze these genes are either cost prohibitive
              or unable to generate more than superficial depictions of the microorganisms
              inhabiting most environments. 

This proposal presents three objectives that
              address this technological deficit. First, the development of an experimental
              approach that allows thorough analysis of the microorganisms inhabiting any
              environment is planned. This will be accomplished through the use of new
              array-based technologies. Second, a public database that allows investigators
              to utilize the tools that will be created from this project will be developed.
              And finally, the project provides training for undergraduate, graduate and
              postgraduate students in microbial community analysis and bioinformatics.
              Overall, this proposal addresses the goals of the NSF Biological Databases and
              Informatics program by developing a public database that will facilitate
              thorough analysis of microbial communities and by disseminating the gained
              knowledge through interactive tutorials and a workshop. This work will
              fundamentally transform investigations into microbial community composition by
              making thorough examinations possible for the first time. This will lead to a
              greater understanding of how microorganisms function, which, in turn, will lead
              to more effective strategies to manage agriculture, maintain a clean
              environment, and advance biotechnology. The training component of this project
              will foster collaborations between computer scientists, statisticians, and
              biologists, which will produce the multidisciplinary researchers needed for
              this new era. 

