Title       : CAREER: Development of Novel Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Oligomer Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0133164

Award Number: 0133164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $580000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart J. Rowan sjr4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the research component of this work is the preparation of a
              number of C2-symmetric aromatic heterocycles and porphyrins and the assembly of
              these components into oligocatenanes (molecular chains) and other types of
              interwoven oligomers.  The monomers used for chain assembly are predominantly
              bis-(pyridyl)pyridines, bis-(benzimidazolyl)pyridines and
              bis-(benzimidazolyl)propane units.  These ligands contain benzyl halide or
              benzaldehyde functional groups which allow for future chain growth.  After the
              ligands are synthesized, two are complexed to Zn(II) or Cu(I) to provide a
              "kink" in the molecular chain and then chain growth is initiated off the
              functional groups in the ligands.  A variety of catenates and hetero-metallic
              oligocatenates will be prepared using this approach.  Column oligomers and two
              dimensional grids and networks will also be prepared using a similar strategy
              but starting with formyl functionalized porphyrin monomers.  There are two
              major educational components to this project.  In educational outreach, this
              group is working with the Cleveland Museum of Natural History and the Great
              Lakes Science Center to establish Polymer Science Days and Polymer Funhouse
              exhibits.  An additional educational component of this work is the development
              of two polymer chemistry lecture courses at CWRU, one aimed primarily at
              undergraduate chemistry, engineering and materials science majors and a second
              aimed primarily at graduate students.

   With this CAREER award, the Organic
              and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
              goals of Dr. Stuart J. Rowan of the Department of Chemistry at Case Western
              Reserve University.  Dr. Rowan will explore the synthesis of heterocyclic
              monomers which can be assembled into molecular chains and interwoven grids and
              networks.  Such materials may have practical applications in the development of
              high temperature polymers, sensors, and separation membranes as well as
              exhibiting conducting and light harvesting properties which may prove useful in
              display devices.  Students trained as a result of working on this project will
              gain experience in materials research as well as supramolecular organic and
              inorganic chemistry, hence they will have skills needed by both the specialty
              chemicals and the computer/materials industries.   In educational outreach,
              this group is working with the Cleveland Museum of Natural History and the
              Great Lakes Science Center to establish Polymer Science Days and Polymer
              Funhouse exhibits.  An additional educational component of this work is the
              development of two polymer chemistry lecture courses at CWRU, one aimed
              primarily at undergraduate chemistry, engineering and materials science majors
              and a second aimed primarily at graduate students.
