Title       : Computational Simulation of Complex Turbulent Diffusion Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0133925

Award Number: 0133925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Kosaly kosaly@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Kramlich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Although the principles and fundamental equations that describe turbulent
              combustion are known, their direct numerical solution (DNS) remains impossible
              for practical problems.  The usual approximations are to either time average or
              to spatially filter the fundamental equations.  The first approach involves
              full time averaging (Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes equations, or RANS), while
              the second filters only for the smaller scales, allowing the larger scales to
              be resolved in space and time (Large Eddy Simulation, or LES).  In either case,
              the semi-empirical modeling assumptions associated with the averaging process
              are critical, and have been the focus of much debate.  These approaches have
              had substantial successes in the modeling of many flames, principally those
              dominated by boundary-layer-like flows such as free jets and shear layers, and
              combustion that is uninterrupted by local extinction.  Most practical flames
              are, however, stabilized by recirculation or swirl, and exhibit extinction
              events, e.g., standoff from the burner.  These phenomena are not well captured
              by the present models.  To improve the modeling one must consider issues such
              as strongly curved streamlines, buoyancy, strongly varying density, dilatation
              due to heat release and its influence on the overall dynamics of the flow, and
              local extinction and reignition of the flame chemistry in regions of high shear
              rates.  In this study, the bluff-body laboratory flames of the University of
              Sydney are used as a prototype for the study of the modeling of these
              phenomena.  A bluff body at the base establishes a recirculation zone that
              stabilizes the flame.  This experimental work has covered a wide range of
              conditions between fast chemistry and close-to-blowout behavior.  These
              experiments therefore exhibit many of the challenging phenomena occurring in
              more complex, practical flames.  They are, however, of a simple axisymmetric
              configuration and have been experimentally well characterized.  Thus, these
              flames are excellent targets for fundamental investigations into the modeling
              of complex flame behavior.  The following research activities are proposed: 
              (a) DNS and theoretical work towards better understanding of (1) the mechanisms
              of extinction/reignition in recirculation-stabilized jet flames, and (2) the
              physics and stability of flames dominated by large density differences,
              dilatation, curved streamlines, and buoyancy;  (b) investigation/evaluation of
              LES subgrid-scale models that incorporate the new information gained on
              extinction/ reignition and on fluid-mechanics issues specific to recirculating
              flames; and (c) comparison of LES computations with laboratory data on
              bluff-body stabilized jet flames to test the performance of the subgrid-scale
              models developed in this project.


