Title       : CAREER: A Two-Tier Approach for the Analysis and Evolution of High-Integrity
               Software Product Lines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a0133956

Award Number: 0133956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295228             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald C. Gannod gannod@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: CCR-0133956

CAREER: A Two-Tier Approach for the Analysis and
              Evolution of High-Integrity 
Software Product Lines

PI: Gerald C.
              Gannod

The objective of the research component of this project is to develop
              software 
architecture analysis and software reverse engineering techniques
              that support 
the evolution of existing software into software product lines
              with an emphasis 
on high-integrity systems.  To this end, this research will
              first involve the 
development of an approach for analyzing software from both
              the architecture and 
component views in order to support assessment along
              different quality attribute 
dimensions.  The approach will consist of models
              for static and dynamic analysis 
as well as simulation to determine level of
              compliance with quality attribute 
constraints.  Second, this research will
              involve the development of a methodology 
for modifying and evolving software
              at both the architecture and component levels 
in order to ensure compliance
              with different quality attribute constraints and 
goals.  For the software
              architecture community, this research will address a 
need for analysis
              approaches that allow software architects to assess the extent 
to which a
              software architecture meets various quality concerns.  In addition, 
the
              results of this research will facilitate the long-term evolution of a software
              
architecture based on long-term product-line goals.  For the software reverse
              
engineering and maintenance community, this research addresses the need for
              
approaches that allow a software maintainer to determine the extent of the
              
support for various quality attributes by individual components and provides
              
a technique that facilitates component modification in order to ensure
              compliance 
to quality constraints.
