Title       : CAREER: A Split Operating System Architecture for Servers with Memory-to-Memory
               Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0133366

Award Number: 0133366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Liviu Iftode Iftode@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal aims to investigate the impact of the new I/O
technologies on the
              operating system architecture of the network servers. 
The key ingredient of
              the proposed approach is the memory-to-memory 
intra-server interconnect which
              allows non-intrusive communication 
between hosts and intelligent devices.
              Memory-to-memory communication 
eliminates or significantly reduces the 
              overhead typically associated with 
conventional communication protocols. This
              benefit has been extensively 
studied to improve the performance of
              distributed applications but has not 
been  yet explored in support of the
              operating system performance. 

The research will focus on how to split the
              operating system functionality
across a cluster of computing nodes and
              intelligent devices. Two novel 
operating mechanisms based on memory-to-memory
              communication will be 
explored: (i) direct application-to-device
              communication to offload the 
TCP/IP protocol processing to TCP servers
              executed on intelligent network 
interfaces or dedicated nodes, and (ii)
              direct communication between  
memory-mapped file servers and TCP servers. 
              The research will also 
investigate how to use memory-to-memory communication
              to support cooperative 
file and network servers for availability and
              load-balancing.

This research has been considerably motivated by the
              increasing interest
in VIA, InfiniBand, and programmable device controllers.
              Its ultimate goal is 
to contribute  to the understanding of how systems
              software should be designed
to exploit and combine these new technologies. 
