Title       : Attention and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0133202

Award Number: 0133202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon D. Logan gordon.logan@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Executive control is a fundamental issue in basic research in cognitive science
              and cognitive neuroscience and in several areas of applied research, including
              human factors and ergonomics.  Executive control is the process by which the
              mind controls itself, programming itself to perform specific tasks, monitoring
              performance for speed and accuracy, adjusting strategies, and switching between
              tasks.  This research will extend Logan's theory of executive control to
              address a broad range of phenomena in the burgeoning literature on switching
              between tasks.  Like many theories of executive control, Logan's theory posits
              an executive process that programs a subordinate task to do specific tasks.  It
              interprets task switching as re-programming: The executive process develops a
              new program for the upcoming task and transmits it to the subordinate, much
              like a programmer installs new software in a computer.  Logan's theory goes
              beyond previous theories of executive control in specifying the subordinate
              process explicitly and specifically.  It adopts a powerful theory of attention
              and categorization as the theory of the subordinate process, and it describes
              executive control in terms of programming the subordinate theory to perform
              tasks.  This allows precise, quantitative predictions of performance in a broad
              range of situations, including those in which people switch from one task to
              another.  The research will consist of three projects.  The first will develop
              quantitative measures of the time required to switch between tasks.  In Logan's
              theory, this switching time represents the time required for the executive to
              formulate a new program and install it in the subordinate process.  The second
              project will investigate the role of short-term working memory in executive
              control.  It will focus on a new experimental procedure in which subjects are
              given names of tasks to be performed and then a list of stimuli to perform them
              on, much like a person remembers a list of errands to be run on the way home
              from work or a list of chores to be done on a Saturday afternoon.  The third
              project will examine the role of long-term memory in task switching.  It will
              focus on competition and interference produced by recent experience with other
              tasks performed on the same stimuli, much like switching from workplace roles
              to social roles in having lunch with the boss.  This research will have direct
              implications for basic research on executive control.  It will also have
              implications for human factors research and job design.  With increased
              advances in technology, people in the workplace are often required to switch
              between tasks in the same environment; many of us have several windows open at
              once on our computer screens.  Understanding the costs of switching between
              tasks and learning what can be done to reduce them will allow better design of
              software, tasks, and jobs.
