Title       : CAREER: Supporting Evolution in Distributed Object Computing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0133838

Award Number: 0133838
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Lewis mlewis@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Programming for distributed object computing systems is complicated by the fact
              that objects persist and interact with a number of other objects in the system.
              When programmers change and evolve their objects, the ramifications are felt by
              clients in other parts of the system, not just within the application that is
              being programmed. Therefore, distributed object programmers require mechanisms
              to manage this evolution and make it known to other objects in the system.
The
              dynamically configurable distributed object (DCDO) model is a first step toward
              managing evolution in distributed object systems. The DCDO model, implemented
              within the Legion grid computing system, helps enable object evolution and
              facilitate the development of distributed objects from multiple independent
              implementation components. Using DCDOs, programmers can evolve existing active
              objects to accept new member functions, to change the interface and behavior of
              their member functions, and to remove member functions from their external
              (public) or internal (private) interface. Programmers can make these changes on
              the fly, without deactivating any part of the system, without replacing binary
              exe-cutables, without interrupting the clients of evolving objects, and without
              having to know what the changes will be at the time the objects are initially
              compiled and run. The model supports evolution management strategies that
              define when and how object types evolve from one version to the next, and
              determine when a type change is propagated to existing instances. The evolution
              management strategies built into the DCDO model are a good start toward
              managing change, but they are not sufficient. Programmers require a more
              general purpose mechanism for defining how objects can change, and for
              restricting how evolutions can take place. The research described in this
              proposal will address this problem. In particular, we will make the evolution
              characteristics of an object a first class entity in the distributed system, so
              that it can be read by other objects, which can then behave appropriately based
              on how their peers have evolved and may evolve in the future. Clients will be
              able to read the evolution histories of servers, and will be able to determine
              the restrictions, if any, that are placed on future server evolution. Further,
              clients will be able to register call-back functions with servers in order to
              be informed when changes take place. When they do, the clients can be given
              some control over when and how the changes can be carried out. In some cases, a
              client may be able to veto an evolution operation, or delay it until the client
              has finished its current application. This functionality is implemented in
              terms of a protocol that is initiated by the call back functions among the
              clients who have registered interest in the evolution operation. This begins to
              address the problem of implementations changing out from under clients that are
              built to support a different interface. In another important part of the
              research, we will study how real applications change over time, in order to
              effectively design evolution management strategies and constraints. We will
              include a wide range of different applications in the study, including the core
              Legion objects themselves, high performance scientific applications, and
              distributed collaborative environments. In the educational component of the
              proposed program, we will implement the Student Centered Applied Learning
              through Industry Projects (SCALIP) program. In this program, students work with
              local industries to define class projects for other students in future
              instantiations of core graduate courses. 

