Title       : Fabrication of Biopolymer Microarrays for SPR Imaging Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0133151

Award Number: 0133151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $661000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Corn corn@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1108,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry and the Instrument
              Development in Biological Research Programs, Professor Robert M. Corn and his
              coworkers at the University of Wisconsin are developing new fabrication methods
              and spectroscopic detection techniques for biopolymer arrays on gold thin
              films. A combination of novel attachment chemistries and microfluidic delivery
              strategies are being employed to create high fidelity biosensor arrays of DNA,
              polypeptide and proteins on gold surfaces. Surface plasmon resonance imaging is
              a surface-sensitive detection technique that is being developed for the
              label-free detection of bioaffinity interactions in an array format. The DNA
              and protein arrays fabricated in this research effort will be used in
              conjunction with the surface plasmon resonance imaging methods for the high
              throughput study of protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions.

Professor
              Robert M. Corn and his coworkers at the University of Wisconsin are creating
              high quality biochips that consist of DNA, polypeptides, and proteins attached
              onto gold thin film surfaces in a multi-element array format. By detecting the
              binding of other biomolecules onto these biochips with the spectroscopic
              technique of surface plasmon resonance imaging, these biopolymer arrays can be
              used as multi-element biosensors in the areas of environmental sensing and
              medical diagnostics. In addition to the detection of biological compounds, the
              high throughput study of bioaffinity interactions with these arrays will have
              immediate applications in the areas of gene expression and proteomics

