Title       : CAREER: Museum-based Approaches to Ecology and Evolution of Aquatic Systems: An
               Integrated Research and Educational Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0133233

Award Number: 0133233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Turner turnert@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

This project will create a research, education, and training program
              in the Museum of Southwestern Biology (MSB) at the University of New Mexico. 
              Participating graduate and undergraduate students will gain a fundamental
              understanding of how natural history collections acquire, document, and
              database specimens, to provide an historical record of our rich natural
              heritage.  Students will then use this knowledge and a collection of museum
              specimens held in the Division of Fishes that spans a 65-year history in two
              research objectives aimed at identifying the underlying causes of ecological
              change in the fish fauna of the imperiled Rio Grande aquatic ecosystem.  First,
              stable isotope methodology will be used to compare present-day and
              museum-preserved fish specimens, to determine whether the fish community
              functioned differently in the past (prior to human population growth and
              large-scale water diversion) than at present.  This research is designed to
              identify ecosystem-wide events that may have altered fish community dynamics in
              the Rio Grande.  Second, abundance patterns of certain fish species will be
              evaluated using the collection and compared to current estimates of genetic
              diversity to ascertain whether reduced abundance has changed genetic diversity
              in ways that hamper species recovery.  Both research efforts are focused on
              important issues for conservation and restoration of the Rio Grande.

Natural
              history collections are becoming increasingly important for documenting and
              understanding the changes in biodiversity on the planet because they preserve
              an historical record of organismal diversity.  Moreover, natural history
              collections have been used to address important issues in human health such as
              the origins and emergence of Hantavirus in the desert southwest.  There exists,
              however, a fundamental gap between undergraduate and graduate training and the
              enormous resources that natural history collections can offer for solving
              important problems.  The goal of this project is to close that gap by
              familiarizing graduate and undergraduate students with the kinds of information
              available in natural history museums, and to show them how this information can
              be brought to bear on critical environmental problems using a multidisciplinary
              research approach.  The intended result is to produce scientists that can
              capitalize on the vast resources offered by natural history museums in novel
              ways to solve environmental problems facing us in the 21st century.



