Title       : Physiological Determinants of Vertical Zonation in Congeneric Marine
               Invertebrates: Comparative Analysis of Species Replacement Along the Subtidal
               to Intertidal Gradient
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0133184

Award Number: 0133184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Somero somero@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A question of great interest to ecologists and evolutionary biologists is, "Why
              do species occur in certain habitats and not in others?"  One basis for
              governing the distributions of species is their tolerance of physical factors
              in the environment, notably ambient temperature. This fact is illustrated
              especially clearly in rocky intertidal habitats: In the gradient from the
              subtidal region to the intertidal zone, thermal conditions vary sharply, as
              does the set of species found along this transect.  It is common for one
              species of a genus to be replaced by a closely related species of the same
              genus (a congener).  The studies supported by this proposal examine the
              physiological, biochemical and molecular differences among congeners from
              different vertical sites in an effort to identify adaptive differences that
              help to explain variation in distribution patterns.  The systems to be studied
              include: (i) the heat-shock response, a rescue system for repairing
              heat-damaged proteins; (ii) heart function, which is markedly sensitive to
              temperature; (iii) membrane integrity, which is essential for many
              physiological processes, and (iv) nerve function, which may be of importance in
              setting thermal tolerance limits. Techniques to be used include a wide variety
              of molecular methods (sequencing of genes and analysis of gene expression
              patterns), biochemical approaches (measurement of levels of heat-damaged
              proteins) and physiological analyses (rates of heart function and generation of
              nerve signals). Study species include snails of the genus Tegula and porcelain
              crabs (genus Petrolisthes). Both sets of congeners occur over wide vertical and
              latitudinal ranges and thus are excellent study systems for elucidating
              mechanisms of adaptation to temperature. The study of congeners adapted to
              different temperatures allows a particularly clear picture to be developed of
              the role of adaptive change in establishing environmental optima and tolerance
              limits.  By identifying the underlying mechanisms that establish thermal optima
              and limits, the effects of predicted global warming could be understood in a
              more definitive manner.
