Title       : CAREER: Scalable Algorithms for Knowledge Discovery in Scientific Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a0133464

Award Number: 0133464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320709             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Karypis karypis@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data mining is the process of automatically extracting useful information hidden
              in large data sets. This emerging discipline is becoming increasingly important
              as advances in data collection have lead to the explosive growth in the amount
              of available data. This project aims to develop a wide-range of novel data
              mining algorithms suitable for the characteristics of scientific data sets
              arising in genomics and fluid dynamics. Our research will focus on developing
              algorithms both for sequential datasets and for datasets that can be
              represented by directed labeled graphs. The graph-based modeling enables us to
              capture in a single and unified framework many of the spatial, topological,
              geometric, and other types of relational characteristics present in scientific
              datasets. The specific research tasks that we plan to address are: (i)
              Development of scalable algorithms for finding frequently occurring patterns in
              graph data sets and algorithms for finding patterns whose frequency decreases
              as a function of the pattern-length. (ii) Development of scalable and high
              quality clustering algorithms for sequence and graph data sets which operate
              directly in the native feature space. (iii) Development of scalable and
              accurate classification algorithms based on automated sequential or relational
              feature extraction approaches. These algorithms will be validated by analyzing
              data sets arising
in genomic and turbulent fluid flow. The project integrates
              the data mining research with an educational plan that focuses on initiating
              undergraduate and graduate students to the various computational and data
              analysis aspects of genomic research and developing a comprehensive
              bioinformatics curriculum whose goal is to foster multi-disciplinary research
              and collaboration. In addition, a comprehensive set of software tools will be
              developed and made available that can be used both to train students in using
              data mining techniques and to conduct novel research expanding the levels of
              understanding in various scientific disciplines.

