Title       : CAREER: Streaming Prerecorded Continuous Media in Wireless Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0133252

Award Number: 0133252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Reisslein reisslein@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Two key developments in networking are that the Internet is (1) increasingly
              used for the streaming of continuous media, a large portion of which is
              prerecorded, and (2) increasingly accessed by wireless (and possibly mobile)
              clients. The stringent Quality of Service requirements of continuous media,
              such as video, combined with the unreliability of wireless links make the
              real-time streaming over wireless links a very challenging problem. To address
              the trend towards wireless streaming, the researcher proposes to develop a
              comprehensive theory and a framework of practical protocols and mechanisms for
              the real-time streaming of prerecorded continuous media to wireless clients. To
              overcome the challenges of real-time streaming of continuous media over
              wireless links the proposed protocols and mechanisms will rely on the following
              key insights:

1. For prerecorded continuous media (i) the exact traffic
              characteristics are known before the streaming commences, and (ii) while the
              stream is being played out, segments of the stream can be prefetched into a
              prefetch buffer in the client.
2. Channel probing techniques can identify the
              wireless links with good transmission conditions in the face of
              location-dependent, time-varying, and bursty wireless link errors.
3. Rate
              adaptation techniques of modern wireless systems (e.g., third and fourth
              generation wireless systems) allow to dynamically allocate transmission
              capacities to the individual ongoing flows.

The novel idea of the streaming
              protocols is to overcome the variability of the wireless links by prefetching
              segments of the continuous media stream into the client buffer. The prefetching
              is done by dynamically allocating transmission capacities to the ongoing
              streams according to (1) the prefetch buffer contents in the clients, and (2)
              the wireless link conditions (determined through channel probing). Through
              prefetching (i.e.,work-ahead) prefetched reserves are built up in the clients
              that allow the clients to continue playback during adverse transmission
              conditions on the wireless links. The preliminary simulation results for
              prefetching using a Join-the-Shortest-Queue (JSQ) policy in conjunction with a
              simple channel probing scheme indicate that prefetching brings dramatic
              performance improvements.

The researcher proposes to develop a comprehensive
              framework for the real-time streaming of continuous media to wireless clients.
              The specific objectives of the proposed project are to develop:

1. optimal
              prefetching mechanisms for a single wireless cell, e.g., mechanisms that for
              given client buffers minimize the client starvation probability while
              maximizing the number of supported streams.  The researcher will analyze the
              fundamental trade-offs in prefetching over wireless links and develop call
              admission rules.
2. prefetching mechanisms for scalable encoded media that
              enable heterogeneous multimedia streaming services.
3. seamless end-to-end
              streaming mechanism, for the real-time delivery of continuous media over
              networks consisting of wired and wireless links to mobile clients.

In the
              preliminary work for the proposed project, the researcher has developed a
              prefetching protocol for the real-time streaming of continuous media between
              the base station and multiple wireless clients in a wireless cell.

The
              proposed research is closely integrated with two educational initiatives. These
              are (1) outreach and extended education, and (2) the development of a wireless
              multimedia streaming testbed based on a 802.11 wireless LAN. The goals of the
              outreach and extended education initiative are to attract traditionally
              underrepresented minorities to engineering, and to provide high-quality
              networking instruction to underrepresented students, e.g., working adults. This
              will be achieved by (i) developing on-line networking labs for K-12 students
              and teachers in the Arizona MESA and the NSF funded WISE programs, (ii)
              enhancing the networking courses in ASU's Extended Education program with
              web-based teaching aids, and (iii) integrating networking courses into the
              exclusively web-based tri-university Master of Engineering program in Arizona. 
              The streaming testbed will serve as a platform for integrating research,
              industrial collaborations, and students' education. Protocols for wireless QoS,
              such as the proposed prefetch protocol will be implemented in undergraduate
              (senior) design projects to complement and deepen the classroom
              knowledge.



