Title       : CAREER: Bridging "In Vitro" and "In Vivo" Protein Folding: An Integrated
               Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0133504

Award Number: 0133504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $605000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan-Emma Shea shea@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The current understanding of the mechanism by which a protein folds and adopts
              its biologically active three dimensional structure stems from experimental and
              theoretical investigations in idealized dilute environments. Under biologically
              relevant conditions, however, proteins fold in the much more complex cellular
              environment, where folding is plagued by a number of obstacles. For example,
              the crowded cytoplasmic environment, sequence mutations and changes in pH or
              temperature, can all lead to the formation of misfolded or intermediate
              structures. While recent experimental advances are permitting an exploration of
              folding in the cell, a theoretical framework and understanding of protein
              folding in the cellular environment is lacking. This project seeks to bridge
              the gap in our theoretical knowledge between in vitro and in vivo protein
              folding. Methods of statistical physics will be used to develop new methods and
              models to further our understanding of protein folding and to develop a
              microscopic picture of the kinetics and thermodynamics of protein aggregation.
              New algorithms based on parallel tempering Molecular Dynamics, Stationary Phase
              Monte Carlo and Field Theoretic methods will be developed to efficiently sample
              relevant aggregate conformations.  The effect of crowding on folding and the
              competition between folding, misfolding and aggregation will be addressed.
              

The educational goals of this project relate to the interdisciplinary
              nature of this research. A reform of the chemistry curriculum, to reflect the
              growing interdisciplinary nature of biochemical research and the impact of
              computers in modern research, will be achieved through the development of a new
              computational biophysics and chemistry course as well as through the creation
              of an interdisciplinary undergraduate research program. Outreach activities
              will be pursued through introductory computer classes aimed at middle school
              girls.



