Title       : CAREER: Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Hybrid Systems with Applications to
               Nanoprocesses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a0133038

Award Number: 0133038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: VijaySekhar Chellaboina ChellaboinaV@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modeling, Analysis, and Control of Hybrid
Systems with Applications to
              Nanoprocesses

In the light of the increasingly complex nature of dynamical
              systems requiring controls, the predominant considerations in control law
              design for modern engineering systems have focused on general hierarchical
              nonlinear switching control architectures that minimize control law complexity
              subject to the achievement of overall system stability and performance. These
              systems, classified as hybrid dynamical systems, include dynamical switching
              systems, nonsmooth impact mechanical systems, biological systems, sampled-data
              systems, discrete-event systems, intelligent vehicle/highway systems,
              constrained mechanical systems, and flight control systems, to cite but a few
              examples. The proposed research program focuses on stability and control of
              general hybrid dynamical systems. In this research, first, we will focus on the
              development of a unified dynamical systems approach for solving the problems of
              stability analysis, disspativity theory, optimal control, robust stability and
              performance of hybrid/impulsive dynamical systems. Next, a general modeling
              framework for mechanical impact systems described by impulsive differential
              equations will be developed. Furthermore, based on an ongoing research effort,
              we will develop a passivity-based control framework for stabilization of
              mechanical impact systems, more generally, Euler-Lagrange systems involving
              impacts. Finally, to transition the proposed theoretical developments to
              cutting-edge engineering technology, we propose to validate our results on a
              very important engineering problem; namely, active control of
              nanoprocesses.

As part of his educational activities, we propose to
              introduce a novel web-based numerical experimental component in the
              undergraduate control education. Specifically, using the new enabling
              multimedia technology, we propose to develop several numerical experiments to
              train students in applying the analytical skills on computer generated models.
              Finally, inspired by an optimal control approach for biological processes, we
              propose a teaching philosophy/model to study and hopefully maximize freshmen
              retention.

