Title       : CAREER: Research on Students' Mental Models, Learning and Transfer as a Guide to
               Application-Based Curriculum Development and Instruction in Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0133621

Award Number: 0133621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436796             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Sanjay Rebello srebello@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The development of students mental models has not been studied extensively in
              physics
education research. Initial evidence indicating that mental models and
              their application are
strongly context dependent is particularly relevant to
              application-based curriculum.
In this CAREER project, I investigate students
              mental models of real-world devices, how
these models evolve through
              instruction, and whether they transfer across contexts. Next, I
utilize my
              research results to develop application-based curriculum, organized into
              versatile
weeklong instructional modules that are pilot-tested in introductory
              classes that I teach. I assess
the impact of the model development on the
              students, as well as issues of transfer of learning
from one context to
              another. As a spin-off from this investigation, I develop instruments that
              are
transferable to other research on student mental model development. This
              research is also
integrated into a graduate level course that I team-teach.
              The course focuses on current trends
and issues in physics education research.
              Students in this course are involved in my research
through a capstone project
              in this course.
Two experienced faculty members facilitate my professional
              development through the
project. A pioneer in physics education and head of
              the department mentors my growth as a
researcher and teacher in the graduate
              course. An award-winning teacher at the introductory
undergraduate level
              mentors my pilot testing of the application-based curricula in
              the
introductory courses that I teach.
Overall this project builds a strong
              foundation for a lifetime of contributions to research and
education in
              physics pedagogy.
