Title       : CAREER: Biochemical Analysis of the DNA Damage Checkpoint
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0133774

Award Number: 0133774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499992             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Matthew Michael matt@mcb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1116,1136,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Transitions between different phases of the cell division cycle are controlled
              by cell cycle checkpoints.  Checkpoints are regulatory systems that monitor
              cellular processes and ensure that a given process has been satisfactorily
              completed before transition into the next phase of the cell cycle is allowed. 
              When chromosomal DNA suffers damage, through exposure to mutagens, the DNA
              damage checkpoint arrests the cell cycle so that damage repair systems have an
              opportunity to repair the damage prior to transition into the next phase of the
              cell cycle.  This activity is especially important when damage is incurred
              during S phase of the cell cycle, as lesions on chromosomes must be repaired
              before the damaged DNA is used as a template during DNA replication.  The
              long-term goal of this research program is to use Xenopus egg extracts to
              biochemically address the problem of how damaged DNA is detected by the damage
              checkpoint.  Our knowledge of how damage is sensed is currently quite limited. 
              To correct this, a series of experiments will be performed that aim to answer
              basic mechanistic questions about how DNA damage is sensed.  The Xenopus
              extract system is ideally suited for this type of analysis, and recent advances
              in the preparation of these extracts will be incorporated into these studies. 
              The problems to be addressed will include the role that DNA replication forks
              play in sensing damage, the role that DNA repair pathways play in activating
              the checkpoint, and the effect that the checkpoint has on DNA replication. 
              Once these questions have been answered, then the identity of the individual
              proteins that function to sense damage can be addressed.
Because this problem
              has obvious connections to cancer, interest in the subject is high amongst
              undergraduates who are preparing for careers in medicine or laboratory
              research.  To accommodate and encourage this interest, a lecture course has
              been developed, to be taught chiefly to undergraduates, that focuses on cell
              cycle control.  This lecture course and the Research Plan described in this
              proposal are tightly connected in that, over the five-year funding period for
              the proposal, students taking the course will annually receive a copy of the
              Research Plan, they will be updated on the progress that has been made, and
              they will participate directly in the work by performing some of the
              experiments as part of a laboratory section that is attached to the class. 
              This exercise not only teaches students about the cell cycle, but will also
              enable students to observe how science is practiced, from the conception of an
              idea (as outlined in the proposal), to the performance of an experiment to the
              interpretation of data.  

