Title       : CAREER: Signal Processing Tools for Dynamic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0133554

Award Number: 0133554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Guskov guskov@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0133554
Guskov, Igor
U of MIchigan-Ann Arbor

Medical imaging systems and
              computational modeling of physical processes produce vast amounts of surface
              data for analysis and visualization purposes. Often such data are
              time-dependent and describe surfaces that evolve in time, for example, a
              developing interface between two fluids or moving walls of the heart
              ventricles. This project will develop processing tools for such dynamic surface
              data. In particular, massively redundant and noisy raw data coming from
              applications will be converted into compact form useful for extensive
              interactive manipulation, especially within remote collaboration environments.
              The developed technology will also be useful for applications in tele-presence
              and animation. This research effort will be integrated with educational
              initiatives via student involvement in research projects, development of new
              curriculum in Digital Geometry Processing, and collaboration with external
              researchers.

The focus of this project will be on converting raw application
              data into hierarchical surface representations that are temporally coherent and
              spatially (semi-)regular, and further processing and compression of the
              constructed data representations. Specifically, a sequence of irregular meshes
              produced by a frame-by-frame marching cubes extraction of isosurfaces from a
              time-dependent volumetric field is an example of geometric data that cannot be
              efficiently processed without first establishing temporal coherence and spatial
              regularity of the surface sampling. The development of a fully automated
              compression system for dynamic geometry in this scenario will include the
              following components: constrained parameterization method for establishing
              temporal coherence of surface sampling, patch layout generation and maintenance
              routine to deal with possible topology changes, efficient topological event
              detection procedure, predictive coding of dynamic geometry streams, geometric
              and topological denoising of raw application data, and possible integration of
              the regular mesh extraction into the simulation (or shape acquisition)
              environment. The developed technology will also be useful in the areas of
              scientific visualization and computer aided geometric design.

