Title       : CAREER: Extensions of Stochastic Programming: Models, Algorithms, and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0133943

Award Number: 0133943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shabbir Ahmed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to study new models,
              algorithms, and applications of stochastic programs with alternative
              risk-averse objectives, subjective probabilities, and decision-dependent
              uncertainties.  Although stochastic programming has now evolved as a viable
              paradigm for planning and decision-making under uncertainty, much of the
              progress in this area has been made at the expense of some simplifying
              assumptions. For example, traditional stochastic programming is concerned with
              optimizing an expected objective function.  Other common assumptions include
              precise knowledge of a static underlying probability distribution. However,
              these risk ignoring assumptions can be quite undesirable in many practical
              applications.  Unfortunately, these generalizations typically lead to
              non-convex optimization models. Consequently, traditional decomposition
              algorithms for (convex) stochastic programs are inapplicable. The research will
              investigate the integration of decomposition principles within non-convex
              optimization algorithms in order to attack large-scale instances of these
              general stochastic programs. The developed concepts will be applied to planning
              problems in important economic sectors such as process industries, engineering
              design, and utility industries. The educational component of this career
              development plan is aimed at popularizing stochastic programming based planning
              and decision making in engineering education and practice. Towards this goal,
              user-friendly stochastic programming modeling and solver tools, electronic
              tutorials, and real world case studies will be developed.

The operations
              research community recognizes Stochastic Programming as a valuable quantitative
              technique for decision support in the face of uncertainty. However, this tool
              has not achieved widespread use in practical planning and decision-making. Two
              reasons for this are: traditional stochastic programming models can often be
              overly simplistic for real-life applications and the lack of exposure to
              practical stochastic programming concepts in engineering education. The
              proposed research program will extend stochastic programming paradigm beyond
              some of the traditional impractical assumptions. These generalizations will
              require the development of entirely new stochastic programming models and
              algorithms, and their application to relevant practical problems. On the
              education side, user friendly stochastic programming solver, electronic
              tutorials, and industrial case-studies will be developed to facilitate the
              introduction of applied stochastic programming concepts in undergraduate and
              graduate engineering education.
