Title       : CAREER: Partial Differential Equation-based Image Processing with Applications
               to Radiation Oncology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0133511

Award Number: 0133511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doron Levy dlevy@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   In the past decade, new nonlinear partial differential
equations (PDEs)
              have been developed for various image processing
applications, such as noise
              reduction, edge detection, image
segmentation and restoration.  While the
              attention of the
scientific community in this area predominantly focused
              on
creating the new PDEs, very little attention was paid to
developing
              numerical algorithms that approximate their solutions.
The few numerical
              algorithms that are currently used suffer from
a variety of problems: they are
              not accurate enough, too slow,
and not fault-free.  In this project, the
              investigator develops
accurate, efficient, and robust numerical algorithms
              for
nonlinear PDEs in image processing.  The research activities are
based on
              the investigator's extensive work in the field of
hyperbolic conservation
              laws, and include numerical methods for
the Hamilton-Jacobi equations, fast
              algorithms for high-order
nonlinear PDEs, algorithms for computing
              steady-state solutions,
numerical homogenization of Hamilton-Jacobi equations
              and
multi-resolution analysis, analysis of nonlinear diffusion
equations,
              constrained morphing active contours and geodesic
flows, and "non-blind"
              algorithms for image processing.  A
portion of the research activities focuses
              on improving existing
algorithms in order to solve a specific imaging problem
              in
radiation oncology treatment planning.
     The investigator develops
              novel mathematical techniques for
image processing and uses these techniques
              for solving problems
in the field of radiation oncology imaging.  Radiation
              oncology
treats cancer by delivering relatively small doses of radiation
to
              tumors in order to eliminate cancer without destroying or
chronically damaging
              healthy tissues in and around the growth.
CT and MRI scans are used as
              three-dimensional anatomical models
to ensure that the treatments conform
              geometrically to the tumor
target.  This process depends critically upon
              identifying the
location of the tumor as well as the healthy organs (in order
              to
minimize the dose of radiation in these areas).  Despite
              extended
research, the existing mathematical tools for image processing
are
              unsuitable for clinical medical applications.  The
segmentation of the CT and
              MRI scans is still carried out by
manual tools, and consumes about one-half of
              the time required to
plan the treatments.  The investigator designs accurate
              and
reliable automated algorithms that would significantly shorten
this time
              and have a big impact on radiation oncology.  He
integrates into his work
              educational activities that demonstrate
the importance of applied mathematics
              in a broad spectrum of
sciences.  Special emphasis is given to applications
              of
computational mathematics in biology and cutting-edge
technologies.  The
              planned educational activities include
programs for junior-high, high-school,
              undergraduate, and
graduate students.  The investigator works to increase the
              gender
and ethnic diversity in the mathematical sciences by
              encouraging
under-represented groups to study applied mathematics and
              choose
it as a future career.

