Title       : CAREER: Protein dynamics and hydrogen tunneling in enzymatic catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0133117

Award Number: 0133117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amnon Kohen amnon-kohen@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Amnon Kohen of the University of Iowa is funded for his research on protein
              dynamics and hydrogen tunneling in enzymatic catalysis by a CAREER grant in the
              Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division.  He will develop
              mechanistic models for how biologically significant C-H bond activation occurs
              and for the role of protein dynamics, coupled motion, and quantum mechanical
              hydrogen tunneling in enzyme catalysis.  Kinetic isotope effects and
              temperature effects will be used to probe tunneling and associated reaction
              mechanism questions.  Dr. Kohen will incorporate aspects of bioorganic
              chemistry, physical organic chemistry, and computational chemistry into the
              organic laboratory for majors.  A new graduate course, Chemical Catalysis in
              Biology, will be developed and based on recent literature.

Enzyme catalysis
              is one of the most important biochemical phenomena, since it is at the heart of
              nearly all of our physiological biochemistry (how our food is digested, how our
              cells reproduce, how hormones induce changes in our body functions, etc.).  The
              role of coupled motion and quantum mechanical hydrogen tunneling in enzyme
              catalysis will be discerned.  Tunneling is the phenomenon by which a molecule
              or group of reacting molecules transfers through a reaction energy barrier due
              to its wave-like property.  Synchronous motion or coupled motion of atoms in a
              reacting molecule is a phenomenon that has been found to be important in some
              enzyme catalyzed reactions.  The small but important enzyme, dihydrofolate
              reductase, that catalyzes hydrogen transfer will be a focal point of this
              research.   Dr. Kohen plans on developing new course work in the area of
              bioinorganic chemistry for both undergraduate and graduate students.

