Title       : Cooperation and Incentives in Models with Asymmetric Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0133113

Award Number: 0133113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajiv Vohra Rajiv_Vohra@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Serrano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The analysis of incomplete information has had a profound impact on economic
              theory, especially in the context of non-cooperative models.  However,
              cooperative theory in the presence of asymmetric information is much less
              settled. This project will study important open problems of cooperation and
              incentives under asymmetric information, with an eye on applications such as
              auctions and bargaining. Due to the importance of individual incentives, the
              research will rely heavily on insights from non-cooperative game theory and
              mechanism design.

When economic agents can cooperate with each other, it is
              important to consider economic allocations that are immune to changes induced
              by self-interested groups or coalitions. The idea of coalitional stability is
              typically formalized through the set of allocations known as the `core,' 
also
              connected with the theory of competitive markets. This project is concerned
              with the theory of the core in an environment with asymmetric information. When
              a coalition of asymmetrically informed agents forms, it is not clear how much
              information will be shared among them because it may be in their individual
              interest to hide some of it. The research will analyze how to formalize
              coalitional stability in this context. It will provide a way of making
              endogenous the amount of information pooling among agents, and investigate
              conditions under which the set of "core" allocations is non-empty. The research
              will also explore how non-cooperative decentralized mechanisms may be designed
              to implement socially desirable outcomes. The results of the project will lead
              to a better understanding of important social, political and economic
              phenomena, including collusion in auctions and coalition formation in problems
              of bargaining.

