Title       : CAREER: Elucidation of the Biosynthetic and Degradative Pathways for
               Phycobiliproteins in Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0133441

Award Number: 0133441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $523147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy M. Schluchter wschluch@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
Program Ref : 1045,1168,1187,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Photosynthetic organisms must balance their metabolism with the growth
              conditions.   Cyanobacteria synthesize and degrade their light harvesting
              proteins, called phycobiliproteins, in response to environmental parameters
              such as light intensity, light quality, and nutrient availability.  The
              phycobiliproteins absorb light in the visible region due to their bilin
              chromophores. The long-term goal of this research project is to understand how
              cyanobacteria synthesize and degrade phycobiliproteins and their bilin
              chromophores. The first objective is to characterize enzymes that are involved
              in attaching the bilins to phycobiliproteins. The role of five proteins within
              Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 that are believed to be involved in bilin attachment
              will be characterized by mutagenesis, by in vitro enzyme assays, and by
              heterologous in vivo assays in Escherichia coli.  A second objective is to
              verify the activity of a novel methyl transferase that is responsible for
              adding a methyl group to a conserved asparagine residue within phycobiliprotein
              beta-subunits has been identified. A mutant lacking this enzyme will be
              characterized to assess the physiological significance of this modification. A
              third goal involves the creation and characterization of mutant strain in which
              the bilin biosynthetic gene pcyA has been interrupted.   Characterization of
              the synthesis and regulation of other tetrapyrroles within this mutant strain
              will be performed. 

This career development plan also includes training of
              the undergraduate and graduate students in performing the research and contains
              innovative efforts for encouraging junior high, high school, and undergraduate
              students to contemplate scientific careers. Additionally, new coursework will
              be created to train biology students in modern molecular and biochemical
              techniques.    

This project is funded jointly by the Molecular Biochemistry
              and Metabolic Biochemistry Programs.




