Title       : Functional Dissection of the PTO Resistance Gene Using DNA Shuffling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0133993

Award Number: 0133993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Michelmore rwmichelmore@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the early events in disease resistance has both fundamental and
              practical importance.  Molecular dissection of disease resistance is currently
              one of the most intensively studied areas of plant biology and interesting
              parallels are being established with the animal-pathogen interactions. 
              Although considerable progress has been made over the past ten years, early
              recognition events that lead to resistance are only just beginning to be
              understood.  In the long term, understanding the molecular basis of specificity
              in plant-pathogen interactions and the molecular events resulting in resistance
              will provide new options for developing disease resistant plants.  

Our
              long-term goals are to determine the molecular basis of recognition and
              signaling in plant disease resistance and to engineer new disease resistance
              specificities.  The specific goal of this proposal is to dissect the functional
              regions of the Pto protein that confer the ability to bind different pathogen
              products and to initiate physiological pathways (downstream signaling)
              necessary for defense against the pathogens in diverse plant species.

DNA
              shuffling is a powerful and novel approach for dissecting protein function that
              makes few a priori assumptions about function yet provides great resolution to
              dissect individual regions of the protein.  DNA shuffling involves the
              generation of chimeric genes (recombinations from two gene sources) in the
              test-tube from fragments of naturally occurring versions of a gene.  Our
              proposed studies will further develop DNA shuffling as an experimental tool and
              provide statistical approaches for interpreting the resulting data.  

The
              interaction between the pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas syringae and
              Solanaceous plants has become one of the best-characterized plant-pathogen
              interactions at the molecular level and the Pto gene is ideally suited to DNA
              shuffling experiments.  We have been studying this interaction for several
              years and have all the necessary biological materials and methodologies in hand
              to make rapid progress.  The first round of DNA shuffling the Pto gene has
              demonstrated the power and feasibility of the DNA shuffling approach and
              revealed several previously unrecognized, potentially important domains for
              binding to the pathogen derived avirulence protein, AvrPto.  

In this
              research program we will conduct three parallel lines of investigation that
              will provide detailed and complementary data on the domains and amino acid
              sequences of Pto which are required for binding pathogen derived proteins and
              for downstream signaling: 1) We will conduct a second generation of DNA
              shuffling as well as specific amino acid substitutions to test the structure -
              function inferences derived from our first DNA shuffling experiment.  2) We
              will screen a shuffled library of chimeric genes to identify variants of Pto
              with new binding specificities.  3) We will shuffle Pto with genes encoding
              similar proteins from Arabidopsis to identify chimeras that confer the ability
              to recognize additional avirulence proteins.

The proposed experiments are
              highly multidisciplinary.  They are a combination of molecular biology and
              statistics that draws on plant breeding strategies as well as making and
              testing structure-function inferences.  The postdoc, graduate student, and
              undergraduates will receive training in both molecular biology and statistics. 
              In addition, they will gain experience in plant-pathogen interactions.


