Title       : CAREER: A Unified Methodology for Variation Management and Reduction in
               Multistage Manufacturing Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0133942

Award Number: 0133942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jionghua (Judy) Jin judy@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant sponsors research and
              teaching efforts in developing a unified methodology for variation management
              and reduction in Multistage Manufacturing Processes (MMPs).  A MMP generally
              involves multiple operations to produce a product, which can be found in many
              industrial processes such as automotive body assembly, machining lines,
              progressive stamping, and semiconductor manufacturing.  In a MMP, each
              operation adds inherent design variation when no fault occurs, and special
              assignable variation when a fault occurs, to the workpiece variation.  The
              output workpiece of one operation is the input of the next operation.  The
              final product variation is an accumulation of variation from all operations. 
              Therefore, the characteristics of variation propagation is very complex in
              MMPs, depending on both product and process design.  The research efforts in
              the project will develop methodologies to achieve on-target production with
              minimum variance by addressing both design and manufacturing concurrently.  The
              research focus is to develop: (a) a math-based model to describe the variation
              propagation in a MMP; (b) an integrated methodology for variation management
              through design synthesis and optimization; and (c) statistical methods driven
              by engineering models for quick root cause identification and product defect
              prevention.  In addition to research, new curriculums and courses will be
              developed.  Various collaborative efforts with industry, international
              universities, and K-12 schools will be conducted in research and education in
              the project.

If successful, the project results will enrich the science base
              and technologies in variation reduction and process control methodologies for
              MMPs, which include: (a) analytical (rather than empirical) modeling of MMP
              variation and its propagation; (b) synthesis (rather than analysis) of
              product/process tolerance for optimal management of inherent design variation
              to minimize their impact on final products; (c) real-time root-cause
              identification (rather than change detection) for manufacturing process control
              and continuous improvement; and (d) prognostics (rather than defect inspection)
              for defect prevention throughout the manufacturing lifetime.  The developed
              unified methodology will generate significant economic impacts in industrial
              sectors where MMPs are used.
