Title       : Studies of the Internal Structure and Dynamics of Convective Weather Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0133506

Award Number: 0133506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480364             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Fritsch fritsch@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator will investigate the internal structure and dynamics
              of the convective region of mesoscale convective systems.  The main goal is to
              determine why moist convection appears as discrete thunderstorms in some
              situations and as solid mesoscale swaths (slabs) of overturning in others. 
              Specific objectives include 1) constructing characteristic inflow environments
              for discrete-thunderstorm events and for slab events, 2) determining the local
              (within the convective region) differences in the dynamic and thermodynamic
              conditions that accompany cellular vs. slab convection, and 3) determining how
              differences in the convection (slab vs. cellular) affect the mesoscale dynamics
              and structural properties of the convective system.

The research methodology
              is composed of three parts: 1) construction of a composite environment for
              observed cases of predominantly cellular convective systems and for systems
              exhibiting solid-slab overturning, 2) numerical experiments on the composite
              environments to determine whether or not the model is able to generate the two
              types of organizational modes, and 3) numerical sensitivity experiments on
              idealized (analytically specified) initial conditions using the results of
              items (1) and (2) as a guide.


It is expected that the knowledge gained
              from these investigations will a) help to identify the factors that establish
              the organizational mode of the convection and the depth and strength of moist
              absolutely unstable layers, and b) elucidate how those factors affect the
              overall structure and evolution of mesoscale convective systems.  The results
              may also provide practical benefits, such as improvements in the ability to
              discriminate among the types of severe weather that will occur for various
              types of large-scale environments.  Differentiating among the possible modes of
              convective organization is extremely important from a forecasting perspective
              since it is these differences that often determine whether or not severe
              weather will occur and, if so, whether it will be characterized by individual,
              possibly rotating, storms or by strong straight line winds associated with slab
              convection.
