Title       : CAREER: The Role of Self-Regulated Learning in Students' Understanding of
               Science with Hypermedia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0133346

Award Number: 0133346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Azevedo ra109@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the role of self-regulated
learning (SRL) in students'
              understanding of science with hypermedia. SRL is
emerging as a significant
              issue in educational and psychological research. SRL is an active, constructive
              process
whereby learners set goals for their learning and then attempt to
              monitor,
regulate, and control their cognition, motivation, and behavior in
              the service
of those goals. SRL is guided and constrained by both personal
              characteristics
and the contextual features of the environment (Pintrich,
              2000). The focus of
SRL research over the last three decades has been on
              learners' academic learning
and achievement and has progressively included
              emphases on cognitive strategies,
metacognition, motivation, and task
              engagement (for a recent review see Paris &
Paris, 2001). The broad scope of
              SRL appeals to educational researchers who seek
to understand how students
              become adept and independent in their educational
pursuits. Whether SRL is
              viewed as a set of skills that can be taught explicitly
or as developmental
              processes of self-regulation that emerge with experience
(within a domain,
              topic, or task), teachers can provide information and
opportunities to
              students of all ages that will help them become strategic,
motivated, and
              independent learners. There are, however, several theoretical and
empirical
              issues that need further research before practical classroom
implications can
              be put forth. How do students' regulate their own learning when
using a
              hypermedia environment to learn about complex science topics? Which
processes
              related to self- and co-regulation do student pairs and teachers use
during
              collaborative learning of complex science topics with hypermedia? What
kinds
              of instructional conditions are more effective in fostering SRL? How
              can
science teachers provide information and opportunities to students of all
              ages
that can help them become more strategic, motivated, and independent
              learners?
Can SRL be taught explicitly as a set of skills or is it a
              developmental process
that emerges from experience (within a task, topic, or
              domain).This NSF Career project will explore these
questions through research
              that forges new directions in the area of students'
self-regulated learning of
              two complex science topics (the circulatory system
and ecological systems)
              with hypermedia environments (CircSysWeb and RiverWeb).
In doing so, the
              research goals will be: (1) To scale-up research on
self-regulated learning
              across developmental levels and contexts; (2) To examine
the role of self- and
              co-regulation during individual and collaborative learning
with hypermedia
              environments; (3) To examine the effectiveness of
co-construction of goals
              (between teacher and students) during learning of
science with hypermedia
              environments; (4) To examine the effectiveness of
strategy instruction
              training in fostering students' self- and co-regulated
learning with
              hypermedia; and, (5) To examine the effectiveness of adaptive
web-based
              hypermedia environments in detecting, modeling, and fostering
students' self-
              and co-regulated learning of science.


