Title       : CAREER: Creating Novel Quantum Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0133999

Award Number: 0133999
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $730000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan M. Stamper-Kurn dmsk@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1291      ATOMIC & MOLECULAR DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project encompasses a broad research program to examine the
              condensed-matter aspects of a novel quantum fluid: spinor Bose-Einstein
              condensates of Rb-87. The initial experimental background and the consequent
              theoretical investigation of this intriguing fluid suggest a range of
              intriguing phenomena waiting to be explored. A dedicated experimental apparatus
              is being constructed which incorporates magnetic shielding and small scale
              magnetic traps, large-volume optical traps, a new type of polarization-contrast
              imaging, and stable laser beams for Raman coupling. Four experimental goals are
              identified: (1) the first observation of ferromagnetic F=1 spinor condensates,
              (2) the exploration of dynamic behavior using a novel in-situ imaging
              technique, (3) accessing the thermodynamic behavior of spinor condensates, and
              (4) the first observation of F=2 spinor condensates. In addition, it is
              expected that other deliberately engineered macroscopic quantum systems will be
              explored to complement this research program. One such system, which was
              recently identified by this research group, is a novel superfluid with an
              anisotropic and variable critical velocity.

These research goals are being
              pursued alongside a program of educational activities. In particular, the
              establishment of a resource for teaching innovations in upper-division physics
              courses is being undertaken. While teaching innovations have been successfully
              implemented and tested in introductory physics courses, the development of
              resources to support such innovations in upper-division courses is sorely
              lacking, in spite of their great need. Particularly needed is a bank of tested
              qualitative questions appropriate for in-class and web-based inquiry. Such
              collections will be created and tested in three areas of upper-division modern
              physics, disseminated for use at other institutions, and supported further by
              contributions from other educators. Further educational activities include the
              exploration of web-based course delivery systems, and the training of future
              scientists through undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral research
              positions.

