Title       : CAREER: Automatic Knowledge Acquisition for Natural Language Interfaces to
               Educational Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0133123

Award Number: 0133123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329813             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara DiEugenio bdieugen@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award.  The project is
              designed to develop fundamental principles for natural language interfaces for
              the next generation of intelligent tutoring systems.  Natural language
              interfaces to instructional and educational applications need both knowledge
              about how to act in a domain and communication knowledge about how to talk
              about acting in the domain.  This project seeks to overcome the domain
              dependence of natural language interfaces that prevents them from being
              portable to other domains.  It will accomplish this in two ways.  First, the
              research will elucidate the difference between domain dependent and domain
              independent communication strategies.  Second, it will develop a methodology,
              algorithms and tools to semi-automatically derive domain and communication
              knowledge from text and dialogues.  An innovative aspect of this work is the
              role played by the lexical semantics of action verbs to acquire domain
              knowledge represented as action schemas.  Among the instructional domains
              addressed by this research is computer science.  The fact that the work
              concerns tutoring systems integrates the research and education components of
              the work, through class evaluation and undergraduate participation in
              research.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports the early
              career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to become an
              academic leader of the twenty-first century.  Success in this research will
              enable the construction of improved computerized tutors, as well as advancing
              the general field of natural language processing.  A specific educational focus
              is mentoring women at the undergraduate and graduate level, and supporting
              girls in choosing science and engineering as a career.

