Title       : CAREER: Scaling Plant Life History, Ontogeny, Diversity, and Ecology:
               Elaboration of a General Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0133974

Award Number: 0133974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Enquist benquist@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              One of the central problems facing biology is to identify the
              general
principles that govern the evolution of form, function and
              diversity.
Adding to this problem is the complexity of connecting pattern and
              process
across several scales of biological organization. The career
              development
plan will allow for the development of a rigorous integrative
              training
program in biological scaling at the University of Arizona. The
              proposed
research program consists of two parts: 1) Expand a general
              allometric
framework to account for patterns of ontogenetic growth across
              vascular
plants. This focus will provide theoretical extensions and
              empirical
assessments of allometric theory to account for patterns of
              ontogenetic
growth and allocation across vascular plants; 2) Extend
              theoretical
framework to quantitatively predict how physiological aspects of
              plants
and variation in allocation and growth rate ramify to influence
              numerous
attributes of large-scale dynamics in ecological communities
              and
ecosystems.  This line of investigation is geared toward: (i)
              documenting
prominent scaling laws associated with the production and
              allocation of
biomass across ecological communities; (ii) elucidating how
              the
constraints of plant allometry influences the size structuring
              and
dynamics of ecological communities; and (iii) highlighting a novel
              theory
for the movement of resources and energy through ecosystems. 
              The
multifaceted research  proposed will combine elaboration of
              allometric
theory, the compilation of large global datasets, and
              experimental
greenhouse manipulations to assess the quantitative predictions
              of new
theoretical insights. The proposed research will contribute to
              a
significant advancement in our ability to mechanistically predict
              the
scaling of pattern and process in biology.


