Title       : Communication and Behavior of Baboons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9514001

Award Number: 9514001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy L. Cheney cheney@psych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Seyfarth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9514001  Cheney      The goal of this research is a better
              understanding of the vocal communication and social behavior of freeranging
              nonhuman primates. Focus will be on vocal communication for a variety of
              reasons: first, because of its potential relation to studies of language and
              cognition in humans; second, because vocalizations lend themselves to
              quantitative signal analysis and to experimental tests of specific hypotheses.
              Finally, prior research has shown that playback experiments can be used to test
              hypotheses not only about vocal communication per se but also about the
              cognitive mechanisms that underlie complex social interactions. Subjects are
              free-ranging baboons (Papio cynocephalus ursinus) living in the Okavango Delta,
              Botswana. Animals in the study population are fully habituated to human
              observers, are recognized as individuals, and have known reproductive
              histories. The proposal has five inter-related components.  The first component
              of this proposal focuses on the use of vocalizations in reconciliation. After
              aggression, female baboons sometimes 'reconcile' by grunting to their
              lower-ranking opponents. Previous experiments have shown that these grunts
              function at least in part to reduce former victims' anxiety.  A second
              component focuses on the acoustic structure and possible semantic content of
              grunts. Baboons appear to use acoustically different grunts in different social
              situations. The PIs plan a series of observations and experiments are planned
              to determine whether acoustically different grunt types designate specifically
              different information to baboons.  A third component focuses on contact barks
              that appear to be exchanged between mothers and infants when they become
              separated in wooded areas. If these experiments indicate that mothers give
              contact barks primarily with respect to their own (rather than their infants')
              location, then they will add to a growing body of evidence suggesting that
              nonhuman primates do not call with the intent of providing inform ation to
              others.  A fourth component focuses on the view that pair bonds are formed in
              response to the threat of infanticide by recent immigrant males. These
              experiments, however, are incomplete, largely because they must be conducted
              opportunistically during the weeks after a new, potentially infanticidal male
              has joined the group. A fourth goal of the research will be to complete these
              experiments.  The final component focuses on the perception of cause-effect
              relations by nonhuman primates. Humans readily distinguish between two events
              that occur together because one caused the other and two events that occur
              together purely by association. Most research conducted to date suggests that
              monkeys do not apply causal reasoning when manipulating tools, though
              language-trained apes perform markedly better on similar experiments. Previous
              experiments conducted with this group of baboons, however, suggest that
              monkeys' ability to perceive cause-effect relations in the domain of social
              interactions may be quite well developed. Female baboons respond significantly
              more strongly to playbacks of vocal sequences that are causally anomalous than
              to those that are not. To investigate this question further, a series of
              experiments is proposed that make explicit predictions about both the strength
              and the timing of subjects' responses to particular call sequences.  ***
