Title       : Integrative Functions of Swimming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9514203

Award Number: 9514203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Shadwick   (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Covell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey B. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514203  Shadwick      The PI proposes that the evolution of animals to maximize
              swimming efficiency will produce characteristic body shapes, patterns of muscle
              activity and body movement. Among oceanic animals, the tunas represent one
              ultimate exploitation of ibis principle. The high-performance swimming of these
              fish is associated with a suite of adaptations on many levels of organization -
              from biochemical to behavioral. For example, tunas have a highly streamlined
              muscular body which is thickened centrally and tapers to a very narrow caudal
              region just in front of the stiff, crescent-shaped tail fin. This tail acts as
              a hydrofoil as it is swept back and forth through the water, producing nearly
              all of the tunas' forward thrust. Unlike other fish, undulations of the body
              are restricted to the tail region, giving the tunas' propulsive system a
              relatively high mechanical efficiency. For these reasons, the physiological
              basis for swimming in tunas is of great interest in the study of aquatic
              locomotion. The major objective in the PI's investigation is to analyze
              biomechanical design features of tunas and to synthesize a comprehensive
              physiological model of how these elite aquatic athletes achieve their high
              levels of performance. Specifically, this will involve collecting data on the
              structure and mechanical properties of the muscular and skeletal systems, and
              analyzing the swimming movements in the context of engineering and fluid
              mechanics principles. The work will be framed within three scientific
              hypotheses, one relating to the manner in which muscular contractions along the
              body act to produce movements in the tail, another relating to the structure
              and mechanical properties of the connective tissues that transmit the muscle
              forces to the backbone and ultimately the tail fin, and a third which deals
              with the timing of muscle activation along the body and how power is generated.
              These experiments involve studying live fish which are swimming under
              controlled conditions by use of an aquatic " treadmill" instrument. 
              Information on the timing of muscle activation along the body in relation to
              the timing and degree of muscle shortening is essential for calculation of
              muscle power output in swimming fish. In studies on other fish, the amount of
              muscle shortening and its timing relative to activation by the nervous system
              has been inferred from shape changes of the body measured by video imaging
              techniques. In the PI's estimation this approach is inadequate, and in the new
              studies the PI will make direct measurement of local muscle shortening and
              activation with ultrasound and electrophysiological methods previously
              developed by the PI's group. The PI will also characterize the contractile
              properties of muscle tissue from different parts of the fish body directly,
              using a oscillatory loading technique that simulates the manner in which the
              muscle is used by the fish when it swims. Finally, the PI will examine the
              structures responsible for transmission of muscle forces to the tail fin. These
              are the connective tissue sheets separating each body segment, the skin and the
              tendons that link the muscles to the backbone and tail fin. Analysis of the
              mechanical properties of these tissues will be performed with techniques
              similar to those used by mechanical engineers to test structural materials. 
              Completion of the studies described in this proposal will allow for the
              creation of an integrated model of how the various mechanical and physiological
              elements present in tunas function to provide the high-performance qwimming
              displayed by these fish.   ***
