Title       : The Role of Activity in Afferent-Mediated Modulation of Target Cell Properties
               in the Visual System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9514614

Award Number: 9514614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Debski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 A prominent feature of nervous systems is their ability to change in response
                to signals from the environment.  This feature is even true within the brain,
                where the local cellular environment can determine the development and  
              organization of several areas.  It has been known for some years that activity
              in   the visual pathways during development of many animals can affect the  
              organization and response properties of cells in the visual system in the
              adult.    Little is known about the mechanisms through which visual activity
              might   modulate the properties of individual nerve cells, or neurons, in
              central areas.    This project uses the simple model system of the optic
              tectum, a part of the   midbrain in frogs, to see how interruption of activity
              in the visual pathway affects   the presence and action in the tectum of two
              neurotransmitter chemical   compounds.  Electrophysiological,
              immunohistochemical and microscopic   imaging techniques are used to assay the
              physiological response and   neurotransmitter expression in the optic tectum,
              and to see whether changes are   mediated by specific components of the
              activity of the cells that form the optic   nerve from the eye to the brain.   
               Results from this work will enhance our understanding of how environmental  
              input shapes the properties of brain areas that receive this information.  It
              will   have an impact beyond visual neuroscience to developmental neuroscience,
                developmental biology, and research in fields that deal with information  
              encoding and storage, and learning and memory.
