Title       : Women's Economic Activities, Household Decision Making & Child Welfare in
               Manabi, Ecuador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9514818

Award Number: 9514818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96678              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. DeWalt kmdewalt+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan V. Poats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Economic development projects in the underdeveloped world after World War 2
              focused on generating income for men, assuming that the men would distribute
              the benefits to women and children.  After decades of experiences development
              specialists realized that the income frequently was not fairly distributed --
              the welfare of women and children was often ignored.  For the past 20 years
              projects have attempted to focus on women as the primary caretakers of
              children.  This project evaluates one form of development project -- a
              cooperative food processing plant -- in its impact on women's abilities to
              control resources and improve the well-being of their children.  This award to
              the University 0f Pittsburgh supports an ethnographic project to study the
              effects of poor rural Ecuadorian women's participation in economic development
              projects on their household economic and health well-being.  The research will
              take place in four communities, two which were the sites of cooperative
              development projects, and two which were not.  The project will document the
              control of income and other resources by women, examine household decision
              making concerning household resources, and study the impact of participation in
              income generating activities on the health and nutritional status of women and
              children.  The hypothesis to be tested is that activity by women in cooperative
              projects positively affects the well-being of their children.  Both
              ethnographic and survey data will be gathered on a broad range of variables
              including social participation, community investment in social welfare and
              health, individual perceptions of the importance and social worth of men and
              women, as well as anthropometric and nutritional data, to assess the welfare of
              a sample of households in the study villages.  This research is important
              because economic development can not be successful without significant
              improvement in the welfare of women and children.  New knowledge which assesses
              the significance of different strategies of improving welfare will be useful to
              planners and governments in designing better ways to improve rural welfare.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
