Title       : Tone and Intonation in Chichewa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9514481

Award Number: 9514481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55169              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Myers s.myers@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A sound pattern can be the result either of the distribution  of targets
              (phonology), or context-sensitive realization of  targets (phonetic
              implementation). Linguists have been aware of  this dichotomy for some time,
              but as yet there has been  relatively little work explicitly exploring the
              properties  distinguishing the two kinds of sound pattern.         This project
              will explore the two kinds of pattern as they  are displayed in fundamental
              frequency (fO) in the Bantu language  Chichewa, the national language of
              Malawi.         Extensive data on the language were collected by the P.I. in 
              1992-1993 in Malawi, including lexical paradigms, intonational  paradigms, and
              natural discourse (in the form of traditional oral  narratives). Pitch tracks
              of the recorded data will be produced  using computer sound analysis equipment.
              Measurements will be  entered into a spreadsheet and the significant factors
              and trends  extracted. The end result will be explicit quantitative models of 
              fO contours.              The project will include the collection of new data
              for  Chichewa, in particular:    (1) An experiment will be conducted with
              Chichewa speakers in the  U.S. in which alternating tone sequences are produced
              as  statements and as questions with systematic variation of (a)  pitch range
              and (b) speech rate. This will make clear the effect  of these two variables on
              fO, as well as clarifying the form of  downtrends in Chichewa.     (2) The
              researchers will collaborate with Dr. Sam Mchombo, a  linguist and Chichewa
              speaker, on a description of the function  of intonation in Chichewa discourse.
                  (3) The Chichewa natural discourse material will be analyzed and  compared
              to the patterns found in the experimental paradigms.  This will provide a test
              of the experimental findings, and reveal  other factors not included in the
              experimental set-up.          The project will contribute to our understanding
              of  intonation and its interaction with lexical tone. It will clarify  the
              distinction between pho nology and phonetic implementation. It  will represent
              the first instrumental study of intonation in a  Bantu language.
