Title       : U.S.-Argentina Planning Visit: A Comparative Study of Breeding Birds of North
               Temperate and Subtropical/South Temperate Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1995   
File        : a9514338

Award Number: 9514338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5378               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin tmartin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514388  Martin    The long-range goal of the research is to provide new 
              insights into well-known but poorly understood, broad  patterns of nesting and
              foraging patterns of birds across  the Americas. To add to 10 years of data
              collected on  clutch sizes, nest predation rates, and food delivery  rates for
              ground-nesting warblers and shrub-nesting  thrushes in the north temperate
              forests, it is intended to  study birds of the same genus or subfamily in the
              tropics,  subtropics, and south temperate forests.  This U.S.-  Argentina
              Planning Grant will permit a planning visit to  Argentina to establish a
              collaborative effort with  Alejandro Brown of Universidad Nacional de Tucuman
              and to  visit possible study sites.  A critical first step is identification of
              a proper forest  system where phylogenetically-related species are abundant 
              and elevational segregation of species pairs is common.    The work of Thomas
              Martin is well respected for its rigor  and insight into nesting patterns,
              while the Argentine  collaborator, Alejandro Brown, is an experienced field 
              biologist in studies of foraging patterns.  Both the  potential for new
              insights through comparisons of closely  related species in differing
              environments and the  robustness added through the collaborative effort are 
              benefits to be expected from research stemming from the  planning visit.
              Results have potential for impact on  wildlife management and, more broadly, on
              our  understanding of ecological systems.  Additionally, Martin  will take a
              graduate student with him on the visit,  providing valuable field work and
              international experience  for a young scientist.  ***
