Title       : CAREER: Physiological Regulation of Estrogen Receptor Gene Expression by
               Estrogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a9514038

Award Number: 9514038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy H. Ing   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514038  Ing      Estrogen is the most powerful hormone within animals and man
              which, in low doses that work over long times, regulates reproduction and many
              other body processes.  The goal of the proposed research by Dr. Ing is to learn
              how estrogen acts at the molecular level.  One way estrogen enhances its
              effects is by increasing the protein it binds ("estrogen receptor") within the
              tissues.  The tissues that respond to estrogen.  With it, she has demonstrated
              that estrogen increases estrogen receptor protein and estrogen receptor
              messenger RNA (mRNA).  Contrary to current beliefs in estrogen action, however,
              estrogen did not enhance the rate of estrogen receptor mRNA synthesis from the
              estrogen receptor gene.  Since proteins, like the estrogen receptor, are made
              with information encoded in genes (proteins are made from mRNAs which are made
              from genes), regulation may be occurring at the level of the mRNA instead of
              the gene.  Therefore, her hypothesis is that estrogen decreases the decay of
              estrogen receptor mRNA to enhance concentrations of estrogen receptor protein
              in tissues and estrogen responses of animals.  The proposed experiments will
              prove the hypothesis and then determine how it occurs in molecular terms. 
              First, uterine tissues from estrogen-treated and control animals will be
              cultured and analyzed to determine if estrogen really does stabilize estrogen
              receptor mRNA.  Next, the specific segment of the estrogen receptor mRNA
              responsible for estrogen-regulated stability will be identified in mutated
              mRNAs.  Finally, the regulatory proteins that bind and act on the estrogen
              receptor mRNA to stabilize it in the presence of estrogen will be
              characterized.  This insight into the basic action of this powerful hormone
              will lead to a better understanding of normal reproductive physiology on a
              molecular level.  ***
