Title       : Family Relationships, Social Ecologies, and Daily Life Events as Supports for
               Social Competence in Preschool Age Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9514563

Award Number: 9514563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Vaughn vaughbe@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514563  Vaughn  This project is an investigation of individual, relational, and
                socio-ecological factors supporting children's social competence   among
              peers in a sample of 3-4-year-old children in center-based   child care
              settings. Data gathered with reference to child-  caregiver attachment, child
              temperament, features of the social   support network, life events/daily
              hassles, and attributes of the   peer setting itself are used to test a formal
              model of supports   for children's social competence in a sample broadly  
              representative of working and middle class families across a   range of ethnic
              groups in the State of Alabama. Latent variables   in the formal model are
              derived from multiple, independent   variables assessed concretely. The model
              posits both direct and   indirect pathways of influence from family
              relationships to peer   social competence. Data gathered will afford
              opportunities to   explore emerging structural and supportive properties of
              young   children's social networks from both mother and child   perspectives
              and explorations of the mothers' networks as   influences on children's
              networks. Also examined will be   influences of parent-child attachment and
              child temperament on   children's social competence with peers. Finally, the
              data will   provide opportunities to evaluate effects of life events stress  
              and daily hassles on attributes of the social network and on   social
              competence. Because samples will be drawn across a broad   range of
              socio-demographic parameters, it will also be possible   to test influences on
              social competence from levels of social   organization such as "classroom,"
              "neighborhood," and   socioeconomic status position.  %%%  This 3-year project
              investigates individual, relational, and   socio-ecological factors supporting
              children's social competence   among peers in a sample of 3-4-year-old children
              in center-based   child care settings. A sample of families will be recruited
              in   each project year that covers the spectrum of ethnicity an d   income
              levels targeted in the study, in approximate proportion to   the population of
              the State of Alabama. Approximately 25% of the   sample in each project year
              will come from African-American   background and approximately 50% of the
              sample in each project   year will have family incomes below the median income
              level in   Alabama. Information gathered in the course of the project will  
              test a formal model that hypothesizes direct and indirect   influences of
              family relationships and child temperament on peer   social competence and on
              attributes of children's social   networks. Peer competence is assessed in the
              context of child   care classrooms. Home visits are used to observe
              parent-child   interactions relevant to the quality of their relationships.  
              Social networks and life events stresses are evaluated from   interviews with
              both the parent and child. The data collection   plan and analytic strategies
              afford opportunities to assess the   influences of the classroom, the
              neighborhood, and various   socioeconomic indicators on both the social support
              networks and   peer social competence. Results from this study may be used to  
              inform policy concerning optimal timing of group care experiences   for
              preschool children, and will also be relevant to evaluating   the relative
              influences of families, classroom social and   physical environments, and
              informal social support networks on   children's sense of well-being.  ***
