Title       : Anxiety and Endocrine Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9514300

Award Number: 9514300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Ellison pellison@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to assess the association between two forms of
              psychosocial stress,  chronic and acute anxiety, and human ovarian function as
              indexed by profiles of salivary  progesterone and estradiol. Variation in each
              form of stress will be assessed at two levels,  between women and within
              individual women.  Chronic and acute anxiety will be assessed by  standard
              psychological tests and by patterns of salivary cortisol.  The project will be
              composed of two separate studies.  In the first study, 120 subjects will be 
              screened  for levels of chronic anxiety.  Twenty women at both the high and low
              end of the  distribution will be asked to collect daily saliva samples for
              hormonal analysis and assessment of  ovarian function.  In the second study, 20
              subjects subject to a common acute stressor (the  Medical College Admissions
              Test), will be matched with subjects not subject to the stress.   Salivary
              hormone levels and ovarian function will be assessed in both groups in the
              month of the  test and again three moths later.  This project incorporates
              several distinct advantages over previous research on the effects of 
              psychosocial stress on reproductive physiology. It is prospective in design and
              double-blind in  execution, eliminating ambiguities in the interpretation of
              dependent and independent variables. It  incorporates sensitive measures of
              ovarian function which have been found to be responsive to  other environmental
              and situational stresses.  It involves two different explicit measures of the 
              independent variables, one of which directly reflects physiological stress
              responses.  It  distinguishes the effects of chronic and acute anxiety, and
              variation between and within women.    The results of this project will provide
              a much clearer assessment of the impact of anxiety on  human ovarian function
              than has been possible previously, and should contribute to our  understanding
              of broader issues in neuroendocrinology.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
