Title       : Choice without Beliefs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9514908

Award Number: 9514908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76462              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Easley dae3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aldo Rustichini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514908  Easley    This project studies the following important question:  What
              does  an individual do when confronted with a new potentially complex, 
              stochastic decision problem?  According to standard expected  utility theory,
              before making any choices the individual  determines all possible stochastic
              processes that could be  driving the states of the world and accesses a prior
              over these  processes.  As appealing as this theory is in relatively simple 
              settings in which no further learning need occur, it is difficult  to accept in
              complex settings.  This project develops an  alternative evolutionary
              foundation for static expected utility  maximization.  Within this alternative
              framework individuals do  not access beliefs over all possible stochastic
              processes.  They  do not even attempt to determine the set of possible
              processes.   Instead, they act and learn from their experience.  Here an 
              individual begins with a set of candidate decision rules, starts  with weights
              on these rules, and selects an initial rule using  these weights as
              probabilities.  She/he then acts according to  the recommendation made by the
              selected rule.  After observing  the state and the payoff that is achieved, the
              individual updates  the weights on rules using an evolutionary dynamic.  He/she
               selects the rule to use at the next date based on these updated  weights, and
              so on.  Based on the work completed so far, it is  known that with three
              natural axioms on the dynamic: symmetry,  monotonicity, and independence, the
              individual eventually chooses  a rule that is a subjective expected utility
              maximizer with  correct expectations.  One part of the project is to determine
              if  these axioms are minimal for this conclusion.  This project  extends the
              process oriented model of choice to richer settings  and an analysis of
              interaction between multiple evolutionary  individuals.
