Title       : Scaling of the Mechanics and Energetics of Mammalian Muscle Fibers with Body
               Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9514383

Award Number: 9514383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232558             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Rome lrome@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514383  Rome      It has been empirically shown that small animals (e.g. mice
              and rats) move their limbs at higher frequencies than large animals (man or
              horses) and that it costs more energy per gram for a small animal to move a
              given distance than for a large one.  In this proposal, the principal
              investigator (PI) will ask "how is the muscular system designed to permit much
              faster movements in small animals and why does it cost much more energy for
              small animals to run than large ones?"  It has been hypothesized that the
              difference lies in the properties of the muscle fibers.  The muscle fibers of
              the small animals are thought to be much faster--a necessity for the high
              frequencies at which these animals run.  But there is a price:  very fast
              muscle fibers use far more energy to generate force, thus potentially
              explaining why it is more costly for small animals to run.  The PI will test
              the above hypothesis by measuring how speed and the energetic cost of
              generating force of different fiber types scales with body size in animals
              ranging from rats to horses.  The long-term goal of the PI's research is to
              understand the design of muscular systems.  This involves performing specific
              experiments that facilitate the integration of information from molecular,
              cellular and whole animal studies.  This approach is crucial because there are
              large gaps in our knowledge of the principles by which animals use their
              muscles.  Further, elucidation of the principles of how healthy motor systems
              work may have far-reaching application in terms of health and athletic
              performance of humans and other animals.  For instance, the information
              obtained from these studies may be useful in 1) understanding disease/injuries
              of the motor/cardiovascular systems; 2) designing computer systems for aiding
              movement in the handicapped; 3) designing pharmacological and genetic
              interventions for muscle disease states; 4) understanding the functional basis
              of training/rehabilitation; and 5) choosing appropriate skeletal muscle fo r
              heart pumping assist.  With recent attempts to use tissue from non-human
              species in man, these studies would be particularly important as they will
              provide a data base of muscle speeds from which physicians might be able to
              choose a good match for a particular function in humans.  This information will
              also be important for veterinary medicine.  ***
