Title       : Sociolinguistic Survey of Cajun French
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9514831

Award Number: 9514831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvie Dubois sdubois@ix.netcom.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is an extensive sociolinguistic investigation of  Cajun French. The
              study will use a scientific methodology based  on a large and diverse enough
              sample of speakers to enable  researchers to access the range of variability of
              the Cajun  speech community. The results will provide the basis for answers 
              about the real usage of, the linguistic attitudes toward, and the  structure of
              this variety, and, consequently, its degree of  assimilation. The goal is to
              determine what Cajun French is in  Louisiana today, who uses it, when, with
              whom and to what end.  Two major objectives will be achieved by this project.
              The first  is the delimitation and definition of four Cajun communities 
              (Thibodaux, Abbeville, Eunice and Marksville), as well as the  linguistic
              attitudes of the inhabitants. To achieve this, a  stratified sample of 1200
              individuals representing these four  communities will be constructed which will
              allow access to socio-  economic and geographic diversity, and a sociological 
              questionnaire will be distributed to specific categories of  respondents. This
              will allow researchers to examine linguistic  attitudes about identity and
              belonging. By assessing four  sociolinguistic indices (linguistic competence in
              Cajun, Cajun  ancestry, network of Cajun use, and use of standard French), they
               will also evaluate the sociolinguistic stability of Cajun French.  The second
              objective is the analysis of the Cajun language spoken  by native or
              near-native members of the four communities. To  highlight its specific nature,
              several linguistic forms which are  strongly stigmatized or otherwise marked
              will be studied. The  tokens will be drawn from a spoken Cajun French database
              designed  to allow statistically valid results representative of the four 
              linguistic communities.        By accounting for the social and cultural
              aspects of the  sociolinguistic situation of Cajun French the results will help
               investigators understand the evolution and maintenance of this  non-standard
              variety, which is  confronted with both the  school-taught standard French held
              up as a linguistic model and  with cultural and linguistic encroachments by the
              majority  Anglophone society. The proposed study will have a significant 
              impact by providing both documentation and interpretation of an  extensive
              linguistic corpus and of statements by Louisiana French  speakers concerning
              their cultural/linguistic experience.  Finally, the results of this
              comprehensive analysis will  contribute to debates on norms, on language
              planning and on the  standardization of non-standard varieties.
