Title       : An Anchoring-based Theory of Lightness Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9514679

Award Number: 9514679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258356             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Gilchrist   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514679  GILCHRIST    This research will further examine how the human visual
              system  assigns black, white and gray values to surfaces represented in  the
              image projected onto the retina.  This problem remains  unsolved, in human
              vision as in computer vision, because the  intensity of light reflected from
              any given surface in the visual  world, regardless of its actual shade of gray,
              can vary by a  factor of a billion to one, depending on lighting conditions.  
              Prior research has established that the perceived shade of gray  of a surface
              depends on the intensity of that surface relative to  that of neighboring
              surfaces, not its absolute intensity, and  that relative intensity is just what
              is encoded when light from  the world strikes the human retina.  But this
              brings into focus  what has been called the anchoring problem:  How is an
              absolute  or specific shade of gray assigned to these relative intensity 
              values?   The general approach of the work will be to formulate   alternative
              potential rules the visual system might use and then  to construct visual
              displays that produce retinal images capable  of testing among these rules. 
              For a given display, one rule  might predict that a particular surface will be
              seen as middle  gray while a competing rule might predict that the same surface
               will be seen as white.  The display will be presented to a set of  naive human
              observers, from whom reports will be obtained as to  the apparent gray shade of
              the surface.  They will indicate the  appearance of the target surface by
              choosing a matching chip from  a standard scale of gray chips under standard
              lighting  conditions.  The work of this project will build upon a series of 
              findings from previous funding that have established the rules of  anchoring
              for relatively simple visual displays.  In short these  rules state that, for
              simple images, the surface with the highest  intensity will be seen as white
              and darker regions will be scaled  relative to this standard.  But relative
              size of regions has also   been shown to be important and can override the role
              of the  highest intensity in certain cases.  Prior work along these lines  has
              produced a model of visual functioning that has already  proven to account for
              much of the research literature in this  field.  The work of this research
              project will be guided by  contradictions and gaps in this model.  An important
              goal will be  the extension of the model to ever more complex images.  The 
              solution of this problem in human vision should make it easier to  solve the
              problem for computer vision.    ***
