Title       : The Physics of Chemoreception: Interactions of Fluid Flow and Chemosensory
               Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9514492

Award Number: 9514492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Moore pmoore@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9107,9169,9178,BIOT,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Sensory reception of a stimulus often involves structures or processes called
              "perireceptor" features that affect the sensory signal before it gets access to
              the receptor cells.  Examples include the lens of the eye or the eardrum of the
              ear.  In chemoreceptor systems for taste and smell, there is a new interest in
              how solubility, microscale fluid mechanics, diffusion, and chemical reactivity
              affect responses to chemical stimuli.  The lobster antennule is a good example
              of a chemoreceptor working in a fluid; this organ, like a small antenna, is
              covered with fine bristles and chemoreceptors to sample, in time and space,
              odor plumes that come by in the water.  The lobster "flicks" the antennule as
              an analogy to "sniffing" with a nose, as the physical flick displaces the water
              mass trapped around the bristles with a new sample water mass.  This project
              uses sophisticated stimulus delivery techniques, 3-D video analysis, and novel
              sensor electrodes, working with this different appendages in the lobster as a
              model system, to provide novel quantitative data on temporal and spatial
              features in the microscale environment around the receptor cells.  Boundary
              layer and physical transport processes interact with the detailed structure of
              the receptor organ to provide "filtering" of the input signals, and it is this
              filtering that helps extract information from the environment in a way adaptive
              for the animal.  The morphology and sampling behavior of different chemosensory
              appendages will be analyzed to see what role the differences play in
              determining the spatial and temporal analysis of chemical signals.   Results
              from this work will lead to new understanding of how specialized chemoreceptors
              detect patterns of stimuli, and how such chemosensory organs have evolved to
              detect particular kinds of environmental signals.  The impact will extend
              beyond chemosensory neuroscience to behavioral science, evolutionary biology,
              fluid mechanics, and possibly also on marine aquaculture.
