Title       : Selection and Plasticity in Social Behavior and Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9514063

Award Number: 9514063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199627             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia M. Rauter cmraut0@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen J. Moore  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kenneth F. Haynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Moore  9514063  Secondary sexual characters are traits that
              influence the reproductive success of individuals.  These traits, such as
              elaborate structures, nuptial colors, courtship songs, or sex pheromones, have
              no function outside of mating.  They are often elaborate and may be costly to
              produce and maintain. Secondary sexual characters develop  after adulthood
              prior to full sexual maturity and are often sexually dimorphic.  Elaborate
              secondary sexual characters are most often associated with males, often change
              with age, influenced by the environment, and can be conditiondependent.  These
              traits have evolved as a result of sexual selection: i.e. either their impact
              on male-male competition for mates or their influence on female mating
              preferences.  This study will determine the quantitative genetics and evolution
              of the male-produced sex pheromone of Nauphoeta cinerea and the social behavior
              of males and females that is displayed in response to this pheromone.  This
              sexual signal develops after males emerge to adulthood, is sex limited in
              expression, and changes with age and social experience after it has developed. 
              Further, this signal has apparently evolved as a result of sexual selection;
              both of the behavioral mechanisms of sexual selection are influenced by
              variation in this pheromone.  Females discriminate among males on the basis of
              this pheromone, and bias the developmental rates of their offspring by mating
              discriminatory.  The outcome of aggressive social interactions among males is
              also influenced by this pheromone.  Extensive background knowledge and
              experience in studying this pheromone allows one to address fundamental
              questions concerning the impacts of variable environments, genetics, and
              development of this sex pheromone and associated behaviors.  The P.I. will
              determine developmental and age-related changes in this pheromone.  In addition
              he will address how the external environment experienced during development
              shapes sexually-selected signals and behavior. Fi nally,  this will quantify
              the extent that genetic variation impacts responses to environmental
              influences. These results will increase our understanding of the genetics and
              evolution of social signals.  These experiments will provide the first
              information on how the behaviors and signals involved in sexual selection are
              mediated by plasticity.  In addition, they will address the importance of
              genotype by environment (GxE) interactions for sexual selection.
