Title       : Integration of Water and Energy Balance in Hummingbirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9514351

Award Number: 9514351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Beuchat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9514351  Beuchat    Hummingbirds  have  the  highest  metabolic  rate   of  
              any  vertebrate, and they fuel this tremendous metabolism  almost  entirely
              with the sugar found in nectar.  Supporting a  high  metabolic rate on liquid
              diet presents these birds with some  special physiological problems. Most
              obviously, hummingbirds  must  consume tremendous quantities of nectar,  up  to
               five  times  the  bird's  own  body  mass  per  day!   Then,   the 
              gastrointestinal tract must be able to extract,  with  great  efficiency, the
              sugar and other nutrients in the  nectar  as  it passes rapidly through the
              bird.  The kidney must also be  able to filter and excrete excess water to
              avoid dilution of  body  fluids.  Finally, because concentrations of salts  and
               minerals in nectar are typically low but are needed  by  the  bird, the
              amounts excreted in the urine must be minimal.    This  research  investigates
              the ways in which  hummingbirds  deal   simultaneously   with  these  extreme  
              physiological  challenges  of fluid, electrolyte, and energy balance.   The 
              study  focuses not only on understanding fundamental aspects  of  the 
              physiology  of the kidney and intestinal  tract  in  hummingbirds,  but  also 
              on how these  organ  systems  play  coordinated roles in the physiological
              maintenance of energy  and  osmotic  homeostasis.  The work is further extended
               by  considering the integration of renal and intestinal function  with
              hummingbird biology at the organismal level in a series  of  questions that
              address the interface of physiology  with  behavior, morphology, and ecology,
              and evolution.    Much  of what comparative physiology has contributed to  our 
              understanding  of  osmoregulation in terrestrial  birds  and  mammals   has 
              been  based  upon  studies  of  the  ultimate  concentrators, the desert
              rodents, and only a few species of  birds.   We  know relatively little, by
              contrast, about  the  special  osmoregulatory problems faced by birds and 
              mammals  for  which  the challenge is an exc ess of water rather  than 
              desiccation.   This study is unusual in the breadth  of  its  perspective and
              its simultaneous consideration of  processes  from  the cellular level to that
              of the animal in the field.  It is  the first study to closely examine the
              osmoregulatory  physiology of a bird or mammal that is a model organism  for 
              the study of diuresis in vertebrates.
