Title       : Neural Regulation of Locomotor Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9514617

Award Number: 9514617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Brodfuehrer pbrodfue@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514617  Brodfuehrer    It is commonly observed that an animal when presented
              with  the same stimulus on successive trials will often perform  different
              behaviors.  This means that an animal decides,  often very rapidly, which
              behavior is appropriate for the  circumstances at that moment.  The concept of
              `motivation'  is often used to explain this type of short-term behavioral 
              variability observed under conditions where sensory input is  constant.  The
              underlying neuronal mechanism of motivation,  however, has yet to be defined. 
              Since an animal's survival  depends upon it continually making the appropriate 
              behavioral response to ever changing environmental  conditions, understanding
              how an animal decides upon an  appropriate motor response is integral to our
              understanding  of animal behavior.    In the medicinal leech, research on the
              neuronal basis of  swimming has progressed to the point where the initiation of
               swimming following body wall stimulation can be traced from  the sensory
              neurons that perceive the stimulus to the motor  neurons that produce the
              swimming movements.  However,  stimulation of this pathway does not always
              elicit swimming.  The probability that swimming occurs following a given 
              stimulus trial is quite variable.  The role that a pair of  identified
              interneurons in the leech head ganglion plays in  biasing the behavioral
              response of a leech toward swimming  following a given sensory input will be
              addressed in this  proposal.  The results generated from this study will 
              provide additional insights into the principles governing  behavioral
              variability in the leech with respect to the  initiation of swimming, and
              further enhance our  understanding of the types of neuronal networks and 
              mechanisms that can influence the motivational state of  animals.
