Title       : Hydrogen Tunneling in Enzyme Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1998   
File        : a9514126

Award Number: 9514126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith P. Klinman klinman@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9507018   Klinman           The original observations of room-temperature
              hydrogen tunneling in enzyme reactions occured in the yeast alcohol
              dehydrogenase and the bovine serum amine oxidase reactions.  In recent years,
              evidence for tunneling has been exteneded to include horse liver alcohol
              dehudrogenase, monoamine oxidase, and very likely soybean lipoxygenase and
              glucose oxidase.  When conditions are optimized to allow the monitoring of the
              hydrogen transfer step itself, it appears that the phenomenon of tunneling can
              be readily detected, although the exact nature of tunneling varies from one
              system to another.  Our findings suggest that, in conjuction with the more
              classical sources of catalytic rate enhancement, the structures at enzyme
              active sites have been optimized to make catalytic use of quantum effects.     
                               One of the most extreme types of behavior has been seen in the
              soybean lipoxgenase reaction, which is postulated to catalyze substrate
              oxidation by close to full quantum event.  Future studies with this enzyme will
              focus on (i) the use of stopped flow kinetics to monitor the H-transfer step
              directly as function of temperature; (ii) the kinetic characterization of D/T
              and H/T labeled substrates as probes of tunneling.  Premiliary studies of D/T
              and H/T isotope effects with two forms of glucose oxidase, which differ ca.
              two-fold in mass (due solely to differences in patterns of
              glycosylation),suggest different degrees of tunneling.  These proteins will be
              deglycosylated and recharacterized to test the hypothesis that overall protein
              mass (and possibly mobility) can influence tnneling.  The horse liver alcohol
              dehydrogenase offers a superb opportunity to examine the role of specific
              active site side chains in optimizing tunneling.  A systematic study of
              residues contacting the bound cofactor is planned by site specific mutagenesis.
               In order or pursue the question of a possible link between protein dynamics
              and efficient hydrogen tunneling, two experimental routes wi ll be taken. 
              These involve (I) the study of horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase at low
              temperature in cryosolvent using a photodisociable, substrate precursor and
              (ii) the study of D/T and H/T isotope effects as a function of  temperture
              (between ca. 25 and 90oC) using thermophilic forms of alcohol dehydrogenase.   
                                      Brief Description (200 words) of Project       The
              accepted paradigm for the enormous rate accelerations brought about by protein
              catalysts (enzymes) has been a reduction in the height of the energy barrier
              for the conversion of reactant to product.  Quantum mechanics provides a more
              fundamental and general way of formalizing reaction dyamics.  However, with the
              exception of electron transfer reactions, it has generally been assumed that
              proteins, because of their large size, catalyze reactions classically.  In
              fact, we have recently shown that under physiologic conditions, quantum effects
              contribute significantly to the tate accelerations brought about by many
              enzymes.  We are now trying to understand the specific ways in which enzymes
              take advantage of quantum mechanics to enhance their catalytic effects.  Three
              areas are under investigation:  these include roles of specific amino acid side
              chain interactions, overall protein size, and protein dynamics in the
              manifestation of catalysis through quantum effects.
