Title       : RUI: Genetic and Functional Analysis of the Nocardia corallina
               Polyhydroxyalkanoate Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9514100

Award Number: 9514100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263032             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Dennis dennisde@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 1502
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9181,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9514100  Dennis  Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are energy-reserve polymers
              that are accumulated by many bacterial species in times of nutritional stress.
              Coincidentally, these polymers may also be utilized as biodegradable plastic.
              The physical properties of the plastic are dictated by the length of the carbon
              chain in the monomer unit with C4 homopolymers being relatively brittle and C8
              homopolymers being elastomeric. Copolymers tend to have physical properties
              intermediate between their monomer units. The enzymes that mediate the
              polymerization, PHA synthases, are grouped into three distinct categories based
              on their substrate specificity and their molecular structure. Type I PHA
              synthases have a single polypeptide chain and form predominately C4
              (3-hydroxybutyrate; 3HB) monomer units. Type II PHA synthases also have a
              single polypeptide chain, but they form C4 to C12 (3-hydroxydodecanoate; 3HDD)
              monomer units, with Cg (3-hydroxyoctanoate; 3HO) and C10 (3-hydroxydecanoate;
              3HD) being the preponderant units. Type III PHA synthase are composed of 2
              polypeptide chains and form largely 3HB. However, some members of this class
              are able to incorporate mostly 3HV into P(3HB-co-3HV) copolymer.  The PHA
              synthase from N. corallina (phaCNc), a bacteria which makes a substantial
              amount of 3-HV from unrelated carbon sources such as glucose and fructose has
              been cloned. Preliminary data suggests that this PHA synthase does not
              completely meet the specifications for any of the three classes of synthases.
              It has a single polypeptide chain and is genetically most similar to Type II
              PHA synthases, yet its substrate specificity appears to be largely in the 3HV
              and 3HH range, though its total substrate range is from 3HB to 3HHp
              (3-hydroxyheptanoate). This is quite exciting for several reasons. First,
              phaCNc represents a potentially new class of PHA synthase. Second, it is a PHA
              synthase which makes new types of polyhydroxyalkanoates that have been
              little-characterized. Third, it is well-expressed in Pseudomona s putida,
              reasonably expressed in Alcaligenes eutrophus and Klebsiella aerogenes, and
              poorly expressed in Escherichia coli. Fourth, it is a PHA synthase that may
              have the capacity to be utilized in plant constructs because it accesses long-
              and medium-chain fatty acid metabolism, yet only forms copolyesters of 3HB and
              3HHx (3-hydroxyhexanoate) or 3HV (3-hydroxyvalerate) and 3HHp.  This research
              continues the analysis of phaCNc in two specific areas.  In the first,
              expression of phaCNc will be analyzed in the four different recombinant hosts
              named above. Analyses will be conducted for enzymatic activity, quantitation of
              phaCNc transcripts, and quantitation of PhaCNc levels. This data will be
              correlated with the levels of expression of polymer in each recombinant host.
              In addition, the effect of rare codon usage in each host will be analyzed by
              selecting specific codons, genetically altering them to more prevalent codons,
              and then examining the result of this alteration on enzymatic activity, phaCNc
              transcript levels, protein levels, and polymer levels. Finally, the effect of
              placing phaCNc under the control of a strong, regulatable promoter will be
              determined. The expected result of this phase of the project is an
              understanding of the factors which limit or facilitate phaCNc expression. An
              additional result is the construction of phaCNc genes which are well-expressed
              in recombinant hosts.  In the second phase of the project studies will be
              initiated that focus on identifying regions of phaCNc which mediate substrate
              specificity. The first strategy used will be to randomly mutagenize phaCNc and
              screen for altered substrate specificity of PhaCNc. This will done
              enzymatically utilizing a novel screening assay developed in our laboratory.
              phaCNc genes which exhibit altered substrate specificity will be analyzed as to
              the specific change in their DNA sequence. The second strategy used to to
              identify regions that regulate substrate specificity will be to construct
              chimeras from different PHA synthase g enes and analyze the construct for
              enzymatic activity and polymer composition.  Though many (approximately 19)
              different PHA synthases have been cloned, only one has been rigorously studied,
              the Alcaligenes eutrophus PHA synthase, and these studies did not extend to the
              level proposed here for phaCNc- phaCNc has advantages over most other PHA
              synthase genes in that its substrate specificity falls into a range that is
              more likely to be of commercial interest. Studies proposed here should be
              applicable not only to phaCNc, but to other PHA synthase genes as well.  %%% 
              This research has application to the inexpensive production of biodegradable
              plastics.  In addition, it accomplishes the training of undergraduate students
              in the techniques of molecular biology and their applications to problems of
              both basic and applied interests.  ***
