Title       : Comparative Phonology of Ivoirian Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9514718

Award Number: 9514718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Leben leben@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The core of the present project is a focused, in-depth  comparative study of
              tone and associated prosodic phenomena in a  number of Kwa languages of Ivory
              Coast, with Baule at the center  of the investigation. In joint work on Baule
              over the past year,  the investigators have uncovered new evidence for two
              prosodic  constituents that have already received much attention in the 
              literature, the prosodic word and the phonological phrase.  Several tonal
              puzzles were solved by positing prosodic domains  that were independently
              justified on the basis of a variety of  other facts in the language. The
              resulting framework provides a  much better motivated analysis than other
              devices that are  commonly used.    The project directors expect that the
              effects of the project will  extend to the following areas:    Prosodic
              Phonology  The comprehensive coverage of eight related languages promises to 
              provide clear, empirically motivated definitions of the prosodic  domains.   
              Comparative Kwa   The data, because they will be gathered in a well coordinated
               fashion from several dozen dialects of the eight languages to be  studied,
              promise to be of great use to comparativists.    Methodology  The project is
              expected to demonstrate the benefits of  cross-dialect and cross-language study
              for synchronic analysis.    Typology of tonal systems   The languages to be
              studied are full tone languages, with between  two and four phonological tones
              and complex tonal rules. They are  likely to shed further light on a variety of
              questions in the  theory of tone that previous investigations in West African 
              languages have asked.     Training of graduate students   A key component of
              the project is the training of linguists to  carry out research in their native
              language and related dialects  and languages.     Documentation of Ivoirian
              languages   The project will help to assure the continued survival of the 
              languages to be studied by creating a body of material that can  be drawn on in
              literacy-related and literary-related  work.
