Title       : Online Ethics Codes Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9514780

Award Number: 9514780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivian Weil vivian.weil@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Trygstad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a project  that will put approximately eight hundred and fifty codes of
              ethics held in paper form by the library of the Center for the Study of Ethics
              in the Professions on the World-Wide Web (WWW), along with keyword searchable
              indexes and guidelines for use.  The codes will be indexed by subject and by
              issuing agency, and will include a keyword search engine which will allow users
              to retrieve the documents by entering any keyword they wish.  Hypertext links
              will be provided to issuing agencies, to other on-line ethics resources, and to
              an instructional overview introducing the codes and providing guidance about
              how best to use them.  The codes are useful in themselves and are valuable
              documents for teaching, research, and professional development. Researchers can
              study the history of a profession by studying different versions of codes;
              students can often find a good toehold for research into professional ethics by
              analyzing a code of ethics; and professional engineers, scientists, and others
              who are trying to create or improve a code of ethics for their own field often
              need examples of other codes to learn from and build on.  The project leader
              will write an introductory essay and a User Guide explaining how codes can be
              used for teaching, research, and professional development.  If the originating
              agency of a code of ethics has a WWW page, or a gopher, hypertext links will be
              created which connect the code to its originating agency.  This will allow
              professionals and students alike to learn more about the professional
              association and its membership.  Such web pages and gophers usually have e-mail
              addresses and phone numbers for significant committee members.  Thus
              communication among students, researchers and members of the profession will be
              facilitated, and opportunities for professional development will be created.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
