Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research to Enhance the Performance of the Model
               Elimination Proof Procedure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9514375

Award Number: 9514375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Loveland dwl@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Owen L. Astrachan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5936,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Donald Loveland and Assistant Professor Owen
              Astrachan of Duke University to collaborate in computer science research with
              Professor Eike Jessen and others of the Computer Architecture Department of the
              Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany.  They are studying the Model
              Elimination proof procedure, a general-purpose theorem-proving technique of
              interest to both research groups.  The procedure is derived from the logic
              programming language Prolog, and can use the sophisticated implementation
              architecture developed for Prolog.  There is a significant amoung of research
              being performed on Model Elimination in Germany as part of a five year
              multi-university research program on deduction that is lead by the TUM group. 
              A fundamental issue being studied by both the German and US groups is the
              intelligent use of lemmas that are automatically generated by the Model
              Elimination system for use in accelerating the subsequent proof finding. 
              Significant theorems have been proven using this technique enhanced with the
              lemma device where no solutions would have been possible without the lemma
              device.  Therefore the development of good lemma selection techniques would be
              particularly valuable in this area of computer science.  The collaborating Duke
              and TUM research groups have experience respectively with global and local
              lemma techniques.  These are quite different approaches, and combining them is
              expected to lead to enhancements of the lemma techniques which will expand the
              usefulness of the Model Elimination procedure for proving more complex theorems
              such as those in the `grand challenge` class.  The U.S. group will also benefit
              from interactions with other participants in the German national program from
              the University of Koblenz and the Humboldt University in Berlin.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
