Title       : Perceptual and Decisional Processes in Identification and Categorization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1997  
File        : a9514331

Award Number: 9514331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74375              (Estimated)
Investigator: W Todd Maddox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514331  MADDOX    The long-term objective of this research is to better
              understand  the perceptual and cognitive processes involved when a person 
              identifies or categorizes objects.  This research will  investigate the complex
              interplay between perceptual and  decisional processes within the theoretical
              framework of General  Recognition theory which is a multivariate generalization
              of  Signal Detection Theory.  This research will investigate several  
              important aspects of human behavior.  First, this research will  investigate
              the optimality of human categorization performance  when category baserates and
              category payoffs are unequal.  This  is an important issue, because baserate
              and payoff differences  are ubiquitous in nature; for example, disease
              categories often  differ in their frequency and in the costs and benefits 
              associated with various diagnoses.  Since the goal of the  physician is to
              diagnose a patient accurately, efficient use of  baserate and payoff
              information is extremely important.  This  research will not only allow one to
              determine the optimality of  human performance, but will assist in identifying
              the locus of  any potential suboptimalities.  Second, this research will 
              examine the time it takes an individual to arrive at an  identification or
              categorization decision.  The  focus will be on  identifying the environmental
              factors that influence response  time, such as whether the components of the
              object can be  attended selectively, or whether the identification or 
              categorization  problem is complex, etc.  A major goal will be to  test several
              extant theories of response time, including the   response time predictions
              from General Recognition Theory.  This  work complements the baserate and
              payoff analyses because not  only does the physician want to make an accurate
              diagnosis, but  in many cases the physician is under severe time pressure.  
              Third, this research will investigate the relationship between  the
              identification and categorization of objects.  The focus will   be on
              understanding how perceptual and decisional processes  differ across tasks. 
              The results of this research will allow us  to better understand human
              identification and categorization  behavior, and ultimately influence these
              behaviors in a  productive and useful manner.    ***
