Title       : Electronic Democracy and Political Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9514269

Award Number: 9514269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72098              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Bimber bimber@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0521900   Mass Media & Socialization              
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The nascent information superhighway is offering rapidly expanding opportunities
              for citizens to engage in political activities electronically.  `Electronic
              democracy` projects have generated a great deal of speculation about how new
              network-based technologies will affect patterns of political access and
              participation, and ultimately, how these will affect the distribution of
              political influence and power in the US.  This study involves a longitudinal
              survey of political participation at several electronic democracy sites, with
              the aim of producing an empirical profile of electronic participators.  Data
              will be collected using on-line surveys at several electronic democracy sites,
              which will be conducted in three rounds spaced at six-month intervals. 
              Questions will examine socioeconomic status, support for the political system,
              traditional participation habits, party identification and ideology, and extent
              of participation in the electronic democracy site.  Data from the survey will
              be used to construct a statistical profile of users of electronic democracy at
              the sites included in the study.  That profile will be compared with a profile
              of traditional political participators drawn from existing data in the National
              Election Studies and General Social Survey, and a series of hypotheses about
              differences between profiles tested.  Among the aims of the study are:  a)
              providing evidence about the extent to which the technology of electronic
              democracy may alleviate or exacerbate problems of access and alienation among
              low-income, less educated citizens; b) shedding empirical light on the claims
              of some that the technology may bring about a populist renewal of democracy;
              and c) exploring a new model of political participation that adds medium of
              participation to variables for individual-level characteristics and political
              context.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
