Title       : RUI: Foraging Behavior and the Role of Social Transmission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9514137

Award Number: 9514137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Clarke jaclarke@bentley.univnorthco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      Carter Hall 4000
	      Greeley, CO  80639    303/351-2881

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Clarke  9514117      Obtaining food is one of the most critical
              problems faced by young animals, particularly precocial young that must seek
              out the correct foods to eat soon after birth. The development of feeding
              behavior is a critical area of study considering the high mortality rate of
              juvenile birds attributable to starvation and predation due to inept foraging
              behaviors. These high mortality rates indicate that selective pressures must be
              intense for the rapid development of foraging skills. Three factors may
              contribute to food recognition in gallinaceous species: a) innate pecking
              preferences, b) taste and nutritional factors, and c)social transmission. It is
              likely that all three factors operate together to enhance and expedite food
              recognition and the development of foraging behavior.  This study proposes to
              investigate the development of foraging behavior in an alpine grouse, the
              White-tailed Ptarmigan, whose precocial chicks must identify food species in
              the wide array of items presented in the alpine tundra soon after hatching. The
              interrelationship of social and nutritional factors influencing food choice
              will be the study's primary focus. Preliminary data indicate that the hens emit
              unique vocalizations (food calls) when specific items are located. Chicks
              respond to the food calls by approaching the hen's bill and feeding on the same
              species she is eating. Further, the plant species that elicit hen food calls
              become the major items in the chick's diets. The foods eliciting food calls
              also may differ from other foods eaten by the hen that do not elicit food calls
              in their nutritional content (e.g. prmtein). Thus the question arises: Do the
              hens' food calls function to focus the chicks' feeding choices through socially
              transmitted food recognition? The first hypothesis that will be investigated is
              that chicks will forage more often on those foods to which elicit hen food
              calls than they will on foods which do not elicit food calls because the call
              represents a form of soc ial transmission that enhances the chicks' recognition
              of specific foods.  White-tailed Ptarmigan provide an ideal species for field
              studies of the ontogeny of foraging behaviors because hens with chicks
              accommodate to human observers, are reluctant to fly, have high site fidelity,
              and forage in the alpine where the vegetation is low in stature and relatively
              low in diversity all of which facilitates foraging observations. Also, the
              foraging selections of the adult ptarmigan are documented as are their
              nutritional profiles. Experimental manipulations would be advantageous in
              testing the hypotheses but are not possible for a variety of reasons. However,
              the hypotheses can be thoroughly investigated by exploiting natural variations
              within the population regarding food calling. The hens within the population
              vary in food calling frequency, ranging from hens that emit food calls during
              nearly every feeding bout to hens that were never heard to emit a food call.
              Thus, in lieu of direct manipulations, comparisons will be made between broods
              of hens that exhibit variations in food calling regarding diet shifting.  This
              research represents one of the first studies to address directly the function
              of social transmission conducted with wild animals in their natural habitat. 
              ***
