Title       : The LHRH System and Reproductive Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9514687

Award Number: 9514687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly S. Rubin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan C. King  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              King  9514687      Successful reproduction in animal species requires the
              release of  an egg from the ovary, known as ovulation.  Ovulation requires the 
              joint action of a part of the brain, known as the hypothalamus, and  the
              pituitary gland.  A chemical substance released by the  hypothalamus,
              luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH), is  transported by the blood to
              the pituitary gland and acts on cells  therein to enhance the secretion of
              luteinizing hormone (LH) which  helps prime the ovary for ovulation.  The exact
              mechanism involved  in LHRH secretion into the bloodstream is currently a
              mystery but  through the efforts of Dr. King, she has demonstrated marked 
              cellular reorganization within the vascular portion of the  hypothalamus, known
              as the median eminence, that facilitates  chemical secretion by the brain.  Dr.
              King is using the state of  the art microscopic techniques to investigate the
              anatomical  relationship between the cells producing LHRH and glial support 
              cells in the median eminence and the changes in this relationship  occurring at
              the time LHRH is secreted.  Dr. King is also examining  the role of excitatory
              neurotransmitters in the dynamic  relationship between LHRH-containing cells,
              glial cells, and the  blood vessels themselves during the remodeling at the
              time of LHRH  secretion.  Studies to identify the cellular components involved
              in  communication between these cells that stimulate reorganization are 
              underway.  These studies examine the local regulation of brain LHRH  secretion.
               The coordinated secretion of LHRH is responsible for  the regulation of
              reproductive abilities in animals and  understanding these mechanisms is
              central to the survival of all  animal species, domestic or wild, including
              man.
