Title       : Functional Characterization of the Sucrose Binding Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9514410

Award Number: 9514410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard D. Grimes grimes@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      ***  9514410  Grimes  The processes that regulate carbon allocation to
              various organs and the developing seed directly impact plant growth,
              development, and productivity.  In nearly all plants, the most important
              translocated nutrient is sucrose and, thus, understanding the molecular
              biology, biochemistry, and physiology of sucrose transport is a central problem
              in plant biology.  Sucrose, a chemically inert carbohydrate, is synthesized in
              the cytosol of photosynthetically active leaves and, in a process termed
              "phloem loading," is actively loaded into the phloem against a concentration
              gradient for long distance transport.  After transport to sink tissues, such as
              the developing seed, sucrose is unloaded from the phloem into the apoplastic
              space and, in many plant species, transported across the plasma membrane into
              the sink tissue cells.  It has been known that sucrose movement across the
              plasm membrane is a well regulated process and begins with uptake of sucrose by
              the sink tissue cells.  With funding from the NSF, Dr. Grimes and his
              colleagues have demonstrated that this uptake of sucrose may be mediated by the
              sucrose binding protein (SBP).  The intent of this research is to elucidate the
              basic biochemistry of sucrose transport in plants and define the mechanistic
              role of the SBP in sucrose uptake.  This work is significant in that it will
              provide insight into a novel membrane transport process, and contribute to our
              understanding of how plants make use of photosynthetic products for their
              growth and development.  ***
