Title       : Function of Auxin-Binding Protein 1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9514306

Award Number: 9514306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29688              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Jones alan_jones@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514306  Jones    This is a supplemental award to continue work on projects
              which address the function of the auxin receptor (Auxin-Binding Protein 1,
              ABP1) in growth control.  This is an unusual growth hormone receptor that does
              not fit any hormone receptor paradigm.  It also has unusual cell biology in
              that it is found predominantly in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen but has its
              site of action on the extracytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane.  The
              proposed work will utilize transformed cells, plants, and DNA constructs
              prepared during the prior funding period of the grant.  It also incorporates
              mutant plants that recently became available.  The three projects are:  1. The
              cDNA for the Arabidopsis ABP1 will be used for trangenic plant expression
              studies.  For several reasons, constitutive overexpression of this receptor is
              not possible; therefore, the auxin receptor cDNA was placed under the control
              of two inducible promoters (tet inducible and salicylic acid inducible). 
              production of transgenic tobacco and Arabidopsis plants are just now being
              made.  T2 plants will be characterized before and after the ABP cDNA is
              inducibly expressed to determine the effect of overexpression of this hormone
              receptor on plant growth and development.  2. In collaboration with CIBA-Geigy,
              maize cells were transformed with the maize auxin receptor cDNA driven by a
              constitutive promoter.  One cell line expressing the auxin receptor at high
              levels was found.  These cells had an unusual wall morphology that phenocopied
              transfer cells, a highly differentiated plant cell type that is involved in
              rapid movement of solutes.  This cell line is a valuable tool to study the
              properties of this important cell type and the function of the auxin receptor. 
              It is the first time a homogeneous population of transfer cells has been
              obtained.  These cells, despite having a drastically different morphology
              (numerous finger projections), appear to have the same cell wall polymer
              composition.  Studies are underway to determine how  different wall morphology
              can be generated and if ABP1 has a role in this transfer cell wall form.  3. 
              In collaboration with Pioneer seeds, mutant alleles of the maize ABP gene were
              found by a reverse genetics approach based on Mutator transposable element
              insertions.  Some of the alleles were sequenced and shown to be in 4 different
              ABP genes.  These mutants will be characterized to determine if the mutation in
              the ABP gene affects plant growth.  Mutants have been planted and will be
              backcrossed to determine if the phenotype correlates with the mutant allele.   
                To date, cell biological and biochemical approaches have been used to study
              the function of the auxin receptor without molecular genetic tools such as the
              transgenic and mutant plants described above.  While this has been productive
              for a while, new understanding can not be advanced without molecular genetic
              tools.  Perturbations on the function of the auxin receptor in the mutant and
              transgenic plants, observed using cell biological techniques, will elucidate
              the mechanism of this unusual hormone receptor in controlling plant cell growth
              and morphology.  ***
