Title       : Isolation and Characterization of Translational Activators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9514698

Award Number: 9514698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Mayfield mayfield@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514698  Mayfield  The general aims of this research are to understand
              translational regulation of chloroplast gene expression.  Nuclear genes that
              regulate translation of chloroplast mRNAs are being isolated and characterized.
               These genes have been tagged by insertional mutagenesis in the green algae
              Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.  Nuclear genes and gene products required for the
              translation of the pbsA mRNA, which encodes the light regulated D1 protein of
              the photosystem II reaction center, are being identified.  These genes are
              being cloned and their protein products characterized.  From this analysis it
              should be possible to identify proteins that function in all aspects of
              translation of chloroplast mRNAs.  This would include translation initiation
              factors, elongation factors, and even signal transduction proteins.  The
              approach is a genetic one and makes no assumptions about what type of proteins
              might be identified.  It is expected that some of these genes may encode
              proteins that directly interact with the 5' untranslated region of the
              messenger RNA, which are being studied under another grant.  Formation of the
              chloroplast and its ability to photosynthesize is dependent upon developmental
              and environmental signals, and requires close cooperation of the genomes of the
              chloroplast and nucleus.  This research is expected to make an important
              contribution to our understanding of the regulation of the genes involved in
              photosynthesis, a process used by plants to utilize energy from light.  ***
