Title       : CAREER: mRNA and Protein Turnover During Mammalian Hibernation: A Potential
               Stimulus for Arousals?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9514675

Award Number: 9514675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286164             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bert B. Boyer ffbbb@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9514675  Boyer      Hibernation   is   an  extreme  adaptation   involving   the
               coordination  of  multiple organs  in  lowering  whole  body  temperature  to 
              conserve energy for an extended  time.  The  PI's  study  hibernating ground
              squirrels which lower  their  body  temperature  for periods of up to three 
              weeks  before  they spontaneously rewarm to normal summer body temperatures 
              for  a  short  period  (< 24 hours).  Following  this  brief  rewarming 
              period, hibernators return to another three  week  period  of reduced body
              temperature. This repetitive pattern  of  cooling and rewarming might seem
              paradoxical,  since  it  requires  the  burning  of a significant  amount  of 
              stored  calories  throughout  the  hibernation  season,  unless  the  pattern 
              meets a critical physiological need.  The  proposed  research addresses this
              phenomenon and represents the  first  comprehensive  analysis  of the
              temperature  sensitivity  of  gene  expression  in a hibernating mammal.  The 
              PI's  major  objectives  are  to  (1) identify potential  messenger  RNAs 
              (mRNAs)  that  become limiting during low body  temperature;  (2) determine the
              turnover of these mRNAs by measuring their  rate   of  synthesis  and 
              degradation  as  a  function   of  temperature;  and (3) determine the effect
              of  reduced  mRNA  concentration  on protein synthesis rate as  a  function  of
               temperature.  Comparison  of  the  relative  rates  of  mRNA  synthesis   and 
              degradation  during  warm  and   low   body  temperatures  will result in a
              considerable  advancement  in  our   understanding   of  biological 
              adaptations   to   low  temperature.    This award also includes a teaching
              component. Most students  are   unskilled  with  the  process  of  scientific 
              inquiry  including   observation,  inference,  hypothesis  formation, 
              experimental   design,   data   collection,   analysis   and  interpretation.  
              To   explain   biological   concepts   and  understand the nature of biology,
              students must learn how to  think    c ritically,   reason   logically    and  
               evaluate  technological information effectively by being introduced to  the 
              methods,  values  and process of conducting  scientific  investigations.   The 
              educational plan  provides  this  for  students by giving them the opportunity
              to contribute to  an  ongoing research project focusing on molecular and
              metabolic  adaptations to hibernation. Students willing to produce  and  follow
               an organized research plan should develop  a  deeper  understanding of natural
              phenomena surrounding them  and  an  appreciation  for the tools of scientific 
              inquiry  and  the  expansion  of  biological  knowledge.  Concurrent  with  the
               proposed   undergraduate  educational  training,   excellent  teaching 
              assistant opportunities will foster  the  academic  growth  of  graduate
              students by integrating  education  and  research into their professional
              development.  Additionally,  critical  thinking skills will also be introduced 
              into  the  classroom   through  an  inquiry-based  teaching   approach. 
              Students  will  participate in problem  solving  activities,  debate,  
              hands-on  demonstrations  and  writing   exercises  involving  local  examples
              of scientific interest.  Finally,  cooperative  research and teaching
              interactions  with  rural  high  school teachers are proposed and include
              sharing ideas  and  experiences  gained  from inquiry-based  teaching,  and 
              development  of investigative laboratory experiences.  These  collaborative
              interactions  will  foster  the  establishment of valuable  linkages  with 
              rural  teachers  and increase the representation  of  Native  Alaskans  and 
              other  underrepresented  minorities  in   the  biological sciences.
