Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: ATM Testbed for Multimedia and Distributed
               Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1996  
File        : a9514898

Award Number: 9514898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj Jain Jain@ACM.Org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anish K. Arora  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dhabaleswar K. Panda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  CDA 9514898  Jain, Raj  Panda, Dhabaleswar  Arora, Anish  Page, Thomas, W.  
               The Ohio State University  Columbus, Ohio     ATM Testbed for Multimedia and
              Distributed Computing    This research proposes to establish an ATM Networking
              Testbed.  The  testbed is targeted to provide networking research
              infrastructure to enable experimental research in the areas of ATM networking,
              ATM switch testing, parallel computing, distributed computing, and multimedia. 
              Specifically, the testbed will be used for the following four research
              projects:     a) Development of performance metrics and benchmarks for various 
              components involved in ATM networked systems including switches,   network
              interface cards, end-system hardware, and operating systems;  b) Development of
              new mechanisms and primitives for communication and   synchronization over
              networks of workstations (NOWs) connected with  ATM interconnection;   c)
              Development of an environment for simulation and implementation of computer
              protocols that are subject to faults, security attacks, and real- time
              constraints; and  d) Reinventing of the familiar spreadsheet paradigm to enable
              transparent  parallel computation and distributed sharing, circumscribed by the
               simple yet powerful programming and modeling paradigm.  The National ATM
              Performance Test Lab established by this proposal will provide impartial
              performance measurements using standard benchmarks for equipment from different
              vendors. This will also allow the creation of a vigorous center for
              experimental research in high-speed multimedia networking and parallel
              processing over ATM-connected networks.
