Title       : Independence and the Taste-Homogeneity of Optimal Jurisdictions in a Tiebaut
               Economy with Endogenous Differentiated Crowding Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9514918

Award Number: 9514918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74275              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Conley jpconley@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              It has been argued that competition between jurisdictions for  citizens would
              lead to efficient provision of public goods on the  local level.  One of the
              persistent questions in the subsequent  literature concerns the properties of
              these efficient juris-  dictions.  In particular, it has been shown that if
              agents care  only about the number of citizens in a jurisdiction and not about 
              their types, then efficient jurisdictions will be  taste-homogeneous in the
              sense that agents will choose  jurisdictions containing only agents whose
              tastes agree with  their own.  An example of this type of nondifferentiated
              crowding  is a swimming pool in which only the total number of bodies in  the
              pool affect an agent's enjoyment of the facility.  When  crowding is
              differentiated, on the other hand, mixing of  different types may be optimal. 
              Differentiated crowding means  that agents care not only about the number of
              agents with whom  they share, but also about their types.  For example, the
              utility  an agent gets from attending a dance depends on both the ratio of  men
              to women, and the total number of people in attendance.  The  question of
              whether or not optimal jurisdictions are  taste-homogeneous has important
              policy implications.  It tells  us, for example, if we should have suburbs with
              only one type of  house, or schools that cater only to a particular type of 
              student.    The purpose of this research is to study this questiol in the 
              context of the "crowding types" model of local public goods.  The  crowding
              types model is a generalization of the differentiated  crowding model in which
              a distinction is made between the  crowding effects and the tastes of an agent.
               This innovation  allows many new results to be obtained.   This study focuses
              on  three points.  First to show that when crowding and taste types  have
              values which are "independent" in the sense that the utility  wages an agent
              receives in the core can be hedonically decomposed  into separate wages for
              each of these traits, the core will  be  taste-homogeneous.  Second, to show
              that "independence" is  nongeneric in a mathematical sense.  Finally, to show
              that when  agents can choose their own crowding type (choosing their 
              profession, for example), market interactions will nevertheless  guarantee that
              independence is satisfied, and efficient  jurisdictions will therefore be
              taste-homogeneous.
