Title       : Effects of Spatiotemporal Pooling on Perceived Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9514522

Award Number: 9514522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Delwin T. Lindsey Lindsey.43@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Todd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514522  LINDSEY    Objects moving within a human's field of view stimulate a
              good  many neurons, which differ with regard to the region of the field  they
              represent and with regard to the local characteristics of a  moving object,
              such as color, orientation, speed, and depth, that  each signals.  Human
              perception of objects in motion suggests  that the human visual system somehow
              unifies the responses of  these many neurons into a single perceptual whole,
              using a  process known as pooling.  This process is spatiotemporal in  nature,
              because it extends across neurons responding, as moving  objects are observed,
              to different properties of the object and  to different regions of visual
              space, as well as across responses  that occur in the recent past as well as in
              the present.     This research is concerned with spatiotemporal pooling by the 
              human visual system and is motivated by a three-stage,  quantitative model of
              motion perception.  The stages of the model  are Detection, Integration, and
              Decision.  The first two stages  simulate the acquisition and collation of
              motion information from  low-level motion sensors analogous to those thought to
              exist in  humans.  The Decision stage simulates a neural network designed  to
              compute an appropriate velocity from the pooled responses of  the low-level
              motion sensors.  The model is designed to resolve  not only the motion of
              single objects moving against a  background, but also to resolve two
              overlapping transparent  objects moving at different velocities relative to one
              another.    This research will involve four series of psychophysical 
              experiments on human subjects.  The research will flesh out  various functional
              aspects of the pooling process in humans and  of the computer simulation of
              these processes.  The first series  will determine the spatiotemporal ranges
              over which pooling  occurs and will determine whether motion pooling is
              "hard-wired"  or whether the visual system has the capacity to adjust its 
              pooling parameters flexibly when additio nal image information is  present in
              the visual scene.  The second series of experiments  will determine how motion
              information from many different  potential sources, e.g., spatial frequency,
              orientation, color,  disparity, is pooled and represented in velocity space. 
              The  third and fourth series of experiments will determine how finely  or
              coarsely image velocity information is represented in velocity  space and will
              determine the robustness of object velocity  resolution in the presence of
              noise.    This research will enhance our current understanding of the 
              processes underlying motion perception in humans.  The research  may be of
              ultimate utility in robotics, in the design and  construction of visual
              prosthetics, and in the clinical  assessment of visual dysfunction.     ***
