Title       : Glycolytic Enzyme Dynamics in Living Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9514259

Award Number: 9514259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard Pagliaro LEN@U.WASHINGTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514259  Pagliaro  Biochemical and ultrastructural studies have been essential
              for elucidating the microanatomy and biochemical logic of cells and their
              organelles, but the spatial and temporal dynamics of many cellular processes
              remain poorly understood. In large part, this is due to the spatial averaging
              inherent in many biochemical approaches and the loss of temporal resolution in
              ultrastructural studies requiring chemical fixation. Fluorescent probe and
              optical microscope techniques developed over the past decade have made it
              possible to study an increasing number of molecular and biochemical processes
              in living cells. We are using these techniques to characterize the organization
              of glycolysis in living cells. The glycolytic enzymes aldolase,
              phosphofructokinase (PFK), glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH),
              and triose phosphate isomerase (TPI) have been shown to interact with each
              other and/or structural proteins in vitro, and a variety of specif1c reagents
              can now be used to study their behavior in vivo. We are studying the
              intracellular distribution and mobility of each of these enzymes, and the
              interactions among these enzymes in vitro and in vivo will be characterized
              extensively. We have also found that the glycolytic enzyme enolase lacks
              specific interactions in vitro and in vivo, and we will use enolase as a
              reference molecule in our experiments.  Aldolase is concentrated in a
              microdomain around F-actin stress fibers in fibroblasts, and a fraction of the
              enzyme is bound in vivo as measured with fluorescence photobleaching (FRAP).
              This finding is inconsistent with the textbook description of glycolysis
              occurring as a series of fully solvated, diffusion limited reactions in
              cytoplasm, and consistent with a growing number of models for organized
              glycolytic metabolism. Recent work from several laboratories has led to the
              identification of an actinbinding domain on the aldolase molecule, based on
              biochemical and molecular genetic studies of aldolase interactions in vitro. We
              ar e using site-directed mutants of rabbit muscle aldolase to study the effect
              of specific mutations on aldolase dynamics in vivo; both catalytic activity and
              actin-binding activity mutants have been obtained and characterized. There is
              also evidence that PFK and GAPDH bind to F-actin and may interact with aldolase
              in vitro. We will map the distribution and mobility of these enzymes in vivo,
              and we will use a panel of site-specific monoclonal antibodies and synthetic
              peptides corresponding to putative catalytic and actin interaction sites on PFK
              and GAPDH to study the effects of these sites on intracellular organization of
              the enzymes. Similar reagents for aldolase are currently under development.
              Finally, we will use fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) to ask
              whether or not indirect "piggyback" binding of TPI to F-actin occurs in vivo,
              consistent with solution biochemical evidence, and to evaluate interactions
              between/among all four enzymes.  We will use an interdisciplinary approach,
              with biochemical characterization of reagents prior to their use in vivo;
              electron microscopy, falling ball viscometry, fluorescence photobleaching, and
              FRET measurements to quantify enzyme/actin interactions in vitro; and
              microinjection, fluorescence imaging, fluorescence photobleaching, and
              fluorescence energy transfer experiments in vivo. Characterization of the
              dynamics of glycolysis will improve our understanding of cytoplasm, and of the
              ways in which biochemical reactions are organized and regulated in vivo. The
              long term goal of this research is to improve our ability to mimic cytoplasmic
              functions in advanced biomaterials, and to provide intelligent structural and
              metabolic support for nanotransport and nanofabrication molecular machinery. 
              %%%  Much modern biology is based on the study of fixed specimens and dilute
              biochemical reactions. While this approach has been very valuable, it has
              limits as we probe the molecular nature of living cells ever more closely. For
              example, many biochemical and bio physical techniques are optimized for
              studying strong interactions between molecules, but weak molecular interactions
              are extremely important biochemically, though inherently more difficult to
              study. New technology has enabled the development of techniques to study some
              aspects of biochemical pathways directly in living cells. While technologically
              difficult, this approach has the important benefit of allowing us to begin to
              ask questions about the elegant and precise way in which cells orchestrate
              biochemical reactions. The goal of this project is to study the organization
              and behavior of several glycolytic enzymes in living cells. These enzymes are
              generally believed to exist as molecules freely dissolved in cytoplasm, but
              much recent evidence has suggested that they may exist partially in the solid
              state. The possibility that this basic and ubiquitous biochemical pathway may
              exist in an unusual state warrant direct investigation in living cells. We will
              microinject tracer quantities of active enzymes labeled with specific dyes that
              can be used to trace their location and movement in living cells. Digital
              imaging technology will be coupled to advanced light microscope techniques to
              map the organization and mobility of these molecules in a variety of metabolic
              states.       The significance of this work is three-fold. First, it is clear
              that much biochemistry generally treated as occurring in solution may have more
              complex organization, perhaps including a degree of solid state basis.
              Characterizing and understanding the molecular organization of these reactions
              is one of the important challenges remaining for many biochemical pathways.
              Second, molecular organization of biochemical pathways may provide a link
              between biochemical logic and three-dimensional cytoplasmic organization.
              Documenting structural roles for enzymes in living cells, in addition to
              catalytic roles, will enhance our understanding of cytoplasmic organization,
              and shed new light on processes as basic as cell motility. Third,  the rules by
              which nature has optimized biochemical function are clearly very elegant and
              sophisticated relative to the crude biochemical machinery we are capable of
              reconstituting today. Identifying these rules may allow us to incorporate more
              sophisticated design features into molecular machinery designed to mimic
              natural systems. This will ultimately lead to the development of advanced
              biomaterials, and perhaps new applications for nanotransport/nanofabrication
              molecular machinery.   ***
