Title       : Perceptual and Cognitive Processes in Identification and Categorization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9514427

Award Number: 9514427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235902             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Gregory Ashby ashby@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514427  ASHBY    This research will investigate the perceptual and cognitive 
              processes used in the identification and categorization of  complex perceptual
              stimuli.  The research program will develop  and test a new theory that assumes
              category learning is a  competition between two separate categorization
              systems.  One  system uses rules that can be described verbally and has access 
              to consciousness (i.e., the verbal system), whereas the other can  learn rules
              that are impossible to describe verbally (i.e., the  implicit system).  The
              theory will be described at three  different levels.  A neuropsychological
              version will provide a  detailed description of the major brain areas and
              neural pathways  used by the separate systems and that mediate the competition 
              between the systems.  In addition, two separate mathematical  descriptions of
              the theory will be developed.  One will provide a  global level description of
              the dynamical behavior that the  theory predicts should occur when people learn
              new categories.   The other will provide a more detailed description that can
              be  used to predict trial-by-trial category learning behavior.  Many 
              experiments will be conducted to test novel predictions of the  theory.  In
              addition to making predictions about category  learning in normal human adults,
              the theory also makes specific  predictions for children, the elderly, patients
              suffering from  major depression and from diseases of the basal ganglia (e.g., 
              Parkinson's and Huntington's disease), and for nonhuman animals.   This
              research will improve our understanding of one of the most  basic and important
              of cognitive processes, namely  categorization.  It also has the potential to
              increase our  understanding of the cognitive effects of several major diseases 
              and disorders, and of how cognition is affected by normal aging  processes. 
              This project will combine extensive experimentation  with theoretical
              investigations that rely heavily on mathematical  modeling techniques and
              recent discoveries in th e neurosciences.    ***
