Title       : The Src29A Tyrosine Kinase Gene of Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1996  
File        : a9514790

Award Number: 9514790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven K. Beckendorf beckendo@mendel.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ***  9514790  Beckendorf    Cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinases related to
              Src constitute a large and growing family involved in many signal transduction
              pathways. All are confined to the cytoplasm and most are associated with the
              inner face of the plasma membrane. They typically interact with the cytoplasmic
              portion of transmembrane receptors, and their kinases activity is stimulated by
              binding of ligands to the receptors. The activity of Src-family kinases is
              under tight control so that they are inactive until stimulated. The importance
              of this regulation is shown by the mutations in Src and several other members
              of this family that result in constitutive kinase activity and oncogenic
              transformations. A recently defined subfamily of Src-related kinases includes
              three mammalian genes, btk, itk and tec, that are all expressed in mammalian
              hematopoietic cells, and the Drosophila gene Src29A. These genes are lacking
              the D-terminal tyrosine that negatively regulates most Src-family kinases. They
              also lack an N-terminal myristylation site that anchors other members of the
              family to the plasma membrane. In its place members of the subfamily have an
              extended region of N-terminal homology that implies interactions with other
              proteins. Because of these structural differences members of this subfamily are
              likely to be functionally distinct from the previously characterized Src-family
              kinases, perhaps participating in different signaling pathways or at different
              levels in familiar pathways. Although Src29A was identified over ten years ago,
              little is known about its function. It is, however, highly expressed in
              hematopoietic cells as are its mammalian counterparts. This project seeks to
              study Src29A function by analyzing zygotic and maternal phenotypes of Src29A!
              mutants. Dr. Beckendorf has recently identified several P element inserts that
              inactivate Src29A and have shown that the gene is required for head
              development. Now he will examine the maternal effects of these mutations and
              attempt to determin e which signal transduction pathway requires this tyrosine
              kinase.  ***
