Title       : Cognition in Informal Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9514491

Award Number: 9514491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance J. Rips   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514491  RIPS    This project will examine the way people understand and judge 
              informal arguments.  Informal arguments take place when  individuals exchange
              views on belief about an assertion or a  possible action.  For example, debates
              between friends or family  members, classroom sparring about an idea,
              scientific exchanges  about empirical results or theories, and negotiations in
              business  are all informal arguments.  This research will develop a theory  of
              these arguments in terms of the conversational moves that  participants can
              make within them, for example, asking for a  justification, giving a reason,
              offering an objection, or  conceding a point.  This theory will determine to
              which of the  argument's claims each participant is committed publicly at any 
              stage of the argument and will identify changes in commitment as  the argument
              unfolds.    Three groups of experiments will assess and refine the theory.  
              The first group will test predictions about people's memory for  arguments and
              understanding of them.  In these experiments,  people will read a series of
              naturalistic dialogues between two  characters and will then judge which of the
              dialogues' claims  each of the characters accepts.  The theory's predictions
              about  changes in the characters' commitments as the dialogue proceeds  will be
              compared to the people's judgments.  The theory also  predicts that arguments
              vary in the demands they make on  participants' and overhearers' memory, since
              some arguments  require participants to keep track of claims in order to return
               to them later.    The second set of experiments will examine people's
              judgments  about burden of proof.  In this context, burden of proof is the 
              responsibility a participant has to support his or her case.  The  theory
              predicts that which participant has the greater burden of  proof depends, among
              other factors, on the number of claims that  are currently under dispute and
              the strength of support for these  claims.  The experiments will evaluate the
              theory's predi ctions  about shifts in burden of proof as currently disputed
              claims  become settled.  They will also investigate the effects on burden  of
              proof of making an argument's first or last claim.    The final group of
              experiments will investigate circular  reasoning or question-begging in
              arguments.  The fallacy of  begging the question occurs when participants
              presuppose the  conclusion of an argument in trying to justify one of its 
              premises.  In the context of most arguments, however, the points  that a
              participant argues for (the conclusions) and the points  argued from (the
              premises) emerge as the argument unfolds and  depend on which points other
              participants accept.  Thus, in some  circumstances, but not in others,
              repetitions of a conclusion can  beg the question.  The experiments will
              examine conditions under  which subjects recognize instances of question
              begging.  ***
