Title       : Proteins Required for Peroxisome Biogenesis in the Yeast Pichia Pastoris
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1996   
File        : a9514289

Award Number: 9514289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Cregg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514289  Cregg    Peroxisomes are present in the cells of virtually all
              eukaryotes  and are the subcellular location of  important metabolic reactions.
              Yet relatively little is known  about the basic mechanisms by which  cells
              maintain and propagate peroxisomes and direct specific sets  of newly
              synthesized proteins to these organelles (peroxisome  biogenesis). Recent
              studies indicate that peroxisome biogenesis  mechanisms are novel and not
              simply variations of those in other  organelles. A molecular genetic
              investigation of peroxisomes has  been initiated using a methanol-utilizing
              yeast, Pichia pastoris,  as a model system. This yeast was selected because:
              (1)  peroxlsomes are required for its growth on either methanol or  oleic acid,
              phenotypes that are easily observed, and (2) the  organelles are large and
              numerous in cells grown on these  substrates. In the previous grant period, a
              number of  peroxisome-deficient (per) mutants of P. pastoris were isolated, 
              and significant progress was made in the cloning and  characterization of
              several of the affected PER genes.    This proposal is aimed at elucidating the
              structure and function  of two very interesting P. pastoris PER gene products,
              Per3p and  Per6p.  Per3p is an 81-kDa membrane-associated protein that  appears
              to be located on the inner surface of the peroxisomal  membrane. Per3p is
              involved in import of peroxisomal matrix  enzymes and may be composed of
              multiple domains required for the  function of different peroxisomal import
              pathways. To test this  multi-domain hypothesis and to define the approximate
              location of  the domains, mutations will be introduced into PER3, and their 
              effects on the function of specific import pathways will be  determined. Per3p
              is one of only a few peroxisomal import  machinery components that has been
              identified. To identify other  import components, the two-hybrid protein method
              will be used to  search for proteins that interact with Per3p. These studies
              will  provide valuable insights into the role of P er3p in protein import  and
              into the identity and organization of other components of the  import
              machinery.    Per6p is a 52-kDa peroxisomal integral membrane protein that has 
              similarity to PAFlp, a protein affected in certain patients with  the
              peroxisomal biogenesis disorder Zellweger syndrome. Although  it is suspected
              that these proteins are involved in peroxisomal  protein import, direct
              evidence for this is lacking. To obtain  such evidence for Per6p,
              temperature-sensitive per6 strains will  be shifted to nonpermissive
              temperature, and the fate of import of  newly synthesized (pulse-labeled)
              peroxisomal proteins will be  examined. If Per6p is required for the import,
              import should  rapidly cease after shift. Peroxisomal targeting signals (PTSs) 
              have been identified for matrix proteins but not for peroxisomal  integral
              membrane proteins. To identify PTS sequences in Per6p,  selected NH2- and
              COOH-terminally truncated derivatives of the  protein will be synthesized in P.
              pastoris and examined for proper  targeting. Defining a PTS for membrane
              proteins is a critical  first step in understanding how cells target and insert
              this class  of proteins into the peroxisomal membrane.  ***
