Title       : Understanding Geographic Space Without the Use of Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9514907

Award Number: 9514907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald G. Golledge golledge@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              U. of California, Santa Barbara  This project examines the extent to which blind
              and vision impaired people can develop and use in everyday tasks, spatial
              information at the `geographic` scale.  The methodology will utilize matched
              groups of congenitally blind individuals (blind from birth), partially sighted
              and sighted participants.  Matching will be by age, sex, culture and
              socio-economic factors.  Tasks to be used in the research include location,
              distance estimation, model building, direction finding and route following. 
              Information will be obtained from the participants and subsequently compared by
              using verbal instructions and videotaping of question and answer sessions.  The
              analysis will also make use of debriefing sessions, preliminary consultative
              and background interviews.  The resulting data will be analyzed both
              quantitatively and qualitatively.  The research will have a cross cultural
              component where information on cognitive mapping and human navigation will be
              compared between the U.S. and the U.K.  These studies will be closely matched
              to allow direct comparison.  This aspect of the research is important because
              of the debate as to whether the concept of disability is functionally driven. 
              Blind and vision impaired persons in the U.S. have been faced with a
              `normalization, independent and self-help` ethic whereas in the U.K. there is a
              `social welfare` ethic of assistance.  Dr Mark Blades at University of
              Sheffield and Dr Robert Kitchin at University of Swansea will participate in
              this aspect of the work.  Scale effects and cross-cultural comparisons have
              been largely ignored in work on spatial cognition of blind and vision impaired.
               The research addresses basic problems relating to theories of spatial
              cognition by this disabled group, as well as, practical problems of the ways in
              which spatial abilities and actions by blind and vision impaired people can be
              enhanced in a manner that influences their quality of life.  The results will
              contribute to the body of information revealing how the visually impaired and
              blind think about and behave in an everyday geographic environment.  This
              enhanced understanding has important policy implications concerning planning
              and education.  In addition the work will likely provide information on ways
              this group's wayfinding and orientation skills may be enhanced.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
