Title       : Reflections of Mesoamerican Expansionary Dynamics at La Quemada, Zacatecas,
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1998   
File        : a9514681

Award Number: 9514681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Trombold CT@WUVMD.WUSTL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Browman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Charles Trombold will conduct one
              season of archaeological fieldwork at the site of La Quemada which is located
              in the Zacatecas region of Mexico. La Quemada represents one of the
              northernmost manifestations of mesoamerican culture and dates between ca. 500
              and 800 AD. The site itself  - also termed the `citadel` -  is a massively
              fortified civic/ceremonial center that occupies about 1.5 square kilometers on
              a mountaintop. Its intermediate hinterland covers at least 200 square
              kilometers of surrounding territory and contains an aggregated pattern of over
              226 individual satellite settlements with associated terracing systems and
              fortifications. Many of these features are linked to the citadel by a network
              of wide causeways. The citadel and its satellite settlements appear to
              represent a unique island of sedentary mesoamerican high culture. Dr. Trombold
              will work not at the citadel itself but at one of the associated settlements
              ca. .3 km. distant. The site, MV-263 includes a series of sunken plazas with
              house mounds associated with each. Dr. Trombold and his team will clear large
              areas to expose plazas and associated domestic structures. Through analysis of
              ceramics and other cultural materials he will reconstruct the social, political
              and economic organization of the site and determine the extent to which
              production activities are centrally organized. On this basis it is possible to
              determine the degree of political centralization.  La Quemada is interesting
              because it is clearly associated with mesoamerican culture but is spatially
              separated from the great central Mexican cultures and sites. It therefore lies
              on an extreme periphery and provides an excellent situation in which to study
              periphery-core interactions. Archaeologists wish to look beyond individual
              sites and cultures. They try to place such units within larger social contexts
              and look at patterns on an interregional scale. Some have argued that cultural
              development in core and peripheral areas vary directly with each other. That
              peripheral areas are dependent on the cultural core and that when one thrives,
              the other does as well. Other researchers posit an inverse relationship. They
              believe that the core dominates and holds peripheral peoples down and only when
              the core is weak do peripheral societies flourish. Much is known about the
              core, which in this case lies in Central Mexico and periods of core strength
              and weakness are well delineated. Much less is understood about peripheral
              areas such as La Quemada and through the examination of changes here in social
              organization over time, the interaction can be examined in detail.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to
              many archaeologists. It will also increase our understanding of how regional
              interaction occurs in simple level societies.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
