Title       : Ecological Factors and Behavioral Mechanisms Underlying Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9514142

Award Number: 9514142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Sih   (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Krupa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        Abstract    Sih  9514142    A blend of field surveys
              and experiments in semi-natural  conditions will be used to examine the
              ecological  determinants and selective consequences of mating behavior  in a
              system with male-female sexual conflict.  The focal  system studied is a
              semi-aquatic insect, the stream water  strider, Aquarius remigis.  This species
              shows very clear  male-female conflict:  males continually attempt to mate 
              with females, while females almost always resist male mating  attempts. 
              Previous experimental work showed that various  biotic, ecological factors
              (predation risk, food  availability, density, sex ratio) have major impacts on 
              mating patterns (mating activity, mating frequency, mating  duration,
              non-random mating by size) and that these effects  depend largely on the
              influence of these factors on patterns  of female resistance to male mating
              attempts (i.e., on  female behavior in the male-female conflict).              
                              The proposed studies expand on  current knowledge in three
              ways:    1.  This study will move us significantly closer to a full 
              understanding of how spatial and temporal variation in  ecological conditions
              (both biotic and abiotic) influence  both variation in mating dynamics and
              overall patterns of  sexual selection.    2.  This study will provide a rare
              instance of an  experimental test of predictions on variation in sexual 
              selection based on known behavioral mechanisms (in this  case, male-female
              conflict) and the effects of ecological  conditions on these behaviors.    3. 
              Studies of selection in nature will provide a bridge  between mechanistic
              experimental studies of behavior in semi-  natural conditions and effects of
              these behavioral  mechanisms in nature.    In sum, 1) patterns of sexual
              selection (as quantified by  modern statistical methods) will be explained 
              mechanistically by using information on behaviors (male-  female conflict) that
              underlie sexual selection, and 2) male  and female behavior a(and  thus
              patterns of sexual  selection), in turn, will be understood as flexible 
              responses to variation in both biotic and abiotic,  ecological conditions. 
              Overall, the integration of concepts  and information from three exciting
              fields (male-female  conflict, quantitative studies of sexual and natural 
              selection, and ecology of mating systems) should add  significant insights to
              our knowledge in all three fields  and thus add to our general understanding of
              reproductive  behavior.
