Title       : Kuykendall Brake: Biocultural Continuity and the End of Prehistory in Central
               Arkansas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9514381

Award Number: 9514381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5460               (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. House   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ark Archeological Survey
	      
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. John House and his colleagues will
              analyze archaeological materials collected at the site of Kuykendall Brake
              which is located in central Arkansas. Excavations conducted between 1990-1994
              revealed a large buried structure which lacked habitational debris. This
              suggests it served a religious rather than domestic function. It appears to
              have been deliberately burned and contained a burial feature with an estimated
              17 individuals, a large deposit of charred beans and maize, ceramic vessels and
              other objects. Preliminary analysis indicates that it dates to approximately
              1500 AD. With NSF funds, the research team will analyze the additional
              botanical remains which were widespread in the soil matrix, obtain radiocarbon
              dates from the charred beams and analyze the skeletal material. This will allow
              careful dating of the site and reconstruction of both diet and environment. The
              skeletal analysis will provide information on the health and nutritional status
              of the inhabitants.  Scientists wish to understand the impact which European
              colonization had on the aboriginal inhabitants of the New World. It is both
              interesting and vexing that the data collected by archaeologists does not match
              will with the descriptions of early explorers and other ethnographic data. This
              suggests that extremely rapid and major change occurred early in the contact
              period. Anthropologists wish to understand the processes involved in culture
              change and the early contact period provides an excellent context for such
              studies. The Kuykendall Brake site it important because it dates to just prior
              to the earliest contact and has the potential to shed light on a little
              understood aspect of cultural adaptation.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
