Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Theories of the Open Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9514145

Award Number: 9514145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Eisenberg beisenbe@rush.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duan P. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rush-Pres St Luke Med Ctr
	      1653 West Congress Parkway
	      Chicago, IL  606123809    312/942-5479

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Eisenberg  9514145    The investigator and his colleagues study the  behavior of
              open channels in membranes,  combining experiments and mathematical modeling. 
              The starting place for a theory of open  channels is a theory of
              electrodiffusion. It has  long been known that a theory should include the 
              phenomena of shielding or screening, whereby  the ions in the ionic atmosphere
              in and around  the channel protein help determine the potential  profile of its
              pore, but mathematical difficulties  were severe, and analysis was usually
              focused on  the ionic atmosphere at the surface of the  membrane or end of the
              channel and not the co-  and counter-ions within the channel's pore.  These
              difficulties have recently been overcome.  The project develops  PNP theory to
              predict the current through  the channel, given its structure and distribution
              of  fixed (i.e., permanent) charge. The project uses Poisson's  equation to
              describe how charge on ions and the  channel protein determines the electric
              field; and  the Nernst-Planck equations to describe  migration and diffusion of
              ions in gradients of  potential and concentration.    The study of open
              channels is an important  component of biotechnology because channels  have
              great biological importance in their role as  gatekeepers to cells: they are
              responsible for  signaling in the nervous system; they coordinate  the
              contraction of the heart, so it can act as a  pump; in general, they are
              receptors or effectors  for many drugs and natural substances that  control the
              life of cells. Channels are wonderful  objects to study by high speed computing
               because they use such simple physics (diffusion)  to perform important
              biological function. The  computation of diffusion is much simpler than  the
              computation of the quantum mechanics  involved in so many enzymatic functions. 
              Channels are also natural nanotubes and so are of  importance in the emerging
              area of  nanostructures, materials and manufacturing.  Porin is particularly
              well suited in this regard  since it  is available in large quantities, it can
              be  easily modified by the methods of biotechnology,  and its structure is
              known in atomic detail.
