Title       : Can Mature Democracies Fail? The Quebec Independence Referendum and the Dynamics
               of Political Support in Contemporary Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9514385

Award Number: 9514385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134374             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold Clarke hclark@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Although considerable attention has been given to democratic processes in
              former communist and totalitarian states, a variety of processes also have been
              transforming attitudes toward and support for governments in nations that have
              long democratic traditions.  Political scientists and researchers in related
              field have used two theoretical perspectives to examine the sources of public
              support for democratic forms of government.  One is a `political culture`
              perspective, which emphasizes socio-cultural and political identities and
              public conceptions of democratic norms and values.  The other theoretical
              perspective is that of `political economy,` which focuses on national and
              personal economic conditions, the redistribution of wealth among individuals
              and groups, and judgments about the effectiveness and fairness of the political
              system in delivering a range of products and services.  These perspectives are
              used to examine the stresses currently affecting Canada through analyses of
              data gathered through a longitudinal series of surveys taken before and
              immediately after a referendum that will be held in late October 1995 to
              determine whether the province of Quebec should become an independent nation. 
              More than 1,000 Quebec residents and more than 1,150 residents of the rest of
              Canada will be interviewed over the phone and asked to complete a
              post-referendum survey.  The data gathered through these interviews and surveys
              will be compared with information gathered in Canada and other nations to
              assess the study the ways that different factors affect public support for
              political institutions in a mature democracy.   The results of this project
              will provide an excellent opportunity to explore the influence of
              socio-cultural and political economic factors on the form and stability of
              democratic governments.  Although focusing on the Quebec independence
              referendum, the data will complement a long-standing series of information
              gathered in other nations, thereby contributing to more generalizable
              knowledge.  Because the data collected through this study will be deposited in
              a number of public archives, they will be available to other investigators to
              use in testing other hypotheses regarding democratic processes and behavior.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
