Title       : Social Identity and Self Concept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9514398

Award Number: 9514398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilynn B. Brewer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514398  Brewer  Social identities are those aspects of an individual's self  
              concept that derive from his or her membership in   emotionally significant
              social groups.  Optimal   distinctiveness theory is an extension of self- 
              categorization theory, developed by the PI to account for   why individuals
              seek identification with social groups and   to explain the role of social
              identities in achieving and   maintaining a stable self-concept.  The theory is
              based on   the thesis that distinctiveness per se is a factor   underlying the
              selection and strength of social identities,   independent of the positive
              evaluation associated with   membership in particular social categories.  It is
              proposed   that social identities are selected and activated to the   extent
              that they help the individual to achieve a balance   between feelings of
              inclusion and feelings of   distinctiveness in a given social context.  The
              purpose of   the proposed program of research is to explore the   implications
              of optimal distinctiveness theory for   psychological processes at the
              individual level.  Nine sets   of experiments are proposed that are designed to
              test the   consequences of seeking and maintaining optimal group  
              identification for (a) self evaluation, (b) self   stereotyping and the content
              of the self concept, (c)   presentation of the self to others, and (d)
              protection of   ingroup identity through differentiation from outgroups.   
              Together these experiments will serve to test the validity   of the fundamental
              assumptions about social motivation   underlying optimal distinctiveness
              theory.  %%%  The purpose of this program of research is to investigate   the
              consequences of group membership for the formation,   maintenance, and change
              of a person's self-concept and sense   of self-worth.  It is designed to test
              the theory that   opposing needs for belonging (similarity to others) and  
              distinctiveness (differentiation from others) shape   individual identity and
              attitudes toward their own and other   socia l groups.  An adaptive
              self-concept satisfies both   needs simultaneously.  Failure to meet either
              produces   anxiety and instability of the self-concept   (disequilibrium).  A
              series of experiments is proposed,   designed to assess the effects of such
              disequilibrium on   individual self-esteem and prejudice toward members of
              other   social groups.  ***
