Title       : Intramembrane Determinants of Membrane Protein Oligomerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9514280

Award Number: 9514280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325265             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Krebs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514280  Krebs    The structure of membrane proteins that span the lipid bilayer
              is thought to be determined by protein-protein interactions in the aqueous
              environment and by protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions within the
              bilayer.  The nature and strength of interactions that occur in the aqueous
              environment can be understood from the perspective of water-soluble protein
              folding and oligomerization, but little is known about those that occur within
              the lipid bilayer.  In the experiments proposed here, intramembrane
              interactions will be analyzed by studying the effect of amino acid
              substitutions on the oligomerization of bacteriorhodopsin (BR) in Halobacterium
              salinarium.  In this organism, BR and associated lipids form  two-dimensional
              crystalline lattice known as the purple membrane.  This system is attractive
              because a structural mode of BR in the purple membrane has been derived from
              diffraction studies, and because genetic methods have been developed to produce
              BR mutants in H. salinarium.  Protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions in
              the purple membrane will be probed by mutational analysis of lattice stability.
               BR mutants will be prepared initially by targeted mutagenesis at sites
              identified from the structural model, and subsequently by random mutagenesis
              and screening.  Amino acid substitutions will be chosen to minimize disruption
              of protein tertiary structure, which will be analyzed by spectroscopic and
              diffraction methods.  The targeted approach will be used to test predictions
              about the role of specific amino acid residues in lattice stability, and will
              provide mutant proteins for developing in vivo and in vitro stability assays. 
              Preliminary studies have identified several substitutions that appear to
              disrupt lattice stability without affecting the tertiary structure of the
              protein, and have provided evidence for a model of BR self-assembly that will
              be used to evaluate the thermodynamic effects of mutations.  Random mutagenesis
              will be used to test additional subst itutions at sites identified by the
              targeted approach and at potentially interacting residues.  BR mutants obtained
              by this method will be screened with a rapid assay developed to measure lattice
              accumulation in vivo.    The proposed experiments will address the following
              questions:  (i) which amino acid contacts within the lipid bilayer are most
              important for lattice stability? (ii) do intramembrane protein-lipid
              interactions play a significant role in lattice stability? and (iii) what is
              the strength of protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions within the lipid
              bilayer?  These studies will provide fundamental insights into the nature of
              non-covalent interactions that determine membrane protein tertiary and
              quaternary structure.  ***
