Title       : Investigation of the Inquisitorial and Adversarial Legal Modes of Adjudication
               on Scientific/Technological Testimony
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9514243

Award Number: 9514243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82473              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Cooper jcoops@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The accurate perception of scientific and technological testimony in courts of
              law is often crucial to protect the interests of individuals and corporations. 
              In the civil justice system, significant monetary decisions hinge upon jurors
              or judges accurately perceiving the S/T testimony of scientists and engineers. 
              Technological and scientific innovations that are supported by reliable S/T
              data may not be fairly adjudicated if those data are not processed accurately
              by the judge or jurors making the decision.  In previous work in our
              laboratory, some of the difficulties jurors have processing complex S/T
              testimony in civil liability cases were examined.  In this study, we will
              examine the locus of the investigator role in the adversarial and inquisitorial
              systems.  We hypothesize that participants who adopt the inquisitorial role of
              investigator for the court will gain a more accurate and complete understanding
              of the S/T evidence than will participants who are asked to take the
              adversarial position.  Moreover, it is hypothesized that inquisitorial
              participants will bring a more representative distribution of evidence to the
              attention of decision makers than will the combination of the defense and
              plaintiff advocates in the adversarial system.  In our society, the legal
              system is where many decisions that affect the implementation of science and
              technology arise.  The current proposal seeks to provide information on the
              impact of important elements of the current adversarial system on the accurate
              perception of S/T evidence in civil proceedings.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
