Title       : Gonadal Hormone Involvement in Brain Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9514888

Award Number: 9514888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247357             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill Becker jbbecker@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514888     Becker      The gonadal steroid hormones have long been known to
              influence  female behaviors.  However, the mechanism by which these hormones 
              generate their behavioral effects is largely unknown.  There are  data that do
              not conform to the classical mechanism for steroid  hormone action, i.e.
              binding of hormone to intracellular receptors  and subsequently altering
              nuclear gene transcription.   Consequently, novel non-genomic effects have been
              postulated by  investigators, including Dr. Becker, to resolve the temporal 
              inconsistencies between the behavioral observations and the time  required to
              alter gene transcription.  The present research goes  beyond this level to
              explore the non-genomic effects of the steroid  hormones in specific brain
              regions and investigates the ability of  steroid hormones to influence
              dopaminergic neuronal activity in the  striatum and accumbens, and how this
              classical neurotransmitter  acts in these areas to modulate female behavior. 
              Moreover, other  investigator have shown a strong interaction between striatal 
              dopamine and gamma-aminobutyric acid in controlling movement.   Logically, Dr.
              Becker will investigate how estrogen alters the  activity of the neurons
              containing these neurotransmitters and the  direct consequences on female
              behavior which is dependent on  movement.  These studies are exciting and
              highly innovative.  They  will revolutionize the thinking about female
              behaviors and the  components required for their generation.  Investigating the
               interaction of dopamine-and gamma-aminobutyric acid-containing  neurons in the
              striatum may open new avenues for understanding  presynaptic regulatory
              mechanisms in the brain, which will impact  not only the neuroendocrinology
              field, but may also reveal more  about the behavior of animals in their natural
              habitats and the  critical cues that trigger female behaviors.
