Title       : Networks, Ethics and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9514719

Award Number: 9514719
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Busch lawrence.busch@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award allows the principal investigator to engage in several research
              projects in ethics and values in science while expanding his knowledge of
              ethics.  He will work on two projects, with five ethicists, three at his home
              institution and two in the Chicago area.  These ethics scholars represent
              different perspectives and areas of competence (e.g., professional ethics,
              ethics in science, ethics of compromise, etc.),  The first project will develop
              a book that will integrate ethical considerations with actor-network
              perspectives, in examining domestic and international approaches to scientific
              and technical development and modernization.  The second involves adding
              ethical considerations to strategies used by agricultural cooperatives in
              grappling with the new biotechnologies.  The project will raise issues
              surrounding the impact of these technologies and the organizational changes
              they portend, on ethical and other values held by cooperative members.  The
              ethical issues will be added to the agenda at a meeting of cooperative leaders
              to be sponsored by USDA.  For both projects, the mentors will suggest relevant
              readings and discuss the issues with the investigator, who will pose specific
              questions to them.  In addition, the investigator will audit a graduate seminar
              in ethics at his home institution and participate in seminars at the Center for
              the Study of Ethics in the Professions at IIT.  Outcomes will include a book on
              ethics and development, journal articles on ethical issues for cooperatives,
              presentations at scientific meetings, and integration of ethics into the
              investigator's teaching.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
