Title       : Specification of Morphogenetic Pathways Through Differential Regulation of
               Deformed Target Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9514246

Award Number: 9514246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Mahaffey jim_mahaffey@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie E. Curtis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9514246  Mahaffey, James    The long term goal of this project is to
              understand how certain genes specify regional development in the fruit fly,
              Drosophila. In particular the specification of anterior-posterior body pattern
              will be studied. The families of genes to be studies are the homeotic and
              related hox complex, which specify segment identity in the fly. Though the
              genetics of this process has been studied extensively, there is very little
              known about how a specific homeobox gene product (protein) directs the
              development of a particular segmental morphology.    The studies described here
              will address how differential gene expression and segment identity are
              specified by the product of the Deformed homeotic gene during maxillary segment
              development. The studies are designed to elucidate how the Deformed
              homeoprotein can, in different maxillary cells, specify different genetic
              pathways determining distinct cell fates. These experiments 1) examine the role
              of the Deformed homeoprotein and other factors in activating expression of
              Deformed specific target genes by comparing the regulation of maxillary
              enhancers from two known target genes and 2) characterize a newly identified
              gene whose product is necessary, along with Deformed, to activate certain
              target genes and thereby influence the morphogenetic pathway maxillary cells
              follow.    To examine target gene activation, the role of various factors
              including the Deformed homeoprotein will be examined by altering the structure
              of the enhancer region of specific target genes and by analyzing the activity
              of chimeric enhancers. Further, it is known that two maxillary gene enhancers
              have differing requirements for a newly identified factor. Genetic analysis
              indicates that this factor behaves as a cofactor with one gene allowing
              selective activation of certain target genes thereby influencing which
              developmental pathway certain cells will follow. A genetic and molecular study
              of the gene encoding the new factor will be undertaken to determine it s
              structure and its influence on target homeobox genes required for formation of
              maxillary appendages.  ***
