Title       : Bioenergetics of C4 Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9514090

Award Number: 9514090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald E. Edwards edwardsg@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports research collaboration between Dr. Gerald Edwards
              (Washington State University)and Dr. Boris Ivanon (Russian Academy of
              Sciences).  During photosynthesis solar energy absorbed by chloroplasts is
              converted into assimilatory power (ATP and NADPH) via electron transport,
              membrane energization, and phosphorylation with reductive power provided by
              oxidation of water and production of oxygen.  Debate is ensuing over whether
              two other forms of photochemistry, pseudocyclic and/or cyclic electron flow,
              have a role in photosynthesis in plants.  Pseudocylic electron flow occurs via
              oxidation of water with a linear flow of electrons culminating with oxygen,
              rather than NADP, as the final electron acceptor.  Cyclic electron flow occurs
              without oxidation of water and generation of oxygen.  The objectives of this
              project are to establish whether one or both of these forms of photochemistry
              function in mesophyll chloroplasts of the maize under conditions which place
              varying demands on the requirement for ATP.  Whether the supply of ascorbate in
              the chloroplasts regulates the capacity for pseudocyclic electron flow will be
              investigated.  Methods of analysis will include measurements of membrane
              energization, quantum yields of photochemistry and conversions of metabolites
              in the carbon metabolism using mesophyll chloroplasts isolated from maize. 
              This research will contribute to our understanding of the efficiency of the
              solar energy conversion by photosynthesis, which is crucial to sustaining life
              on earth.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
