Title       : Development of Voltage-gated Ion Channels in Amphibian Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9514624

Award Number: 9514624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270581             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Moody profbill@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514624  Moody     Ion channels are proteins that mediate the movement of
              charged molecules across cell membranes, and thus are responsible for
              generating the electrical signals used by nerve and muscle cells.  The
              development of excitability in nerve and muscle is governed by complex changes
              in the populations of ion channels that occur during embryogenesis.  It is now
              clear that in many cells the types and properties of ion channels at early
              stages of development are very different from those in the mature state.  These
              differences reflect a developmental function for electrical activity, a
              function that is distinct from the later roles of electrical signaling in the
              mature cell.  By measuring the functional ion channels that are present at
              different stages of development. we can identify critical periods during which
              the particular channels present are likely to create spontaneous electrical
              activity, and then to determine whether that activity is in fact important for
              later development.  Because changes in channel properties during development
              can be vary rapid, these critical periods can be short, often only a few hours
              long.  In many cells, they can occur before it is possible to identify the cell
              in the embryo.  To understand the biological function of the patterns of ion
              channel development, therefore, it is necessary to identify cells as early in
              embryogenesis as possible and to measure the types and properties of ion
              channels present over a wide range of stages.  This project uses
              electrophysiological recording techniques to measure the properties of ion
              channels at various stages in the development of a muscle, and molecular
              techniques to make specific changes in that developmental profile.  This will
              allow determining exactly how electrical activity is influencing development.  
                The results obtained in an accessible experimental system such as frog muscle
              can then be applied to the development of the mammalian brain, where it is
              known that electrical activity, often mediated by ear ly sensory experience,
              plays a role in assuring normal cognitive development.
