Title       : US-Indo Cooperative Research: Phenomenological Studies with Standard Model &
               Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1996      
File        : a9514793

Award Number: 9514793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Pakvasa pakvasa@uhheph.phys.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xerxes R. Tata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514793  Pakvasa  Description: This research will investigate  phenomenological
              issues concerning different  aspects of High Energy Physics with  special 
              emphasis on high energy colliders.  Considering  the success over the last
              decade of new  colliders at Fermilab, SLAC, CERN, DESY, and  that others are
              due to begin operation this  year, collider physics will continue to grow as 
              an important branch of  High Energy Physics.   The Standard Model of particle
              physics is  generally believed to be incomplete.  The  investigators will
              explore phenomenological  implications of Physics Beyond the Standard  Model
              for current and future experiments at  high energy colliders.  Examples include
              the  search for supersymmetry, for Higgs bosons the  only Standard Model
              particle yet to be  discovered, as well as the physics of neutrinos  whose
              masses could provide clues to physics at  high energy.  Professors Sandip
              Pakvasa and  Xerxes Tata of the University of Hawaii at  Manoa, Honolulu will
              collaborate with  physicist, Dr. Rohini Godbole of the University  of Bombay
              and the Tata Institute of Fundamental  Research (TIFR).  All coinvestigators
              have been  actively engaged in phenomenological research  for the last several
              years.  This collaboration  will allow Godbole to interact with the large 
              experimental group at the University of Hawaii  that is involved with
              experiments at Fermilab  in the US, in China and in Japan. Scope:  High  energy
              physics is an area of research that has  been identified as a thrust area by
              the Indian  Government and is one of tremendous activity  and strength among
              Indian physicists. The   research team has particular expertise in the  areas
              of investigation and they have worked  effectively in the past. The modest
              support  requested for this project will allow the  investigators to renew
              their collaboration and  also strengthen cooperative research betweens  the
              growing community of collider physicists in  India and their counterparts in
              the US.     ***
