Title       : Northern Caddoan Dictionaries Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9514516

Award Number: 9514516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Parks parksd@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The "Northern Caddoan Dictionaries Project" will complete  reference
              dictionaries of Arikara and Pawnee, closely related  American Indian languages
              of the Caddoan family. Today these  languages are spoken by fewer than a dozen
              elderly tribal members  in North Dakota and Oklahoma. The project will complete
               compilation of three databases from which the dictionaries will  be generated,
              for Arikara, Skiri Pawnee, and South Band Pawnee.  Comprising each of those
              databases will be both written and sound  material.          Each of the
              databases will provide material from which the  project will generate three
              products for each of those three  groups. The first is a conventional printed
              dictionary. The  second a valuable and innovative product in the documentation
              of  endangered languages is a multimedia dictionary for use with  personal
              computers. The multimedia dictionary will be published  in CD-ROM format and
              present the same information as the printed  volume. In addition, it will
              provide sound recordings of every  word main entry and grammatical and other
              illustrative forms and  offer many useful features for searching and
              cross-referencing. A  third product is development of an enduring,
              non-proprietary  method of storing the dictionary databases that is accessible
              to  a broad range of operating systems and hardware platforms and  that will
              allow dissemination and publication of research in a  format that will not be
              rendered technologically obsolete.          The dictionaries, each to contain
              approximately 10,000  entries, will draw upon all available lexical and textual
               materials: data collected by the PI over the past twenty-five  years; data
              collected by anthropologists earlier in the century;  and data in historical
              sources. Ten months of additional field  work are necessary, most of which will
              be with Arikara and the  South Band dialect of Pawnee.         The project,
              part of a larger effort to document the Pawnee  and Arikara languages as fully
              as possible, will result in the  first  reference dictionaries ever compiled
              for them. The  dictionaries, moreover, will provide essential data for the 
              comparative study of the Caddoan language family and the  interrelationships of
              the Caddoan languages with other  genetically related language families in the
              New World. Because  Pawnee and Arikara are complex polysynthetic languages,
              these  dictionaries will be of particular interest to typologists and 
              theoreticians. They will also serve as reference tools for  scholars and in
              language classes taught in the Arikara and Pawnee  communities.
