Title       : Calcium Signaling in the Brain of Behaving Zebrafish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9514777

Award Number: 9514777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. O'Malley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514777  O'Malley    Calcium is a key signaling molecule in the nervous system
              of  all animals.  In vertebrate animals, calcium levels inside  nerve cells
              increase when the cells are stimulated.  Increased calcium levels have many
              different actions inside  nerve cells, ranging from the immediate regulation of
              the  electrical excitability of the cell to very long term  changes in the
              cell's behavior, which may be mediated  through alterations of gene expression.
               Recently a  technique was developed that allows the imaging of calcium 
              activity in nerve cells in the brain of intact zebrafish.  This allows
              measurement of cellular calcium activity in  response to a variety of sensory
              stimuli and also allows the  investigation of any correlations between these
              calcium  signals and the behavior of the fish.  This approach  demonstrated
              that calcium signals in one particular  identified nerve cell in the hindbrain
              of the zebrafish, the  Mauthner cell, were dramatically enhanced after
              repetitive  sensory stimulation.  One principal aim of this proposal is  to
              determine the conditions required to produce this novel  form of enhancement. 
              This will be accomplished by varying  the timing, intensity and modality of
              sensory stimulation.  A second major aim is to understand the cellular
              mechanisms  underlying these large calcium signals. A third aim takes 
              advantage of the fact that the Mauthner cell is a behavioral  command neuron,
              which triggers the animal's escape behavior.  This cutting-edge project will
              demonstrate the molecular  basis for a behavior in a living animal.  The
              potential  implications are enormous, both for the understanding of the 
              molecular basis of animal behavior and for the development  of non-invasive
              measuring techniques in living animals.
