Title       : Modeling Phonetic Structure Using Articulatory Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9514730

Award Number: 9514730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Goldstein louis.goldstein@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine P. Browman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
	      
	      New Haven, CT  06510    /   -

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will continue the development of a  computational model of
              phonetic structure, and employ it to help  understand certain kinds of place of
              articulation assimilation  that occur in various languages. The model is based
              on a  particular dynamical systems approach called task dynamics, which 
              abstractly characterizes speech gestures in terms of coordinated  patterns of
              articulator movements during speech production. The  relative timing and
              parameterization of the gestures comprising a  given utterance are specified by
              a gestural score that is  generated by the model's linguistic gestural
              component. To apply  the model to assimilation, the investigators plan to
              collect data  on the variation exhibited by the gestural structures (as defined
               by the model) as a function of variety of conditions, such as  speaking rate
              and prosodic structure, from speakers of English,  Russian, Arabic, and
              Spanish. They will model the observed  patterns of variation. Because the model
              provides an explicit,  principled connection between gestural specification and
              an  acoustic output, it can be used to test how patterns of variation  give
              rise to the percept of assimilation.
