Title       : Collaborative Research: Biosynthesis of Dimethylsulforiopropionate and its
               Precursor in Relation to Sulfur Emission from Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9514336

Award Number: 9514336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Hanson adha@mail.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The two major dimethylsulfonium compounds known in higher plants and marine
              algae are S-methylmethionine (SMM) and 3-dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP). 
              SMM is widely distributed in higher plants and algae, typically at moderate
              levels; it is not clear whether SMM has any physiological funtion.  DMSP occurs
              only in certain higher plants and marine algae, but can reach very high levels,
              particularly in conditions of high salinity and low nitrogen.  DMSP is a sulfur
              analog of a betaine and, like betaines, functions as an osmoprotectant.  Both
              SMM and DMSP are known to be precursors of dimethylsulfide (DMS) gas, which is
              the predominant biological source of atmospheric sulfur.  SMM is probably the
              principal precursor of terrestial DMS emissions, whereas DMSP is the main DMS
              preursor in the oceans and coastal environments.  Both compounds are therefore
              central to biogenic sulfur emission.  Despite the pivotal roles of SMM and DMSP
              in the natural sulfur cycle, until recently little was known about their
              biosynthesis except that both are derived from methionine.    The overall aims
              of this research are to elucidate the steps in DMSP biosynthesis in marine
              algae as well as in higher plants, to understand the enzymes that produce and
              cleave SMM and how these are kept apart, and to seek the enzymes that convert
              SMM to DMSP.  The results would provide biochemical insight into the origin of
              the world's most abundant biogenic sources of atmospheric sulfur.  This is a
              collaborative project with Dr. Gage's laboratory at Michigan State University. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
