Title       : Contracting and Delegation in Monetary Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9514876

Award Number: 9514876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Walsh walshc@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on two issues related to the contracting  approach to
              monetary policy design.  First, the project addresses  a range of questions
              dealing with the implementation of  incentives, the relationship of alternative
              policy mechanisms  such as central bank independence and inflation targeting to
              the  type of incentive structures suggested by optimal central bank  contracts,
              and the effects of information on the feasibility of  achieving optimal policy
              outcomes.  Second, the project advances  our understanding of the means through
              which central bank  independence leads to differences in macroeconomic outcomes
              by  examining the role of delegation, the factors that determine the  optimal
              degree of delegation, and the consequences for monetary  and fiscal
              interactions of alternative aspects of the delegation  of monetary policy
              authority.  The project address these issues  both through theoretical
              modelling and applied regression  analysis.    The results of this project will
              clarify how mechanisms such as  inflation targeting combined with central bank
              announcements  might be used to implement the types of optimal incentive 
              structures emphasized in the contracting approach to the design  of monetary
              policy.  The project will also identify the issues  that are important for
              determining the degree of delegation that  is optimal in the conduct of
              monetary policy and how the presence  of institutions that are insulated from
              direct electoral  influences may actually promote democratic stability.  These 
              results will contribute to the ongoing debate on the consequences  of
              alternative institutional structures for central banks and the  role of
              inflation targeting as a framework for the conduct of  monetary policy.
