Title       : Septal Cholinergic/GABAergic Pathways and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9514557

Award Number: 9514557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Walsh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514557  Walsh    An  exciting,  unresolved question in  neuroscience  is  how 
              animals acquire and store memories.  For mammals there is an  identified site,
              the hippocampus, at which memory processing  appears  to occur.  The structure
              and function of this  site  is  known in some detail,  however the nature of
              the  inputs  that  control  the  functioning of  hippocampal  neurons  is 
              largely unknown.  One of the input brain regions, the medial  septum,  contains
              neurons that project to  and  control  the  hippocampus.   The  medial  septum 
              appears   to   integrate  subcortical  information about the 'biological
              significance'  of   episodes   or   events  and  in   turn   modulate   the 
              responsiveness  of the hippocampus to its primary,  cortical  input.  Septal
              neurons release two types of neurotransmitter  molecules,  acetylcholine  and 
              GABA,  which  modulate   the  physiology  of  hippocampal neurons and  hence 
              the  memory-  related  functions  of the hippocampus.   Studies  conducted 
              through  funding by this award examine the neurotransmitters  and  brain
              circuits involved in a specific type of  learning  related  to  remembering a
              position in space.   One  set  of  experiments  is  designed to examine 
              whether  site-specific  manipulations     of    different    molecular    
              receptors  (benzodiazepine receptors), in the medial septum, will alter  the
              activity of septal neurons and of memory processes.   In  other  experiments, 
              tests are conducted  to  determine  the  physiological mechanisms through which
              intraseptal injection  of   a  receptor  blocker  drug  (flumazenil)  enhances 
              the  activity  of  neurons  that project to the  hippocampus  and  increases
              working memory.    These  studies  should  provide a  better  understanding  of
               specific  brain  circuits and neurochemical mechanisms  that  control memory
              in mammals.  The expectation is that  such  a  detailed understanding of a
              specific type of learning  at  a  specific  site  will  contribute importantly 
              to  a  general   understanding of how animals learn, and remember  what  they 
              learn.
