Title       : Sieve Tube Unloading: Control Point for Assimilate Partitioning?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1997   
File        : a9514188

Award Number: 9514188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald B. Fisher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Despite the central role of sinks in determining photosynthetic assimilate
              partitioning in plant growth, very little is known about the control of
              assimilate import into a sink tissue.  The overal goal of this research is to
              understand how import by a sink is controlled.  Because the developing wheat
              grain offers significant experimental advantages, Dr. Fisher's work has focused
              on that system.  However, findings from this research have important
              implications for all sinks in which unloading of the sieve element/companion
              cell complex follows a symplastic pathway.  All of the transport steps, from
              within the sieve tubes to the endosperm cavity, are passive, reversible and
              relatively nonspecific.  Assimilate movement out of the grain phloem into
              surrounding parenchyma cells is accompanied by the largest turgor and
              concentration differences over any step of the source-to-sink pathway.  Because
              solute movement out of the sieve tubes occurs via pressure-driven flow, while
              grain growth rate is constant, flow rate must be inversely related to the
              pressure and concentration gradients across this part of the pathway.  This,
              and the high resistance involved, implicate this step as an important control
              point for assimilate import into the grain.    This research will focus more
              closely on this step of assimilate import.  Important questions remain to be
              addressed in developing wheat grains, and they will continue to be the main
              object of the work.  However, to test whether import might be controlled at
              this step in other sinks, some work with growing root tips will also be
              initiated.  The main questions to be addressed in growing roots are whether
              sieve tube unloadiong is reversible, the pressure and concentraiton gradients
              involved, and their relationship to root growth rate.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
