Title       : Common Agency in Political Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9514866

Award Number: 9514866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Avinash K. Dixit dixitak@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The political process by which economic policy is made and  implemented involves
              several principal-agent relationships.  One  participant (a political party,
              legislature, or a bureaucratic  agency) takes some action that affects another
              (voters, special,  or interest groups).  The latter (the principal) can devise
              a  contract or an incentive scheme to influence the actions of the  former (the
              agent).  The incentives take different forms.  In the  relationship between
              lobbyists and political parties, these can  be cash payments.  When groups of
              voters are the principals and  politicians the agents, the incentives take the
              form of promises  of votes.  When the Congress is a principal for a
              bureaucratic  regulatory agency, the incentives can consist of funding or 
              threats of micromanagement.    Observers of political agency relationships have
              noted an  important special feature of these, namely the existence of  multiple
              principals who simultaneously attempt to affect the  actions of the agent.  In
              the U.S., each bureaucracy is  constantly under pressure from the Congress, the
              courts, the  media, and lobbyists.  In Europe, several sovereign nations 
              attempt to influence the decisions of the European Union's  central
              decision-makers.  In such common agencies, the incentive  schemes offered by
              the various principals jointly affect the  action of the agent, and therefore
              the return to each principal.  The equilibrium of this interaction among the
              principals  ultimately determines the agent's incentives.    The aim of this
              project is to construct theoretical models to  examine the interaction in
              several such "common agencies," and  characterize their outcomes.  A general
              methodology is developed,  which can help construct tractable models involving
              several  principals and several dimensions of the agent's choice.  The  value
              of the approach is demonstrated using two solved examples,  and then several
              further proposed applications constitute the   research agenda.
