Title       : U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research: Production Mechanism andInternal Structive
               Studies of Exotic Mesons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9514904

Award Number: 9514904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheung-Ryong Ji JI@NCSU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Cotanch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adam Szczepaniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,5953,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514904  Ji    This U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research award is to study 
              "Production Mechanism and Internal Structive Studies of Exotic  Mesons"  The
              principal researchers for the American side are Dr.  Chueng-Ryong Ji, Dr. Adam
              Szczepaniak, Dr. Stephen R. Cotanch,  and Dr. Eric S. Swanson, all of North
              Carolina State University.   The principal researcher for the Polish side is
              Dr. Leonard  Lesniak of the Institute of Nuclear Physics in Krakow.  The 
              recent advent of CEBAF will help researchers obtain more accurate  information
              on production mechanisms and the internal structure  of mesons.  The planned
              experiment on p(e,e'f0)p at CEBAF  especially will shed light on present
              speculations about the  exotic internal structure of scalar mesons.  Through
              this award,  the researchers will discuss two projects for the theoretical 
              investigation of the production mechanism and the internal  structure of
              mesons: (1) electroproduction and photoproduction of  scalar mesons; (2)
              improved constituent quark model.  The first  project will merge the expertise
              of the Krakow group on the  coupled channel model of scalar meson production
              mechanism with  the program at North Carolina State University on the meson 
              photo- and electro-production analyses.  They will investigate  the production
              mechanisms of f0,a0 and   mesons using the channel  coupling formalism of   
              and KK developed by the Krakow group.   In the second project, they propose to
              improve the existing  constituent quark models of the ordinary mesons by
              including some  of important QCD effects, in particular chiral symmetry
              breaking  and nonvalence degrees of freedom.  The aim of this project is to 
              construct a constituent quark model which can describe both the  ordinary
              mesons and the suspected exotic mesons such as scalar  mesons, glueballs and
              hybrid mesons.  However, at the minimum,  the researchers propose to build the
              model that would lead to a  spontaneous symmetry breaking and dynamically
              generated quark and  gluon masses and calculate the s pectra of mesons
              including some  of the suspected exotic mesons.     This research in physics
              fulfills the program objectives of  bringing together leading experts in the
              U.S. and Poland to  combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of
              strong  mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,  reciprocity,
              and mutuality of benefit.  ***
