Title       : Soil Amino-Acid Uptake by Alpine Plants and Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1997  
File        : a9514123

Award Number: 9514123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell K. Monson monsonr@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9514205  Huey    Conditions   experienced  by  a  developing   insect   often 
              influence  its  size  and  performance  as  an  adult.   For  example,  food
              levels and crowding have profound effects  on  size  and  reproduction of adult
               insects.  Consequently,  a  consideration  of  the  importance of these  
              "developmental  effects" is crucial to understanding the ecology of  insects 
              in  nature.   Moreover,  knowledge  of  these  developmental  effects  can be
              used effectively in designing protocols  for  optimal  mass-rearing  of 
              insects,  as  is  often  done  in  biocontrol  programs.  This project will
              explore the  effect  of   developmental   temperature  on   adult   fruit  
              flies  (Drosophila   melanogaster).   The  temperature  experienced  during 
              development (larval and pupal stages)  is  known  to  influence many aspects of
              an adult insect's biology, but the  actual  impact  may  depend  as  well  on 
              the  temperatures  experienced  as  an  adult.  This  project  uses  a  complex
               experimental   design   that    independently    manipulates  temperatures  of
              both developing and adult flies,  and  then  tests  several  competing
              hypotheses.  An  adult  insect  is  influenced not only by temperatures
              experienced  during  its  own   development,  but  sometimes  also   by  
              temperatures  experienced  by  its parents.  This project  will  similarly 
              determine  the  significance  of  such  "cross-generational"  effects  on 
              offspring.  The results of  this  project  will  elucidate  a  basic issue in 
              entomology - namely,  to  what  extent  is  the  performance  of  an  insect 
              sensitive   to  conditions  experienced by itself at  earlier  developmental 
              stages  and by its parents.   Moreover, information  derived  from  this  study
               will  indicate  whether  quality  control  programs  used in mass-rearing of
              insects should incorporate  temperature as a dynamic variable for study.
