Title       : Generalizability & Mediation of the Videotaped-Confession Bias
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9514966

Award Number: 9514966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169903             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Daniel Lassiter lassiter@ouvaxa.cats.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514966  Lassiter  Within the criminal justice system, there is a growing trend
              toward utilizing videotape technology to record and to present confession
              evidence. However, despite the seeming objectivity associated with the making
              and subsequent evaluation of a videotaped interrogation and confession, the
              literature on salience effects in causal attribution suggests that certain
              aspects of this process could inadvertently bias or prejudice judgments of
              voluntariness and guilt. Consistent with this literature, our preliminary
              studies show that, relative to other confession-presentation formats (e. g.,
              audiotapes and transcripts), videotapes that are recorded with the focus on the
              confessor tend to produce judgments of greater voluntariness and guilt.  These
              findings have important legal implications. This research will build on our
              preliminary results in two ways. The first line of investigation will focus on
              determining whether the previously observed videotaped-confession bias can be
              eliminated or attenuated by certain standard criminal justice practices or by
              other factors that would likely come into play in real courts of law. The
              second line of investigation will focus on identifying the process or processes
              that underlie or mediate the videotaped-confession bias. The proposed research
              has considerable theoretical and applied significance because only when the
              limits of the videotaped-confession bias are clearly established and an
              adequate explanation for its occurrence is identified can appropriate decisions
              be made as to how to utilize videotaped confessions to the best benefit of the
              criminal justice system.  %%%%  Within the criminal justice system, there is a
              growing trend toward utilizing videotape technology to record and to present
              confession evidence. However, despite the seeming objectivity associated with
              the making and subsequent evaluation of a videotaped interrogation and
              confession, the literature on salience effects in causal attribution suggests
              that certain aspects of this  process could inadvertently bias or prejudice
              judgments of voluntariness and guilt. Consistent with this literature, our
              preliminary studies show that, relative to other confession-presentation
              formats (e. g., audiotapes and transcripts), videotapes that are recorded with
              the focus on the confessor tend to produce judgments of greater voluntariness
              and guilt.  These findings have important legal implications. This research
              will build on our preliminary results in two ways. The first line of
              investigation will focus on determining whether the previously observed
              videotaped-confession bias can be eliminated or attenuated by certain standard
              criminal justice practices or by other factors that would likely come into play
              in real courts of law. The second line of investigation will focus on
              identifying the process or processes that underlie or mediate the
              videotaped-confession bias. The proposed research has considerable theoretical
              and applied significance because only when the limits of the
              videotaped-confession bias are clearly established and an adequate explanation
              for its occurrence is identified can appropriate decisions be made as to how to
              utilize videotaped confessions to the best benefit of the criminal justice
              system.
