Title       : Development of X-PLOR, a System for X-ray Crystallography and NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1997  
File        : a9514819

Award Number: 9514819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Axel T. Brunger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              X-ray crystallography and solution nuclear magnetic resonance  spectroscopy of
              biological macromolecules have become important tools  for understanding
              biological phenomena at the atomic level. The number  of structures solved
              continues to increase rapidly due to advances in  techniques such as molecular
              cloning, crystallization screening, data  collection, and data analysis.
              Despite these successes, fundamental  questions remain about the solution of
              difficult structures and about  the adequate description of thermal motion and
              solvation of  macromolecules. After data acquisition and reduction, a large
              variety  of computational procedures are required to solve and refine a crystal
               or solution NMR structure. In the previous grant period we have  extended the
              X-PLOR program by incorporating most aspects of phasing  and phase improvement
              in X-ray crystallography. New refinement  techniques were developed for both
              crystal and solution structures.  Some of these developments were implemented
              by design of a high-level  computer language. This high-level language allows
              one to easily modify  existing algorithms and to even design new ones without
              an intervening  programming step.    It is proposed to pursue the following
              specific aims: 1. Continue the  software development in order to make X-PLOR a
              nearly complete package  for structure determination. My laboratory has
              recently undertaken  several experimental crystallographic projects. This
              involvement in  structure solution will enable us to test and to further
              develop X-PLOR  by application to real problems. 2. Collect highly accurate
              phases for  selected cases obtained by multi-wavelength anomalous diffraction
              and  develop improved models of solvation and conformational variability. 3. 
              Develop protocols for crystallographic refinements at low to medium  resolution
              using all available experimental information in a  reduced-variable
              conformational space. 4. Continue development of  molecular replacement methods
              in the case of flexible molecules. 5 .  Develop improved methods for heavy atom
              searches for multiple  isomorphous replacement and multi-wavelength anomalous
              diffraction. 6.  Develop improved protocols for structure determination of RNA
              molecules  by solution NMR.
