Title       : Dissertation Research: Mitochondrial Phylogeny of New WorldMonkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9514173

Award Number: 9514173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9483               (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Meyer ameyer@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Evolutionary relationships among species of New World monkeys are poorly known. 
              Several  different hypotheses of relationships have been generated with
              morphological characters and  nuclear DNA sequences.  Three major groups o f
              New World monkeys-callithrichids (tamarins  and marmosets), pithecines (sakis
              and uakaris), and atelines (spider, woolly, and woolly-spider  monkeys), are
              well supported in all of these studies.  However, most of all other
              relationships  show weak support  and differ across studies, suggesting that a
              fast sequence of speciation  events (or evolutionary radiation) occurred in
              some cases.  Genes located in the mitochondria  (extranuclear cellular
              organelles) have a higher rate of evolution on average than nuclear genes  and
              chances are higher that more mutations accumulate during rapid evolutionary
              radiations.   Hence the potential advantage of combining the existing data sets
              (morphological and nuclear)  with mitochondrial data.   The major aim of this
              project is to clarify the relationships among New World monkey genera.   For
              this purpose, the researchers intend to: 1) sequence a mitochondrial gene, the
              12S ribosomal  gene in all genera of New World monkeys, to conduct a study of
              their evolutionary relationships;  2) combine the 12S sequences with published
              nuclear, morphological and preliminary  mitochondrial data to generate a `total
              evidence` evolutionary tree;  3) evaluate different  methods to assign
              differential weights to individual characters.  The researchers will assume
              that  a method that yields the species of  callithrichids, pithecines, and
              atelines, assorted in that way,  performs better than a method that does not,
              because these are well corroborated relationships.  The project is significance
              because: 1) it furthers  knowledge about the poorly known  evolutionary
              relationships among New World monkeys; 2) it provides a phylogenetic framework 
              to test hypotheses of evolution in this group; 3) it provides a test of the
              performance of different  weighting methods.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
