Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Computational Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9514848

Award Number: 9514848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry Kammash   (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip L. Roe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
              21        Mathematics                             
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to support collaborative research by Dr. Terry
              Kammash, Department of Nuclear Engineering, and Dr. Phillip Roe, Department of
              Aerospace Engineering at the University of Michigan and Dr. Necdat Aslan,
              Department of Physics at Marmara University in Istanbul, Turkey.  The thrust of
              the research is to produce a generalized computer code that solves the
              magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) equations in two dimensions on the structured or
              unstructured quadrilateral grids using a higher order Godunov type scheme.  The
              code is to be developed so that it will accept different initial and boundary
              conditions to model different physical problems of interest to plasma physics
              and controlled fusion as well as to astrophysical problems.  Scope: This award
              is to fund visits by the two U.S. P.I.'s, as well as one of their graduate
              students at the U. of Michigan, to Marmara University, and the visit of the
              Turkish scientist and a graduate student to the University of Michigan.  The
              project brings these very experienced scientists in the fields of MHD, fusion
              and computational fluid dynamics to collaborate on developing a new powerful
              two-dimensional computer code to solve MHD problems in various physical
              applications.  The project also allows for the initiation of a long-term
              collaboration between the two teams at the two schools in the United States and
              Turkey.   It also provides an international experience for a U.S. graduate
              student, by working at a dynamic foreign institute in Istanbul.  Partial
              funding of this project is being provided by the Division of Mathematical
              Sciences.   The project fits well with the objectives of the Division of
              International Programs.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
