Title       : Caste Determination in the Polyembryonic Wasp Copidosoma Floridanum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9514231

Award Number: 9514231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Strand mrstrand@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Miodrag Grbic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  Polyphenism refers to the occurrence of alternative phenotypes in a species
              in response to cues from its internal or external environment.  Most studies on
              insect polyphenisms have focused on how environmental and endocrine factors
              affect phenotypic plasticity.  Implicit in this view is that individuals are
              initially bipotential but at a critical period, specific stimuli irreversibly
              commit them to a particular caste.  Environment factors that influence insect
              polyphenisms have been examined many times previously, but how these factors
              impact morphogenetic events at the cell or molecular level is largely unknown. 
              A useful system for studying these questions is a unique group of parasitic
              wasps (parasitoids) that are polyembryonic.  Parasitoids lay their eggs on or
              in the bodies of other insects, which act as food for the develop larvae.  Each
              egg laid by a polyembryonic wasp divides clonally to produce a brood of
              genetically identical siblings that feed together inside the host.  The eggs of
              some species form more than 1,000 embryos and two morphologically distinct
              laral castes:  reproductive larvae that develop into adult wasps and precocious
              larvae that have worker functions.  In this proposal, we seek funds to study
              caste formation in Copidosoma floridanum, a polyembryonic wasp that attacks the
              moth Trichopulsiani.  Our background data will allow us to characterize how
              cell lineage and endocrine factors interact with genes regulating pattern
              formation.  Objectives of the proposal are to:  1)  assess the role of cell
              lineage in caste determination, 2)  examine the influence of host endocrine
              factors on caste, and 3)  characterize spatial/temporal expression of
              pattern-forming genes in the precocious and reproductive morphs.  For lineage
              studies, fate maps will be generated by injecting selected blastomeres using
              fluorescently conjugated dextran tracers and/or horseradish peroxidase. 
              Endocrine studies will employ a series of transplantation, ablation and rescue
              strategies, while pattern  formation will be examined by monitoring expression
              of pattern gene homologs.  Our study will contribute fundamental information to
              our understanding of polyembyrony, the cellular/molecular mechanisms regulating
              alternative polyphenisms, and the processes influencing developmental
              evolution.  ***
