Title       : Group Formation and Commitment in Multi-Person Productive Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9514860

Award Number: 9514860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95773              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Lawler ej13@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is an experimental study of group formation in multi-person productive
              exchange.  It extends the theory of relational cohesion, which was developed in
              studies of two-person exchange, involving three or more people and
              incorporating the uncertainty-reduction effects of repetitive exchange.  The
              theoretical argument is that when three or more people negotiate
              jointly-beneficial collaborative efforts and do so repeatedly, individuals
              sense a cohesive group above and beyond person-to-person ties, and this
              cognitive or psychological group formation produces greater commitment to the
              group.  This group formation process takes place ostensibly because frequent
              exchange among the same people produces positive feelings and reduces
              uncertainty about each other.  Multi-person exchange makes the group a unifying
              force, because subtle "two against one" pressures are likely to constrain
              opportunism or malfeasance and make negotiations more routine over time.  %%%  
              The theory will be tested in an experimental setting in which three people can
              negotiate a joint venture that provides payoffs to each that they cannot
              produce alone or in dyadic transactions.  Each person's profit is contingent on
              the group, and the group effort requires the assent of each person.  This is a
              form of productive exchange, where the joint good produced is divisible, and
              each person has an incentive to claim as much of this good as possible.  The
              project calls for two experiments, manipulating the average dependence of the
              individuals on the group (person-to-person dependence) and whether there is a
              difference between individuals' dependence on the group (equality or inequality
              of person-to-group dependence).  The major theoretical propositions are that
              greater average (total) dependence on the group and more equal person-to-group
              dependencies produce more negotiated agreements which then unleash an
              endogenous group-formation process.  Positive emotions and reduced uncertainty
              are key moments in this endogenous process, because  these should enhance
              perceptions of group cohesion which, in turn, generate commitment behavior. 
              %%%   Each experiment examines a different form of commitment behavior.  The
              first examines symbolic (token) gift giving among members.  Stronger commitment
              is indicated by greater propensities for all members of the group to give token
              gifts to all others.  The second experiment examines whether members will
              contribute to a new joint venture in which each has an incentive for
              opportunism or malfeasance.  In sum, the theory predicts that certain
              power-dependence conditions will affect, indirectly rather than directly, the
              degree that members give each other gifts and the degree that they trust each
              other enough to contribute in an N-person social dilemma.  %%%   This project
              has broader implications for collaborative efforts of multiple entities,
              whether these are individuals, groups, organizations, or societies.  Under
              favorable relative and mutual dependencies, people exchange repeatedly, come to
              define themselves as a group, ascribe value to the group itself, and become
              more inclined to do things for the group and its members.  The commitment
              process involves movement from instrumental toward expressive person-to-group
              relations.  One result is an incipient normative order manifest in mutual
              expectations of cooperation.  Overall, this project suggests a fundamental way
              that small-scale social order comes about and is maintained in multi-person
              exchanges.
