Title       : Paleobiology, Evolutionary Theory, and Geopolitics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9514784

Award Number: 9514784
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Weishampel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor David Weishampel, in collaboration with Dr. Coralia Maria Jianu,
              Curator of Fossil Vertebrates in Deva Romania, is investigating important
              questions on the origins of the science of paleontology and the role of
              position and funding in the kinds of research one conducts.    It is clearly of
              great importance to understand how differing approaches to a scientific field
              develop and what relationship they have with currently accepted science in our
              country.  In this respect, Drs. Weishampel and Jianu's study of Franz Baron
              Nopcsa promises to enrich our understanding of how paleontology has developed
              in the 20th Century.  Nopcsa was a pioneer in the field.  He emphasized the
              biological nature of fossil vertebrates, the use of bone histology to
              understand the physiology of extinct vertebrates, neo-Lamarkian evolutionary
              mechanisms, and the theory of continental drift. He also examined the geology
              of the eastern Adriatic Coast. By bringing together these different strands,
              Nopcsa helped to create a distinct approach for Eastern European paleontology. 
              His insights present this science in a valuable perspective that is worth
              contrasting to the rise of American paleontology as created by Henry Fairfield
              Osborn.  Two aspects of Nopcsa's career are of great interest beyond just his
              science.  First, he invented the field for himself.  There was no one to train
              him.  How does a scientist go about creating a new discipline and how does he
              attract followers?  Secondly, Nopcsa was independently wealthy and was able to
              carry out his research in whatever manner he chose to pursue.  How did this
              independence affect the kinds of questions he asked versus those of his
              contemporaries who were bound by the constraints of university and/or
              government, foundation or patron support?  The PI will also examine these
              important and fascinating questions.  This study thus promises to enhance our
              understanding of the rise of paleontology and the role patronage in directing a
              field of investigation.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
