Title       : Optical Analysis of Synaptic Integration in Cerebellar Purkinje Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1998  
File        : a9514266

Award Number: 9514266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Ross   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nechama Lasser-Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York Medical College
	      
	      Valhalla, NY  10595    914/594-4480

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514266  Ross    The  central  nervous  system often appears  like  a  dense, 
              bewildering  array  of  neurons  and  of  neuronal  synaptic  interactions.  
              Part of the problem is that  the  functional  significance  of specific
              locations at which synapses  occur  on  cells is largely unknown.  The focus of
              research  funded  by  this  grant is on determining the significance  of   the 
              spatial  arrangement of  synapses on Purkinje  cells,  which  are  the largest
              neurons in the cerebellum and which provide  the  only  output  to other parts
              of the brain.  This  focus  relates  to  the  complex problem of  how 
              voltage-dependent  membrane   conductances in Purkinje cell input regions,  the
               dendrites,  and the architecture of these neurons  influence  the  integration
               process.   Experiments  are  designed   to  determine   the  functional 
              significance  of  the   spatial  patterns  of  these synaptic inputs.  The
              primary  technique  is  optical recording of calcium concentrations through 
              the  use  of  indicator dyes in slices of brain tissue.   Calcium 
              concentrations, when combined with an electrical  recording,  are  good 
              indicators of changes in intracellular potentials  throughout neurons and hence
              of local neuronal activity.    The  relatively  stereotyped  circuitry  of  the
               cerebellar  cortex  provides a favorable model system for  studying  the 
              functional  significance  of  cell  geometry  and   synaptic  interactions  in
              detail. These studies should  provide  much  needed,  detailed descriptions of
              synaptic  interactions  in  critically  important cerebellar neurons.  Such
              descriptions  will greatly enhance knowledge of information processing  in 
              mammalian neurons at the single cell level.
