Title       : CAREER: Neurosteriod Effects on Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9514463

Award Number: 9514463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl A. Frye   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9514463     Frye      The classical mechanism of action of steroid hormones is
              for the  hormone to diffuse through the plasma membrane, bind to a cytosolic 
              receptor which is translocated to the nucleus of the cell, where  the
              receptor/ligand complex induces changes in gene transcription,  and
              subsequently protein production.  However, it has been observed  that some
              behavioral effects of these hormones take place quite  rapidly when compared to
              the hours required to change protein  synthesis in a cell.  As a result, the
              current theory of steroid  action includes the ability of these hormones to
              exert rapid,  non-genomic effects, possibly involving receptors imbedded in the
               plasma membrane.  The investigations of Dr. Frye focus on the  non-genomic
              behavioral effects of steroid hormones.  A study of the  ability of steroid
              hormones to modulate classical  gamma-aminobutyric acid receptors and
              reproductive behavior is an  integral part of this project.  In addition, the
              behavioral effects  of steroid hormones produced by the brain,  will be
              undertaken.   The notion that non-genomic effects of steroids complement
              genomic  effects of these hormones to initiate and terminate reproductive 
              behavior is unique and will provide essential new information in  the study of
              the brain communication mechanisms.  Additionally, the  evidence supporting
              novel, non-classical effects of steroid  hormones will be important for
              biologists investigating the  neurobiology and physiology of this essential
              class of molecules  that are used by organisms in many ways.  In addition to
              the novel  research to be undertaken during this research, Dr. Frye will also 
              engage in novel educational activities crucial to the development  of new
              programs at Connecticut College. The development of a new  curriculum in
              neuroscience and biopsychology incorporating novel  research experiences for
              undergraduate students is a centerpiece of  Dr. Frye's activities, as well as
              developing new outreach  activities.  Support for this research an d education
              program will  have great importance on the development of future generations of
               neuroendocrinologists and neuroscientists from both an educational  and
              research perspective.
