Title       : Developmental Plasticity in the Autonomic Nervous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9514552

Award Number: 9514552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Birren birren@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514552  Birren  The mammalian nervous system is made up of an astonishingly
              large number different nerve cells (neurons) which interact to permit thought,
              movement and the control of bodily functions.  The generation of this enormous
              cellular diversity is one of the central issues of developmental neurobiology. 
              We know that the many different classes of neurons arise from a relatively
              small number of undifferentiated precursor cells in the mammalian embryo.  The
              goal of this project is to understand how these precursor cells respond to
              signals in their local embryonic environment to develop into the correct type
              of neuron for a given area of the embryo.  The peripheral nervous system
              provides an excellent system for this study.  Evidence from other laboratories
              has suggested that the enteric neurons that control the function of the
              mammalian gut are very closely related to the sympathetic neurons that control
              involuntary functions such as heart rate.   In fact, it has been suggested that
              these two neuronal lineages arise from a common embryonic precursor cell.  We
              plan to directly test the idea that the precursor cells that normally develop
              into sympathetic neurons have the capacity to develop into enteric neurons when
              provided with the appropriate embryonic signals.  Likewise, we will investigate
              whether enteric precursor cells can develop into sympathetic neurons.  We will
              also test the idea that as these cells respond to signals and follow one of
              these differentiation pathways that they lose the ability to respond to signals
              from the other lineage.  This will permit us to define the developmental time
              that multipotent precursor cells become restricted to specific cell lineages. 
              Finally, we will seek to understand the nature of the signals that direct the
              precursor down one or the other neuronal lineage.  We will study the
              distribution of neurotrophin receptors in the developing sympathetic and
              enteric nervous system.  These receptors comprise a family of proteins that
              play a role in the de velopment of many different types of neurons.  We will
              test the possibility that one of the members of this receptor family is
              directly responsible for lineage decisions in the sympathetic nervous system. 
              We will do this by introducing the expression of this receptor into enteric and
              sympathetic precursor cells at early developmental stages and asking if we can
              observe alterations in the type of neurons developing from the precursors. 
              These experiments will provide important information on how the early embryo
              controls the development of different cell types from uncommitted precursor
              cells.  Normal development of the mammalian embryo requires that many such
              lineage decisions be carried out in a very precise manner.  Our studies will
              shed light on the mechanisms that control these developmental patterns.
