Title       : The Neuromuscular Basis of Limbed Locomotion in Lizards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9514585

Award Number: 9514585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227746             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Jayne bruce.jayne@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514585  Jayne      There is currently no broad comparative understanding of the
              neuromuscular basis of locomotor movement of the hind limb of vertebrates
              because of a lack of information for amphibians and reptiles which generally
              have a "sprawling" limb posture unlike the "erect" limbed birds and mammals.
              Lizards are by far the most diverse lineage of vertebrates with the ancestral
              sprawling limb posture, and the proposed research will quantify the movements
              and in vivo patterns of muscle use in the hind limbs of this vertebrate
              lineage. Experiments with a generalized lizard species will test for
              differences associated with different speeds and locomotion up and down
              inclines. Three other lizard species with different specialized hind limb
              postures will be studied similarly allowing quantitative interspecific
              comparisons of motion and muscle activity. Upside-down locomotion will also be
              studied for two species of climbing specialists. Overall, the experiments will
              determine the extent of behavioral diversity in this system and address whether
              or not major innovations in motor pattern occur either for different locomotor
              tasks within a species or for similar locomotor tasks among species with
              differing morphology. It is hypothesized that intraspecific variability in
              motor pattern of a generalized species performing different tasks may encompass
              intraspecific variability in motor pattern among species with specialized limb
              posture. Understanding the functional basis of lizard locomotion will also
              complement their ecologically and evolutionarily-oriented studies which attempt
              to relate morphological variation to variation in locomotor performance and
              habitat selection.  ***
