Title       : Molecular, Genetic, and Functional Analysis of Synaptic Transmission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9514485

Award Number: 9514485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Ordway rwo4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ordway  9514485    As the organ system responsible for controlling movements,
              sensing  surroundings, and consciousness, the nervous system must be capable 
              of rapid information processing and rapid transmission of that  information
              throughout the organism.  To meet these demands, the  nervous system is
              composed of complex networks of cells which, like  electrical networks in
              computers, use electricity for information  processing and transmission.  In
              order for the nervous system to  function, individual nerve cells must convey
              electrical signals to  other nerve cells in the network.  This transmission
              occurs at  specialized sites of contact between two nerve cells, called 
              synapses and is generally mediated by a complex process where  electrical
              information is converted into chemical information.  The  chemical signals are
              responsible for information transfer across  the synapse.  Understanding
              chemical synaptic transmission, and  thus the mechanisms by which nerve cells
              can send and receive  electrical signals, is essential to understanding the
              fundamental  mechanisms of nervous system function.  Using a simplified model 
              system which functions similarly to more complex nervous systems,  a better
              understanding of information processing can be gained.   This simple model
              system is also amenable to a wide variety of  molecular genetic approaches
              allowing even more powerful  understanding of nervous system function.  Dr.
              Ordway is using a  simplified model system to investigate the function of a
              specific  synaptic protein called NSF.  Using the molecular approaches  alluded
              to above, Dr. Ordway is investigating the function of NSF  in chemical synaptic
              transmission when the function of NSF has been  perturbed.  The basic
              mechanisms of nervous tissues have been  conserved during evolution and
              information from simpler systems  will lead directly to a better understanding
              of the function of our  own brain and nervous system.
