Title       : Molecular Genetic Studies of Bdelloid Rotifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9514279

Award Number: 9514279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Meselson msm@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             =8 w       @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       w       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    =8 w   
              =8 w         4 @                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         ?   @   A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   9514279
              Meselson Bdelloid rotifers are common fresh water invertebrates classified
              among 4 families, 18 genera, and more than 350 species. Males, hermaphrodites,
              and meiosis are unknown and eggs are produced from oocytes by mitosis. The
              Bdelloidea constitute the only higher level metazoan taxon that appears to be
              entirely parthenogenetic, making them the most favorable group in which to test
              the possibility that extensive evolution can occur without sexual reproduction
              and genetic recombination. The approach being taken to determine if bdelloids
              evolved asexually is based on the expectation that a diploid line that lost
              sexual reproduction and genetic recombination millions of years ago will
              accumulate a large amount of neutral heterozygosity, greatly reducing the
              homology of chromosome pairs. Such heterozygosity will be heritable, so that
              the ancient origin of its accumulation will be manifested in the phylogeny of
              heterozygous nucleotide sites among species of the asexual group. Tests for
              hyper  heterozygosity are being conducted by determining the nucleotide
              sequences of numerous independently is olated copies of specific genes from
              rotifer populations grown from single eggs. Gene copies are isolated by cloning
              the products of polymerase chain reactions and also by screening genomic
              libraries. Results thus far, with the bdelloids Philodina roseola and
              Macrotrachela quadricornifera, are consistent with heritable hyper
              heterozygosity that began to accumulate long before these two genera diverged.
              The generality of this finding is being tested by sequence studies of four
              different genes to two different families.   genes in bdelloid rotifers of
              three different genera belonging to two different families.  Tests for
              chromosome homology and divergence are being performed by fluorescence in situ
              hybridization. If the homology of chromosome pairs has become greatly reduced,
              one member of a diverged gene pair will hybridize at high stringency to only
              one chromosome-and the other member of the pair will generally hybridize to a
              different chromosome. Bdelloid rotifers from two different families are being
              tested in this manner, using probes containing the same genes that are being
              examined in sequence studies.  As controls, the above sequencing and
              cytogenetic tests are being performed with rotifers of the Class Monogononta,
              in which females are diploids that usually reproduce parthenogenetically but
              which occasionally undergo meiosis and reproduce sexually, producing haploid
              males and exhibiting Mendelian segregation. %%% Genetic recombination is
              believed to be essential for the successful evolution of a species. The
              bdelloid rotifers, a common fresh-water invertebrate, produce eggs from oocytes
              by mitosis and no indication that sexual reproduction occurs has ever been
              found. It is now possible to look, at a molecular level, for any indication of
              genetic recombination and to test the possibility that extensive evolution can
              occur without sexual reproduction and genetic recombination. ***         @    
              @                                                       Oh     +'  0           
                                          $       H       l                             S u m
              m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (                      
                                          >                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          D       h                          
                                      R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                          
                          christine a savoy                   christine a savoy           @  
                | r                           @       s                           @       w  
                                                                                             
                              @    H'                                     Microsoft Word 6.0 
                                                                  2                          
                                                                              ;              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        e =       e                   w                                      
                                  j       j   j       j       j       j       j              
                                                                          1                  
                                                                                          %  
              >
