Title       : Power in Negotiated and Nonnegotiated Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1997   
File        : a9514911

Award Number: 9514911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda D. Molm molml@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is an experimental study of power in negotiated and non-negotiated
              exchange.   It develops and tests a theory of how the form of social exchange
              affects the distribution of power in exchange networks.  These two forms of
              exchange create different relations between actors' behaviors and their
              outcomes, and they provide actors with different amounts of information about
              their potential outcomes from exchange.  In the absence of negotiation,
              exchange partners perform individual acts that provide benefits for one
              another, without knowing what, if anything, they will receive in return.  But
              when exchanges are negotiated, actors engage in joint action (negotiating the
              terms of an agreement) that provides benefits for both.  Whether equal or
              unequal, these benefits are known and agreed upon in advance.  The theory
              argues that these differences affect the mechanisms that underlie the use of
              power and the development of inequality in exchange networks.  Consequently,
              structural variations in the availability and number of alternatives will have
              very different effects on power use in negotiated and reciprocal exchange, and
              information that reduces uncertainty about outcomes will have stronger effects
              on power use in reciprocal than negotiated exchange.  Three laboratory
              experiments will be carried out to test the predicted effects of network
              structure and information on power use for the two forms of exchange.  %%%  
              This project is the first systematic comparison of these basic forms of direct
              exchange.  While the classical exchange theories (e.g. Peter Blau and George
              Homans) excluded bargaining and negotiated exchange from the scope of their
              theories, most contemporary theorists have done the opposite, concentrating
              exclusively on negotiated exchanges with strictly binding agreements.  The
              prevalence of both forms of exchange in social life requires research of this
              kind to compare them.
