Title       : Molecular Origins of Specificity in Protein-Nucleic Acid Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9514117

Award Number: 9514117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jannette Carey carey@chemvax.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514117  Carey  The goal of this work on protein-nucleic acid interactions is to
              understand the molecular origins of specificity in the recognition process. 
              How does a protein identify its target site among all available nucleic acid
              sites?  Interest in the underlying principles of recognition motivate
              comparative study of different systems in order to distill out the molecular
              generalities that may be common among them.  This work combines methods of
              biochemistry, biophysics, and molecular biology, with the goal of integrating
              structural and thermodynamic aspects of each system trying eventually to relate
              these aspects to the physiological role of the interaction.  This proposal aims
              to examine molecular features responsible for specificity in two
              protein-nucleic acid interactions, those of bacterial arginine repressor (ArgR)
              and eukaryotic transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA).  These two systems share
              many features that recommend them as excellent examples for our studies,
              including the probable ability to bind both RNA and DNA and to package nucleic
              acids.  In the case of the hexameric ArgR, important open questions concern the
              functional definition of the operator sequence, and the range of tolerance
              toward variations in both protein and DNA sequence.  These issues will be
              approached by biochemical studies of binding to a natural operator with an
              extended tripartite structure, using functionally homologous but very divergent
              arginine repressors from E. coli and B. subtilis.  Interactions of wildtype and
              site-directed mutant operators with each protein will be characterized by
              determining affinity, specificity, stoichiometry, cooperativity, and details of
              the DNA contacts using quantitative gel retardation and footprinting.  A second
              aim with ArgR is to investigate a possible general regulatory role for the
              protein implied by some of its biochemical and physiological properties.  This
              will be tested by using in vitro selection for ArgR-binding sequences from an
              E. coli genomic library.  A thir d aim is to characterize a putative
              RNA-binding function observed in our purified samples of ArgR.  To confirm that
              the RNA-binding moiety is ArgR, we will conduct quantitative biochemical
              studies of the ArgR-RNA interactions by using gel retardation and footprinting
              to determine affinity, specificity, stoichiometry, cooperativity, and details
              of the RNA contacts.  In the case of TFIIIA, conflicting data in the literature
              indicate a need for quantitative biochemical approaches that can probe the
              origins of specificity in RNA binding.  One hypothesis is that specificity is
              determined in a rapid binding equilibrium which must be studied kinetically to
              resolve it from subsequent particle formation.  To approach this problem
              requires using purified recombinant components and isolated natural particles,
              and quantitative gel retardation and footprinting to determine the affinity,
              specificity, stoichiometry, cooperativity, and details of the RNA contacts in
              the various complexes that form during the time course of association,
              dissociation, competition, and exchange reaction.  ***
