Title       : A Molecular Study of Elasmobranch Steroidogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9514051

Award Number: 9514051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Trant trant@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514051  Trant      Sharks and rays (elasmobranchs) belong to a scientifically
              important taxa; however, relatively little is known about their reproductive
              endocrinology. This proposal describes a classical and a molecular approach to
              the study of ovarian steroid synthesis in the Atlantic stingray (Dasyatis
              sabina). Similarly to mammals, the stingray maintains a pregnancy, supports the
              developing young through a "placenta", and gives birth to precocious young.
              This proposed research will result in the development in the tools used in the
              examination of the molecular and cellular control of the steroidogenic pathway.
              The cDNAs that encode specific steroidogenic enzymes will be isolated. In
              addition, the cDNA will be used to express the encoded protein in yeast and E.
              coli for biochemical studies. After these tools are developed, the regulation
              of steroidogenesis will be studied at the site of transcription (synthesis of
              RNA from DNA) and translation of the RNA (synthesis of the enzymes) for four
              key steroidogenic enzymes.  This molecular investigation will be married to a
              classical reproductive endocrine study. The suite of steroids produced by the
              stingray ovary will be identified, rates of steroid synthesis will be
              determined, and the seasonal changes of reproductive steroids in the blood will
              be monitored.  Accomplishment of the proposed objectives will provide a
              foundation for:  1) a greater in-depth examination of gonadal steroidogenesis,
              2) an examination of the unique elasmobranch adrenal steroidogenesis, and 3)
              development of long-term primary culture of follicular tissue. The results of
              this proposal will yield probes for other laboratories interested in studying
              steroidogenesis in lower vertebrates.   ***
