Title       : Gender Differences in Infants' and Parents' Social Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9514495

Award Number: 9514495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Z. Tronick ed.tronick@tch.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. K. Weinberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie Beeghly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Children's Hospital Corp
	      320 Longwood Ave
	      Boston, MA  021155746    617/355-7044

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Early gender differences in infants' social emotional behavior during
              mother-infant and father-infant interactions will be evaluated longitudinally
              at 3 and 6 months of infant age.  96 infants (48 boys, 48 girls) and their
              mothers and fathers will participate in the study.  At each age, infants will
              be videotaped during a 3-minute face-to-face social interaction with each
              parent.  Parents will also provide demographic information and independently
              complete self-report instruments that assess their emotional state, perceptions
              of infant temperament, parenting goals, adaptation to parenthood, social
              support, marital adjustment, and involvement in infant caretaking.  The
              videotapes of the infants', mothers', and fathers' behavior and facial
              expressions will be scored microanalytically using the Infant Regulatory
              Scoring System (IRSS), the Adult Interactant Regulatory Scoring System (AIRSS),
              and Izard's AFFEX system.   Gender-related differences in maternal and paternal
              social emotional behavior as well as dyadic features of infant-parent
              interactions will be assessed.  Specific hypotheses guided by the Mutual
              Regulation Model and prior research are proposed.  It is hypothesized that
              infant boys are less able than infant girls to regulate their affective states
              during parent-infant interaction.  Moreover, fathers are hypothesized to be
              more likely than mothers to have an arousing interactive style.  Behavioral and
              affective differences among cross-gender pairs of infants and parents are also
              hypothesized as are the effects of contextual variables such as marital
              adjustment.  Fathers and mothers play different roles in the development of
              infant affect regulation.  Children may also develop different behavior
              patterns from each parent, and these different dyadic experiences may have
              ramifications for their socio-personality development.  However, it remains
              unclear how the characteristics of mother-infant and father-infant interactions
              affect the development of socio-emotional and regulatory behavior in male and
              female infants and the ontogenesis of gender-related differences in later
              psychological functioning.  Thus, the proposed project will add significantly
              to the extant literature on gender differences in early infancy, extend
              theories of normal social development, and guide future research.  %%%  Early
              gender differences in infants' social emotional behavior during mother-infant
              and father-infant interactions will be evaluated at 3 and 6 months of infant
              age.  At each age, 96 infants (48 boys, 48 girls) will be videotaped during
              social interaction with their mother and their father.  In addition, each
              parent's emotional state, perceptions of infant temperament, parenting goals,
              adaptation to parenthood, social support, marital adjustment, and involvement
              in infant caretaking will be assessed.  This project is unique in evaluating
              gender differences in the social emotional interactive behavior of infants
              under one year of age with their mothers and, in particular, their fathers. 
              The study will examine whether and how infants develop different behavior
              patterns from each parent and whether this influences their social and
              personality development.  The study will also evaluate the different roles
              fathers and mothers play in the development of infants' ability to control
              impulses, anger, and aggression.  A focus on these issues is of critical
              importance and will significantly add to our understanding of the origin of
              gender-related differences in later psychological functioning (such as higher
              rates of aggressive behavior in male children).  The American family is
              changing and an increasing number of children are growing up without a father
              at home.  This project, by evaluating the role fathers and mothers play in the
              social and emotional development of their sons and daughters, will begin to
              address this important issue.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
