Title       : Interactions Between a Parasitic Wasp and its Insect Host: A Molecular Study of
               Wasp Virus, Parasite Protein and Host Hemocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9514583

Award Number: 9514583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pauline O. Lawrence pol@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514583  Lawrence      When females of the parasitic wasp Diachasmimorpha
              longicaudata lay their eggs in larvae of the Caribbean fruit fly, Anastrepha
              suspense (host) they also introduce a virus into the blood of the host. In
              addition, a new protein appears in the blood of the parasitized larvae within 2
              days after parasitization but is absent from unparasitized individuals. The PI
              has shown that the level of this protein increases in the host's blood at the
              same time as the virus begins to infect new host cells. In addition, infected
              host cells round up and do not form protective defense capsules as do cells
              from unparasitized fruit flies. Consequently, the parasite eggs and larvae
              escape encapsulation by the host and the parasite develops at the expense of
              the fruit fly. Thus, this parasite is an excellent biological control agent. 
              The PI proposes to determine whether the protein is a gene product of the virus
              and whether it enhances virus infectivity. The PI will also identify the
              effects of both protein and virus on the cellular communication and defense
              system of the host.  Since the Caribbean fruit fly and its close relatives like
              the Mediterranean fruit fly are major pests of citrus and other agricultural
              crops, the PI's basic studies will provide significant insights into the
              potential of protein and/or virus as tools in fruit fly developmental
              disruption and control. Additionally, the PI's findings will shed light on
              whether membrane carbohydrates (sugars) are important in cell-cell recognition
              and defense. The findings will also help to identify possible factors (sugars)
              that enhance and/or suppress cell aggregation (tumor formation).  ***
