Title       : Temperamental Contributions to the Development of Social Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9514612

Award Number: 9514612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan A. Fox nf4@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Rubin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Schafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to examine the social skills, self-perceptions, and
              social relationships of 11-year-old children who, at earlier ages, had been
              identified as extremely wary and socially inhibited.  In our longitudinal
              program of research we have found that the pattern of brain electrical activity
              (EEG), recorded over the anterior frontal lobes, represents a marker of
              individual differences in the tendency to express and modulate positive and
              negative emotions.  Thus, infants and toddlers who exhibit wariness and
              behavioral inhibition during the first two years of life, and who display
              greater negative right frontal EEG activation are more likely to be socially
              reticent during preschool peer interaction.  Furthermore, 4 year social
              reticence predicts social withdrawal in the peer group at age 7 years.  We
              posit that socially withdrawn 7-year-old children, especially those who display
              greater relative right frontal asymmetry, will be rejected by peers in later
              childhood.  Moreover, we hypothesize that the friendships of these children, at
              age 11 years, will be qualitatively inferior and more fragile than those of
              their non-withdrawn counterparts.  And finally, we postulate that
              physiologically assessed wariness, in combination with impoverished social
              skills and peer relationships, will predict negative self perceptions of social
              competence and peer relationships, as well as internalizing problems in early
              adolescence (11 years).  These hypotheses will be examined by bringing the
              participants in our longitudinal project to the laboratory for three visits at
              11 years of age.  Session 1 will consist of same-sex quartets, much like the
              ones in which the children participated at ages 4 and 7 years.  Session 2 will
              consist of a friendship dyad interaction in which the target child will be
              observed interacting with his/her best friend.  Also in Session 2, both the
              focal child and his/her best friend will participate in a same-sex quartet with
              two additional unfamiliar children.  Session 3 will allow collection of
              psychophysiological data.  As a result of these three sessions, we will be able
              to describe the friendship and social interactive patterns of both reticent and
              non-reticent children.  We will also be able to characterize the processes
              through which competent peer interaction develops.  %%%  The goal of this
              project is to examine the social skills, social relationships, and 
              self-perceptions of 11-year-old children who, at earlier ages, had been
              identified as extremely wary and socially inhibited.  Earlier research has
              suggested that adolescent and adult depression, anxiety, and other problems of
              an `internalizing` nature may be predicted from negative self appraisals and
              withdrawal from the peer group during childhood.  The developmental precursors
              of negative self appraisals and social withdrawal, however, are by-and-large
              unknown.  In our longitudinal program of research we have found that infants
              and toddlers who display greater negative right frontal EEG activation tend to
              be wary and behaviorally inhibited during the first two years of life.  This
              constellation of psychophysiology and behavior predicts extremely wary,
              socially reticent behavior during preschool peer interaction.  And, 4 year
              social reticence, combined with negative right frontal EEG activation, predicts
              social withdrawal from the peer group at age 7 years.  In the present study, we
              are predicting that socially withdrawn 7-year-old children, especially those
              who display greater relative right frontal asymmetry, will, at 11 years, be
              rejected when they attempt to initiate interactions with their peers.  We
              hypothesize also that the friendships of these children, at age 11 years, will
              be qualitatively inferior and more fragile than those of their non-withdrawn
              counterparts.  And finally, we posit that physiologically assessed wariness, in
              combination with impoverished social skills and peer relationships, will
              predict negative self perceptions of social competence and peer relationships,
              as well as internalizing problems in early adolescence (11 years).  These
              hypotheses will be examined by bringing the participants in our longitudinal
              project to the laboratory for three visits at 11 years of age.  In these
              sessions, we will assess the quality of the children's peer relationships, with
              a special emphasis on the quality and strength/fragility of their relationships
              with their best friends.  We will also assess the children's self-expressed
              perceptions of their social skills and social relationships, as well as their
              feelings of anxiety, social wariness, and depression.  Finally, we will
              continue to collect EEG data, given the purported significance of right frontal
              asymmetries in the prediction of internalizing disorders in childhood and
              adolescence.  As a result of this study, we will be able to document some of
              the early origins, and some of the early adolescent concomitants of negative
              thoughts and feelings about the self, social wariness, and other problems of an
              internalizing nature.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
