Title       : The Ecological Significance of Molecular Signaling Between Bacterial Populations
               on Plant Roots: Effect on Competitionand Coexistence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1996   
File        : a9514074

Award Number: 9514074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leland S. Pierson III   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Pierson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9514074  Pierson    The rhizosphere, the zone of soil surrounding plant
              roots, contains greater amounts of nutrients in the form of root exudate than
              the surrounding soil.  Therefore, microbial competition for these root exudates
              is intense.  In response to this competition, bacteria have evolved diverse
              competitive mechanisms to allow them to compete for these nutrients.  One
              benefit of the expression of these competitive mechanisms is the inhibition of
              plant pathogens, commonly termed biological control.  However, commercial use
              of biological control as been limited by inconsistent performance.  This is the
              result of our lack of understanding of the factors, including the plant host
              and the natural microbial community, that affect the expression of these
              competitive genes in the rhizosphere.    Pseudomonas aureofaciens 30-84, one of
              the best genetically defined biological control organisms, produces phenazine
              antibiotics. Phenazine production is the primary mechanism responsible for the
              competitive fitness of this species  in the rhizosphere and for its ability to
              suppress plant pathogens. We have shown that this bacterium regulates the
              expression of the genes encoding phenazine production through the recognition
              of a diffusible signal encoded by the gene phzI.  Recently, it has been shown
              that populations of diverse bacteria rely on the accumulation of structurally
              similar signals to trigger the expression of host-associated genes.  We have
              shown that the expression of genes involved in phenazine production in strain
              30-84 is influenced by the production of diffusible signals produced by other
              rhizosphere bacteria.  The ecological significance of these interactions is
              that competing strains may be able to influence the outcome of competition by
              affecting the regulation of a competitive mechanism at a genetic level.  The
              proposed research will directly test the effect of diffusible signals produced
              by other populations of bacteria on phenazine gene expression in P.
              aureofaciens, including  the effect of interactions on population densities in
              situ on plant roots.
