Title       : Social Pathways to Competence Among Children at Risk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9514992

Award Number: 9514992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan I. Vondra vondra@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514992  Vondra  This study examines the role of selected social   relationships
              at home and school in forecasting early school   competence among children at
              risk for problems and failure   in school.  The study will test the importance
              of the   teacher-child relationship, peer relations, and linkages   between
              home and school as mediators between experiences in   the home and competence
              in school for children from   socioeconomically disadvantaged families with
              varying   degrees of social/parenting risk.  The proposed   investigation
              involves up to three waves of school-based   data collection and concurrent
              observation and/or interview   of a sample of 192 children and their urban,
              low-income   families who were observed and assessed during infancy and   early
              childhood.  Data will include: (1) annual teacher   ratings and school records
              for children in kindergarten   through second grade, (2) annual phone
              interviews with a   second parent figure, (3) home visits at 5-5.5 and 7-7.5  
              years, and (4) phone interviews with mothers in years when a   home visit has
              not taken place.  The cross-sectional and   longitudinal data will be used to
              test hypotheses about: (1)   the predictive importance of the teacher-child
              relationship,   peer relations, and home-school links for classroom  
              motivation and competence, (2) developmental and familial   antecedents of
              these critical social relations, and (3) the   specific role of child
              sociability and verbal competence,   close relationships with parent figures,
              and child social   status among siblings as protective factorq for early school
                success among children from higher-risk families.  %%%  This study examines
              the role of social relationships at home   and at school in promoting early
              school success among   children who are at risk for problems and failure in
              school.    The relationships of importance in this study are those   between
              the child and his or her mother, a second "parent   figure," the child's
              teacher, and other children in the   classr oom.  Each will be tested as an
              important link between   the child's experiences growing up in an urban,
              low-income   family with some degree of social problems and his or her  
              competence in the school setting.  Data will be collected in   schools, and the
              children and their families will be   observed and interviewed in their homes. 
              The same children   were previously observed and assessed during infancy and  
              early childhood.  The data will be used to test the   importance of the
              teacher-child relationship, peer   relations, and home-school links for
              predicting classroom   motivation and competence, and to identify protective  
              factors for early school success among children from higher-  risk families. 
              ***
