Title       : RUI: Serotonergic Control of Feeding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9514483

Award Number: 9514483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. O'Gara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514483  O'Gara    The experiments described in this proposal will examine how 
              the nervous system controls the feeding behavior of the  medicinal  leech.  The
              physiological mechanisms used by the leech  nervous system  to control behavior
              are similar to those found in higher  animals,  including humans.  The relative
              simplicity of the leech  nervous system  allows us to examine some of these
              physiological mechanisms  in ways  that are difficult or impossible in higher
              animals.  An  additional  justification for studying feeding in the leech is
              the re-  emergence of  the use of leeches following plastic and reconstructive 
              surgery.  When  an amputated part of the body (like a finger or an ear) is 
              reattached,  it is relatively easy for the surgeon to reattach the  arteries in
              the  affected body part.  However, veins are more delicate and  blood is  more
              likely to clot in them.  Because of these problems,  blood within  the
              reattached body part has no way to return to the rest of  the body.    Pressure
              builds up in the reattached part and blood flow  stops.  Without treatment, the
              tissue will die.  When these  problems  occur, the surgeon can restore blood
              flow to the affected  tissue using  leeches.  The leech will feed on the
              congested tissue and  drain it of  blood.  In addition, the bite mark left by
              the leech will  ooze blood  for a number of hours.  These two actions will
              allow new  blood to flow  into the reattached tissue and keep it alive. 
              Efforts to  mimic these  actions artificially have been unsuccessful; thus,
              there is  no  substitute for the use of leeches in these situations.  A  better
               understanding of how leech feeding is controlled may allow  doctors to  more
              efficiently utilize leeches in this role.    Nerve cells (called neurons)
              communicate with other neurons  and muscle cells by releasing a chemical called
              a  neurotransmitter.  The neurotransmitter changes the behavior of the
              recipient  neuron or  causes a change in tension of a muscle cell.  The 
              neurotransmitter is  sens ed by the recipient cell using protein molecules
              called  receptors.  Receptors for a particular neurotransmitter usually come in
               a number  of varieties.  The different receptors can be preferentially 
              activated  using specific drugs that resemble the neurotransmitter.  Feeding 
              behavior of the leech is dependent on the neurotransmitter  serotonin.  The
              experiments in this proposal will examine the effects of  serotonin  on the
              nervous system and muscle cells of the gut.  In the  first  series of
              experiments, we will examine the effects of  serotonin (and  similar acting
              drugs) on biting behavior and blood  consumption.  By  the use of specific
              drugs that activate only certain types  of  serotonin receptors, we will
              examine the role of the various  receptors  in feeding.  We will also record
              the electrical activity of  the  muscles involved in feeding using very fine
              wires implanted  in these  muscles.  These experiments will allow us to examine
              how  serotonin  turns on feeding behavior.    In a second set of experiments we
              will examine the effects  of  serotonin-like drugs on the contractions of the
              leech  pharynx after we  have removed it from the body.  The pharynx is the
              first  part of the  gut and actually generates the suction that draws blood
              from  the  victim.  These experiments are designed to allow us to  deduce what 
              types of serotonin receptors are present on the muscles of  the  pharynx, and
              the role of each receptor type in controlling  contractions of the pharynx.   
              The last series of experiments will examine the effects of  serotonin-like
              drugs on individual pharyngeal muscle cells.  Using  fine microelectrodes that
              are inserted into individual  cells, we will  examine the effects of these
              drugs on the muscle cell  membrane.  We  will examine the effects of
              serotonin-like drugs on the  permeability  of the cell membrane to ions
              (charged atoms).  The movement  of ions  across the cell membrane triggers the
              events that eventually  lead to  muscle contraction.  These studies will a llow
              us to examine  the role  of various serotonin receptors in regulating muscle 
              contraction at the  level of the individual cell.
