Title       : Polyandry and Male Variability in a Heterogeneous Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9514245

Award Number: 9514245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86264              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Zeh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        Abstract    Zeh  9514245    Theoretical models
              generally portray sexual selection as a  constant, undirectional         force,
              driving a population  towards a single, optimal male phenotype.  Species are 
              assumed to occupy homogeneous environments and to experience  selection either
              through male competition or through mate  choice by monogamous females.  This
              view fails to explain  why sexually-selected male characters are often
              precisely  those which exhibit the greatest variability, perhaps  because the
              models do not reflect the complexity of factors  influencing trait evolution in
              nature.  Many species,  particularly those that exploit ephemeral resources,
              are  subject to fluctuating environmental conditions.  In  addition, DNA
              fingerprinting has revealed that multiple  paternity, and hence polyandry, is
              far more common than  previously assumed.    The research proposed here will
              test the hypothesis that  sperm storage by polyandrous females, superimposed on
              male  competition in a heterogeneous environment, can contribute  to the
              maintenance of variability in male sexually-selected  characters by carrying
              genotypes through episodes of  unfavorable selection.  The development of
              single-locus  minisatellite DNA probes for a species whose natural history  and
              reproductive biology are highly amenable to  experimentation makes the
              neotropical pseudoscorpion,  Cordylochernes scorpioides, a model system for
              testing this  hypothesis.  As an essential first step in carrying out a 
              rigorous test of the  sperm-storing females as carriers of  male genetic
              variability  hypothesis, the proposed research  will determine whether all the
              elements of this model are  present in the C. scorpioides system.  First, to
              assess  whether sexual selection favors a significantly smaller male  phenotype
              within trees than on beetles, DNA fingerprinting  will be used to quantify the
              relationship between male size  and reproductive success in experimental tree
              populations.  Second, to assess the ca pacity of females to act as carriers  of
              male variability, DNA fingerprinting will be used to  compare levels of
              multiple paternity in the broods of  females captured in the act of boarding
              and of disembarking  from beetles.  In addition, sperm utilization patterns
              will  be investigated in a semi-natural experimental simulation of  a dispersal
              episode.  Finally, to assess the potential for  exaggerated male traits to
              respond to selection in the two  environments, the design of the within-tree
              sexual selection  experiment will provide field estimates of heritability 
              based on paternity assignment and son/sire regression  involving field-caught
              males (sires)and their male offspring  recaptured after release and development
              to maturity in the  field.  Assuming that all the elements necessary for the 
              model are found to exist in this pseudoscorpion system, the  development of
              quantitative simulation models to investigate  how selection in the two
              environments may be balanced will  be the focus of future research.
