Title       : Structure and Function of hnRNP Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9514179

Award Number: 9514179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Williams kenneth.williams@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Sedivy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514179  Williams  Heterogeneous nuclear RNAs (hnRNA) are found in the nucleus
              in complexes with more than 20 hnRNP proteins.  A1 hnRNP is unusual in that it
              appears to have several functions in addition to its structural role in hnRNP
              fiber formation.  A1 interacts with intermediate filaments; modulates
              alternative 5'-splicing; can recognize a high affinity RNA target sequence that
              is similar to splice site consensus sequences; and facilitates annealing of
              complementary nucleic acids.  The latter "activity" is controlled by
              phosphorylation of a critical serine residue in A1.  A1 hnRNP also contains two
              conserved RNA binding domains at its NH2 terminus, and has an RGG repeat which
              may be a significant RNA binding domain.  In these studies, the yeast two
              hybrid system will be used to identify other proteins that interact with A1 in
              vivo.  Circular dichroism, fluorescence spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic
              resonance will be used to probe the structure and nucleic acid binding
              properties of the RGG motif, and to locate sites of methylation within the
              domain.  The methylase that carries out the posttranslational modification of
              the RGG will be cloned and analyzed.  The results of these studies will
              significantly increase our understanding of a multi-functional hnRNP protein
              that plays a key role in pre-mRNA biogenesis.  %%%  Although all of the
              information contained within a cell is encoded in its DNA, most of the actual
              functions of cells and the organs and systems that they make up are carried out
              by proteins that are in turn composed of varying sequences of amino acids.
              Since proteins are made in the cytoplasm of the cell while the DNA that encodes
              them is in the nucleus, a molecule called messenger RNA  (mRNA), structurally
              related to DNA, serves to transport the "message" for protein synthesis from
              the nucleus to the cytoplasm.  In general, there is a unique mRNA for each
              protein.  This project is directed at understanding how a particular class of
              nuclear proteins (hnRNP proteins) that are cri tical for the formation and
              transport of mRNA carry out their functions.  In particular, how hnRNP proteins
              bind to mRNA and to other proteins will be investigated so that this critical
              step in gene expression will be better understood.  ***
