Title       : Emotion and Perceptual Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9514449

Award Number: 9514449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Steinmetz steinmet@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula M. Niedenthal  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In previous research, the PI found evidence that emotions mediate early
              perception.  Specifically, emotions appear to increase a person's perceptual
              sensitivity to emotion-congruent information in the visual world.  The past
              results indicate that emotions have very specific effects on perception such
              that happy people are particularly efficient at processing information related
              to happiness (but not all positive events) and that sad people are particularly
              efficient at processing information related to sadness (but not all negative
              events).  These past findings will now be extended in several ways: In one
              series of experiments, the emotion-congruence effect will be explored in the
              domain of face processing.  These experiments will examine the hypotheses that
              (1) emotions increase the efficiency of perception of emotion-congruent faces,
              and (2) emotions mediate the perception of the boundaries of facial expression
              categories such that emotional perceivers can detect the offset of
              emotion-congruent expressions with greater expertise than can other perceivers.
               Another series of experiments will explore the roles of emotional feelings and
              of emotional language in perceptual processes.  These experiments will
              investigate the hypothesis that emotional feelings per se mediate emotion
              congruence effects.  The results from this research can provide the basis for a
              more precise account of the cognitive representation and processing of emotion.
               %%%  In previous research, the PI found that a person's emotional state can
              influence very basic perceptual and cognitive processes.  The past results
              indicate that happy people do indeed see the world through rose-colored glasses
              and that sad people see the dark side of life.  In addition, the past results
              suggest that emotions have very specific effects: happy people are especially
              good at understanding information related to happiness (but not all positive
              events) and that sad people are especially good at understanding information
              related to sadness (but not all negative events).  These past findings will now
              be extended in several ways: One series of experiments will examine the effects
              of emotion on the accuracy and efficiency of interpreting another person's
              facial expressions.  Another set of experiments will examine whether emotional
              experience itself influences a person's perceptions of others, or whether
              emotional language is the more important determinant.  The results from this
              research can provide the basis for a more precise and complete understanding of
              the cognitive representation and processing of emotion.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
