Title       : Estrangement from the Public Sphere: Economic Change, Democracy and Social
               Division in North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9514912

Award Number: 9514912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232086             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy C. Holland dholland@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Nonini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Lutz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award to the University of North Carolina funds several anthropologists
              studying local political participation in 5 places in the region.  The goal of
              the project is to study people's participation in local political activities. 
              The effects of economic restructuring will be analyzed as they affect local
              conceptions of `the public` whose interest should be served.  The extent to
              which the community component of Human Capital varies as local groups are
              estranged from participation, both formally through voting and informally
              through behavioral participation in local public institutions such as schools,
              law enforcement and health clinics will be examined.  The communities will vary
              by whether their primary economic orientation is from the public sector, the
              private firm sector, or whether the communities are `consumption` oriented,
              including retirement and educational communities.  Extensive in-depth local
              ethnographies will be carried out in each of the five places, as well as case
              studies of local `dramas of contestation`, or conflicts over resources carried
              out in the public sphere.  At the end of the fieldwork a final survey of 300
              individuals in one of the communities will be carried out to see how the
              ethnographic material can inform survey research.  This research is important
              because it focuses on an issue of great concern: the preservation and extension
              of the community component of the Human Capital of America's public sphere,
              where matters of public concern and common resource problems are debated.  It
              will advance our understanding of how the changing American political economy
              affects local integrating and segregating practices among people viewed as
              different because of their race, ethnicity, or other characteristics.  The
              methodology used, of focusing on local cultural narratives and interpretations
              of significant cases of conflict, will shed light on basic processes of how
              cultural interpretations of differences lead to differences in public resource
              distributions and shape group relations.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
