Title       : The Quiet Politics of Voice: A Comparative Study of Classification and
               Information Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1998  
File        : a9514744

Award Number: 9514744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey C. Bowker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Star  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Very large information systems embody invisible values, embedded in layers of
              infrastructure, that impact on people's lives yet are often inaccessible to
              public debate.  This project analyzes two such infrastructural tools, seeking
              to understand their politics, values, and how they tie together infrastructure,
              work and knowledge.  In order to understand how and where values are embedded
              into these systems, the investigators will conduct systematic comparisons. 
              Primarily, they will examine the design, development and use of two
              classification systems, the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) and
              the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC).  The first is about one hundred
              years old, while the second originated only 20 some years ago.  For comparative
              purposes and depth of analysis, the team will look at similar developments in
              library and racial classification schemes.  Routine, even boring aspects of
              information encoding may have important public and scientific consequences that
              can only be identified by careful attention to these procedures and their
              outcomes.  The investigators draw empirical material from several sources. 
              They have collected archival material on the ICD from WHO and UN archives and
              secondary material from WHO and USPHS documents.  For NIC, they have been
              conducting an ongoing ethnographic investigation with its designers and
              developers, nursing researchers at the University of Iowa.  They have collected
              and archived interview and fieldnote transcripts and electronic bulletin board
              material.   This research will allow them to conplete data collection and
              analysis and conduct systematic comparisons.  Results will include a monograph
              as well as articles and presentations to audiences in science studies, library
              and information science, nursing and informatics.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
