Title       : Cutaneous Vibration and Its Role in Texture Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9514432

Award Number: 9514432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Hollins mhollins@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514432  HOLLINS    This research will investigate humans' sense of touch, and
              in  particular, the ability of people to determine, by touch, what  the surface
              of an object is like.  People can often determine, by  drawing a finger across
              a surface, whether it is cloth,  styrofoam, leather etc.; it is not known,
              however, on what  specific aspects of the stimulus event these perceptions are 
              based.  The hypothesis to be explored in this research is that  small
              vibrations, set up in the skin when the finger moves across  a textured
              surface, contain the information needed to make many  of these judgments, and
              that sensory processing of the vibrations  in fact contributes to texture
              perception.  The research will  test this notion in a number of ways.  First,
              the vibrations  themselves will be recorded and analyzed.  The information they
               contain will be evaluated and compared with the performance of  experimental
              participants.  Second, higher-order features of the  vibration, such as the way
              it waxes and wanes over time, will be  manipulated to determine if perception
              reflects the encoding of  such temporal patterns.  Third, some textures will be
              presented  repeatedly, to learn how adaptation influences the precision of 
              texture judgments; the resulting perceptual changes will yield  information
              about underlying sensory processes.  Fourth, textures  will be touched
              indirectly, with a small rod, thus eliminating  all cues except vibration.  If
              subjects' judgments are still  accurate, the importance of vibration in texture
              perception will  be established.  Fifth, pre-recorded vibrations will be played
               back to the finger, to determine whether participants can  recognize the
              original texture.  These five sets of experiments  will provide a thorough test
              of the hypothesis that vibrations  contribute to tactile texture perception, an
              idea that has  important implications for remote and prosthetic sensing, and
              for  the possibility of sensory enhancement in persons with  somesthetic
              impairments.  In additi on, the research will  contribute basic knowledge about
              an important aspect of tactile  perception.    ***
