Title       : Ontology and Quantification in Early Childhood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9514695

Award Number: 9514695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Carey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514695  CAREY    Language is perhaps the most important conceptual capacity
              that  separates human beings from our primate cousins.  This research  will
              explore the origins of human language, both evolutionarily  and in the
              developing child.  The focus will be on some of the  numerical concepts that
              play an important role in the grammars of  natural languages, i.e., quantifiers
              such as "one, another,  some," the distinction between countable entities (such
              as  objects) and noncountable entities (such as sand and liquids),  and
              concepts of specific countable entities (such as bottles and  books).  The
              research will attempt to discover which of these  concepts are available before
              the emergence of language in the  developing child, which emerge as the infant
              learns their  expression in a natural language, and which are available 
              independently of language in primates, such as rhesus monkeys and  cottontop
              tamarins.    The method to be used to probe the conceptual capacity of 
              creatures without language is simply to show magic tricks,  essentially
              impossible events, and record when the creature  registers surprise by looking
              for a long time at the outcome of  such impossible events.  If a creature is
              surprised at the magic  trick, we can be confident that he or she
              conceptualized the  property of the natural world that was violated in the
              trick.   For example, earlier research has demonstrated that if infants  are
              shown one object placed behind a screen, and then a second  object, (i.e., 1 +
              1), and then the screen is lowered, revealing  2 objects (the possible
              outcome), they show little interest.  But  if the screen is lowered revealing 3
              objects or just 1 object,  they look reliably longer at these impossible
              outcomes.  This  method has been used for many years to study the concepts of 
              human babies, and recent research has demonstrated shown that it  also yields
              interpretable results both with rhesus monkeys in the  wild and with
              laboratory-housed cottontop tamarins.      ***
