Title       : Residential Compound Excavation at Copan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9514267

Award Number: 9514267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17559              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Webster DXW16@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr David Webster will conduct one
              season of archeological field research at Copan Honduras. This large Mayan site
              has been the focus of extensive excavation, much of it by Dr. Webster and his
              colleagues, and the basic history and settlement pattern are well known. The
              site is large, contains both massive stone architecture as well as many small
              associated settlements and house mounds. It was occupied over much of Mayan
              prehistory and thus documents both the rise and subsequent decline of this
              society. In previous work Dr. Webster located a compound which appears to have
              been the residence of an elite group. With National Science Foundation support
              he will extend his survey and excavation in this area. He will clear the
              vegetation, re-establish a grid and map in all ancillary structures. At least
              one 2x2 meter trench will then be excavated adjacent to each such structure
              down to sterile soil. A large shallow trench will also be cut down to the
              latest living surface in front of one set of structures to search for signs of
              residential activities such as cooking. Finally a long trench will be excavated
              to tie this area in with other regions of the site. Trash middens and burials,
              usually found at the rears of such buildings will provide materials for
              absolute date determinations.  With relatively simple technology Mayan peoples
              developed large city-like settlements with monumental architecture which
              indicates the ability to mobilize and control large numbers of people and to
              bind them together into functioning social units. Based on differences in the
              size of residence compounds and differences in relative wealth of grave goods
              it is clear that society was organized in a hierarchical fashion and that
              developed religious, economic and political systems supported this
              differentiation. However surprising little is known about elites themselves and
              how they lived and exercised control. It is unclear whether the concept of
              `elite` is useful or not since archaeologists do not know how much variation
              exists within and between Mayan sites. This project will help to yield an
              answer since it will provide systematic information about one such group. Based
              on research to date this residence appears to span the period which includes
              both Classic and Postclassic periods and thus records both the apex and decline
              of the site. Thus it may be possible to determine how elite roles changed over
              time.  This research will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
              will shed light into how social differentiation emerges and is maintained and
              how the Mayan civilization functioned at the height of its development.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
