Title       : Molecular Genetics of Proteus Mirabilis Pattern-Determining Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9514803

Award Number: 9514803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233620             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Robert Belas BELAS@UMBI.UMD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514803  Belas  Proteus mirabilis exhibits the unique ability to undergo a
              morphological and physiological differentiation to form a swarmer cell in
              response to growth on surfaces or in viscous fluids. Maintenance of the
              differentiated cell requires constant contact with the inducing environment and
              is mediated through conditions that inhibit rotation of the flagella. A second
              signal, the amino acid glutamine, is also critical for induction of
              differentiation. Moreover, swarmer cells respond specifically to glutamine
              concentration gradients, while undifferentiated swimmer cells do not. While
              differentiation into a swarmer cell occurs at the level of the individual cell,
              swarming motility and behavior are characteristics associated with the
              coordinated movement of groups of swarmer cells. This behavior is cyclic in
              nature, so that the movement of the swarming mass is punctuated by periodic
              episodes during which the bacteria cease movement and dedifferentiate from the
              swarmer cell back to the swimmer cell in a process called consolidation. The
              cycles of swarming and consolidation are then repeated several times until the
              agar surface is covered by concentric rings giving rise to the characteristic
              "bull's-eye" appearance of P. mirabilis colonies.  TnS mutagenesis has produced
              two general categories of mutants defective in swarming: null mutants (Swr-) in
              which swarming does not occur and mutants that show aberrant swarming behavior
              (Swrcr).  Swrcr mutants do not produce "bull's-eye" consolidation patterns.
              Instead, many of these mutants are altered in their ability to form discrete
              consolidation zones of uniform size and are called pattern-determining mutants.
              We have developed two hypotheses to explain the control of pattern formation,
              each having a different set of predictions and anticipated genes. The first
              hypothesis argues that the cycles are generated by an internal 'clock' where
              the increase or decrease of some intracellular component is crucial in
              determining when consolidation occurs. In  contrast to the 'clock' model, the
              second hypothesis suggests that the cycles of consolidation are generated by an
              extracellular system of molecules, i.e., extracellular concentration gradients
              control the cycles. These two possibilities are not mutually exclusive (and are
              not the only models that one can develop), but are useful for making
              predictions.  Moreover, the 'clock' model suggests a temporal control of
              pattern formation while an extracellular concentration gradient hypothesis
              implicates a spatial control mechanism. This framework lends itself to the
              development tests to prove the efficacy of each model and predicts the
              involvement of certain gene products.  This research will test the hypothesis
              that these pattern-determining mutants have arisen from mutations affecting the
              spatial or temporal coordination of multicellular migration and consolidation. 
              The research seeks to gain insights into the mechanisms of pattern
              determination by: a) Identifying swarming-pattern-determining genes and their
              functions through nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequence analysis and b)
              Determining the differential expression of pattern-determining genes at
              discrete time points during swarming behavior. To accomplish these goals known,
              previously constructed Tn5 mutants defective in multicellular migration and
              pattern formation will be used. The disrupted genes will be cloned from each
              mutant, the nucleotide sequence analyzed, and the putative function of the
              encoded protein determined by homology to known genes in the database.  P.
              mirabilis merodiploids will be constructed to produce transcriptional fusions
              with bacterial luciferase (luxCDABE), to measure temporal control mechanisms,
              while translational fusions with (-galactosidase (lacZ) will measure spatial
              control during pattern formation. The completion of these objectives will
              provide knowledge of fundamental importance to molecular biologists, and may
              offer insight into how multicellular movement is regulated during both
              prokaryotic and eukary otic development.  ***
