Title       : Evolution of Unique Desaturases in Insect Glands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9514211

Award Number: 9514211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158692             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell L. Roelofs wlr1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514211  Roelofs      Sex pheromone systems in insects have had considerable
              attention because the species-specific attractant chemicals used for attracting
              mates can be exploited for monitoring and insect management strategies. Also,
              the critical use of these signals in maintaining the integrity of a species
              supports the idea that the evolution of the specific signals is directly
              involved in the speciation process. Although much is now known about how the
              chemical signals are biosynthesized in the pheromone gland of female moths,
              there remain many questions about how these chemical communication systems have
              evolved to use different blends and chemical compositions in related moth
              species.  The PI has found that a family of unique enzymes have evolved in the
              moth pheromone gland to produce unsaturated compounds possessing double bonds
              in locations not normally found in other animals. The PI hypothesizes that
              these unique "desaturases" evolved from the common (9 desaturase that is found
              in all animals to make compounds such as oleic acid (unsaturation at carbon 9).
              The characterization of the genes for some of the unique desaturases would
              provide the possibility of conducting a comparison of desaturase genes from
              primitive and advanced species to the common (9 desaturase gene to better
              understand the speciation process. These novel desaturases also would provide
              an important resource of enzymes not available from other sources to study in
              general how these desaturases function to produce different compounds with
              double bonds in various positions and how they can make specific mixtures of
              these isomers. An understanding of the unique desaturases from moth glands and
              how they insert double bonds, in addition to its huge contribution to the
              fundamental knowledge about these enzymes and to the speciation process, could
              lead to the development of commercial processes for producing valuable raw
              materials for the pharmaceuticals, food or chemical industries.   ***
