Title       : Behavioral Isolation Between Two Interfertile Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9514041

Award Number: 9514041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine R. B. Boake cboake@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                         Boake        9514041    The process of species
              formation is very poorly understood; a major factor is the maintenance of
              separate gene pools before two species are incompatible.  This proposal
              describes an analysis that links an intraspecific phenomenon, sexual selection,
              to the process of behavioral isolation and the separation of gene pools.    The
              proposed research will examine factors that could influence behavioral
              reproductive isolation between two species that are incompletely isolated. 
              Behavioral reproductive isolation has been explicitly related to sexual
              selection in two models, and the relationship deserves empirical attention. 
              The central hypothesis for the proposed study is that the aspects of mating
              behavior which are critical to species discrimination are also involved in
              sexual selection within at least one species.    This hypothesis will be tested
              by examining Drosophila silvestris and D. heteroneura, a pair of allopatric,
              interfertile species.  These species were chosen because they have no
              postzygotic isolation, their mating systems are non-resource based, and because
              behavioral isolation is incomplete, the cross between D. Silvestris females and
              D. heteroneura males is easy to make and occasionally occurs in the wild. 
              Behavioral isolation has arisen in the reciprocal cross, D. heteroneura females
              and D. silvestris males.  Furthermore, these species inspired a controversial
              hypothesis that relates sexual selection to speciation.  The failure of D.
              heteroneura females to mate with D. Silvestris males is primarily due to the
              failure to initiate courtship, rather than failure at later stages, and
              research will focus on early courtship.    At the end  of the study, behavioral
              traits that are keys to reproductive isolation will have been identified, which
              will allow an analysis of the inheritance of critical differences between the
              species.
