Title       : In Vitro Studies of Vertebrate Telomere Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9514196

Award Number: 9514196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261987             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Langmore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Makarov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514196  Langmore  Telomeres are the terminal nucleoproteins of all eukaryotic
              chromosomes.  The definitive function of telomeres is stabilization of the ends
              of chromosomes, apparently by protection against non-homologous recombination
              and exonucleolytic degradation--well-documented instabilities of non-telomere
              ends in cells and cell extracts. Telomeres must maintain this protective
              function to prevent degradation, rearrangement, or loss of chromosomes.
              Deterioration of telomere function might be involved in some of the chromosomal
              instabilities associated with developmental defects and aging.  Genetic and
              biochemical studies of the highly diverse, short, telomeres in protozoa and
              fungi have probed telomere function in unicellular, immortal organisms.
              Vertebrates telomeres have a highly conserved repeating sequence (TTAGGG)n of
              length 2-100 kb, unusual nucleosome structure, and probably specific
              non-histone proteins. The role of these components in the protective function
              of vertebrate telomeres is not clear due to the difficulties in doing genetic
              studies, and the lack of an vitro model for telomere assembly          and
              behavior. The ideal model system will permit the protective function of
              telomeres to be studied independent of the possible roles of telomeres in the
              cell cycle, chromosome segregation, and gene regulation.  The aim of this
              project is to understand how telomeres are protected, using a reductionist
              approach of recapitulating and manipulating telomere structure and function in
              vitro.  Xenopus egg extracts are used for this task, because they have both the
              strong non-homologous recombination activity and specific telomere-protection
              activity characteristic of human and other vertebrate somatic cells. The
              specific goals are to:  1) Describe model telomere assembly and function in
              vitro and in vivo; and 2) Determine the DNA structure requirements for model
              telomere stability.  These studies will help to understand telomere roles in
              chromosome and cell behavior.  The in vitro studi es will lead to new
              hypotheses about the mechanism of chromosome stability and instability that
              will be useful in explaining chromosome behavior, and for suggesting new
              experiments.  The identification and characterization of the factors that are
              necessary and sufficient for protection of telomere ends from recombination
              will lead to even more detailed mechanistic and structural studies.  ***
