Title       : Isoprenoid Pathway Partitioning: HMGR Isoforms and Sterol vs. Phytoalexin
               Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9514177

Award Number: 9514177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole L. Cramer CCRAMER@VT.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514177  Cramer  Plants produce a vast array of isoprenoid compounds (>10,000)
              that function in growth and development, electron transport, photosynthesis,
              anti-oxidant protection, reproduction, and disease resistance.  The appropriate
              spatial and temporal production of specific isoprenoid endproducts from common
              central-pathway intermediates poses a significant regulatory challenge.  The
              proposed reserch will address whether the plant isoprenoid pathway is organized
              in distinct metabolic units or "metabolons" as a mechanism to direct pathway
              flux into specific endproducts. In Solanaceous plants, the HMG1 isoform of
              3-hydroxy-3methylglutaryl CoA reductase (HMGR, the rate-limiting enzyme
              producing mevalonic acid) and squalene synthetase (the key branch enzyme
              committing farnesyl intermediates to sterol synthesis) are coordinately
              regulated in association with sterol biosynthesis.  Data from a variety of
              experimental approaches suggest that, in addition to differential regulation at
              the gene level, protein-protein interaction and/or subcellular localization of
              specific HMGRs may be important in partitioning intermediates into production
              of specific isoprenoids.  In this project, the hypothesis that tomato HMG1 and
              HMG2 function in physiologically distinct pathways or metabolons leading to
              production of phytosterols or phytoalexins, respectively, will be tested.  HMGR
              isozyme levels will be altered by introducing hmg1 or hmg2 sequences regulated
              by either constitutive or defense-inducible promoters.  The HMG1 and HMG2
              transgene projects will be differentially tagged to facilitate
              immunolocalization studies and assessment of protein stability.  Many
              plantspecific isoprenoids have significant value for agricultural, industrial,
              and pharmaceutical applications (e.g., natural pesticides, rubber, and taxol). 
              The proposed experiments will provide significant new information critical for
              understanding the complex biochemical and cellular mechanisms involved in
              isoprenoid biosynthesis.
