Title       : Competence and DNA Processing in Transforming Haemophilus Influenzae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9514112

Award Number: 9514112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard J. Barcak 660 W. Redwood St, Baltimore, MD  21201  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Barcak  95-14112  In the Gram-negative bacterium Haemophilus influenzae, DNA
              transformation is genetically-encoded process that is temporally and
              physiologically regulated.  DNA binding to the transformation-competent cell
              surface is mediated by a DNA sequence-specific receptor that internalizes and
              processes the duplex DNA through the multilayer cell envelope.  It is the
              objective of this research project to learn more about this DNA receptor-DNA
              translocation complex by characterizing a newly discovered putative operon
              containing 3 novel genes, of which dprA is competence-inducible and
              specifically required for chromosomal DNA processing in the competent cell.  We
              shall determine the biochemical role of Haemophilus influenzae DprA protein in
              the translocation and processing of transforming donor DNA in cells.  In order
              to do this we will use cellular fractionation, immunocytochemistry and genetic
              fusion technology to identify the cellular location of the DprA protein in
              non-competent and competent cells.  We will follow the fate of specifically
              labeled substrate DNA to determine the biochemical role of DprA in DNA 
              translocation and DNA processing during transformation.  A second major
              objective of this research is to identify other competence-inducible genes with
              emphasis on membrane-bound and periplasmic components of the transformation
              machinery through the use of gene fusion technology and a novel screening
              procedure.  Importantly, these studies will be strongly facilitated by the
              availability of the complete DNA sequence of the chromosome of the H.
              Influenzae strain to be used in these studies.  Significant advances in our
              knowledge of how cells communicate and how cells temporally or physiologically
              activate sets of genes comes from studies of receptor-ligand interactions and
              signal transduction pathways (e.g., IR-1 mediated insulin response in
              eukaryotic cells, chemotaxis in bacterial cells).  In this project we will
              study a novel process involving a DNA receptor-DNA translocation compl ex using
              a newly discovered competence-inducible operon, dpr, as our toe-hold.  This
              research project will give new information since it emphasizes an aspect of DNA
              transformation that may be intrinsically different between the two major types
              of bacterial organisms due to cell architecture, namely components of the
              membranes and periplasmic space found almost exclusively in the Gram-negative
              bacteria such as H. influenzae.  Close examination of the cellular location of
              dproperon gene products and their biochemical role in DNA processing coupled
              with the identification of new competence-inducible components of the DNA
              receptor-translocation machinery will serve to augment and refine the current
              "transformasome" model proposed by earlier investigators.  This research
              focuses on a research topic that is gaining increasing interest every year,
              namely the transfer of genes between bacteria.  This transfer is  important to
              the  evolution of bacterial capabilities and the interaction of bacteria with
              their environments.  Dr. Barcak's research will provide insight into the
              genetics of an important species of bacteria.  ***
