Title       : A Comparison of Training Options for Machine-Tool Workers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9514223

Award Number: 9514223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garry E. Chick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In spite of the focus on information and service industries as the source of
              economic growth in the US, the machining and tooling industries are still
              vitally important to the economic well-being of the nation.  This industry is
              in somewhat of a crisis due to a shortage of trained workers.  This award to
              the University of Illinois will support the research of a cultural
              anthropologist to assess and compare five educational programs in machine-tool
              technology in western Pennsylvania.  Two of the programs are innovative
              flexible attempts to train students, and three are traditional public and
              apprenticeship programs.  The project will interview students, parents,
              teachers, counselors and machine-tool company managers on their definitions of
              relevant skills and the personal values which underlie their opinions.  Using
              traditional ethnographic methods, field experiments and experience sampling the
              project will assess the strengths and weaknesses of the most prevalent forms of
              training for machine-tooling employment.    This research is important because
              the current societal interest in apprenticeship and vocational training as an
              alternative to purely academic programs assumes that we know how to train
              people for skilled blue-collar jobs.  This sort of basic research on the nature
              of values people have which underlie their performance in diverse educational
              and vocational training experiences, will be valuable to planners in assessing
              how to improve the strength of this fundamental part of our economy.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
