Title       : Discrimination of Complex Mixtures Involved in Olfactory Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9514365

Award Number: 9514365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Linn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 Chemical compounds used by animals for communication signals are called  
              pheromones.  Much of the early work on pheromones was done using the  
              extremely sensitive antennae of moths, and their role in mate attraction.   
              Females of many insect species produce blends of chemicals that are released  
              into the air, and males that are downwind perceive these pheromones and fly  
              upwind along the odor plume to the female.  An important area of research  
              includes the parameters that control response specificity in the males. 
              Receptor   cells in the antennae are specific for particular compounds, and the
              antennal   nerve carries this information to the brain.  It remains unclear how
              information is   processed from the periphery to the central nervous system,
              leading to   recognition of the mixture of compounds.  This project uses an
              agriculturally   important insect, the European corn borer moth, that has
              hybrid races which   exhibit different levels of specificity for ratios of
              components that comprise their   pheromones.  A novel technique of
              transplanting the embryonic cells that form   antennae will be used to grow the
              antennae of one hybrid on the body of another   hybrid form.  The behavioral
              sensitivity will demonstrate whether the specificity   to a particular blend
              depends more on the antennal receptors or on the brain   processing of the
              integrated inputs.      Results from this work will provide important insight
              on the relative role of   central and peripheral processing of pheromones, and
              will lead to advances in   understanding other chemosensory systems as well as
              pheromone-mediated   behavior.  The impact also will extend beyond neuroscience
              to agriculture, in the   strategies for control of pest and beneficial insect
              species.
