Title       : The Effect of "Exciting" Shared Activities on Relationship Satisfaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9514417

Award Number: 9514417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Aron aron@psych1.psy.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine N. Aron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research examines the motivational and cognitive mechanisms
              underlying excitement and boredom in long-term relationships, focusing
              specifically on the apparent beneficial effect of joint participation in
              `exciting` activities.  Although several processes are probably involved
              (misattribution of arousal, positive affect from success, conformance with
              romantic ideals, cooperation, etc.), the proposed research focuses on
              motivational processes associated with novelty, efficacy, exploration,
              curiosity, and optimal level of arousal, as integrated and extended to
              relationship issues by a relatively new theoretical approach, the
              self-expansion model.  Hypotheses include the prediction that participating
              together in novel, arousing activities increases relationship satisfaction, and
              that this effect is moderated by length of relationship, individual
              differences, and saliency of the partner at the time of the activities and is
              mediated by increased perceived self-efficacy; that there is a positive effect
              of participants' believing that such activities enhance competence; that there
              is an influence of self-expansion processes over and above various other
              potential mechanisms; and that some of these other potential mechanisms also
              have an effect, over and above self-expansion processes.  Six laboratory
              experiments test these hypotheses by randomly assigning volunteer couples to
              participate in activities structured by the researchers and assessing change in
              relationship satisfaction using self-report, systematic observation, and other
              measurement procedures.  %%%  Marital satisfaction impacts all areas of
              life--overall life satisfaction, mental health, physical health, and job
              performance--as well as the stability of families and the attendant effects on
              children.  Unfortunately, there is a well-documented decline in satisfaction
              after the early relationship years, but scientific research on marriage
              provides little precise understanding of that decline, or of the general role
              of boredom in day-to-day relationship life.  One way of understanding
              relationships proposes that the high satisfaction in early years is due to each
              member of a relationship feeling expanded and enhanced by the other, and holds
              that these feelings fade because partners get used to each other.  But if the
              couple at this point can engage, together, in activities that are enhancing to
              both, the satisfaction from such activities will be linked with the
              relationship--and preliminary studies support this prediction.  The proposed
              experiments study these ideas while carefully sorting out the other ways of
              understanding boredom in relationships and the effect on it of participating
              together in various kinds of activities.  These experiments will first assess
              relationship satisfaction of volunteer married couples using established
              measures.  Couples will then participate together in an activity and have their
              satisfaction assessed again.  The activity will differ, varying in ways that
              real-life activities might, such as the activity being very novel versus
              commonplace or involving a lot or a little cooperation.  Predictions are tested
              by comparing change in couples' marital satisfaction from before to after the
              different activities.  This research is designed to lead to direct practical
              applications in marital counseling and family education.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
