Title       : Development of Children's Awareness of Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9514821

Award Number: 9514821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161972             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie Esbensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9514821  TAYLOR    Recent research has shown that young children absorb the 
              information they are taught without realizing that they are  learning something
              new.  For  example, once 4- and 5-year-olds  learn a novel fact such as the
              function of litmus paper, they  claim to have known the new information for a
              long time.  They  also have difficulty identifying which information they have 
              known longer, a fact the experimenter taught them a minute  earlier (e.g., the
              name of the color chartreuse) or a fact they  have known for a long time (e.g.,
              the name of the color green).   Across a variety of tasks, young children fail
              to attend to  transitions in their own knowledge and claim they  have always 
              known what they have just learned.  The evidence indicates that  these results
              are due to a genuine conceptual difficulty, rather  than a desire to appear
              knowledgeable to the experimenter or some  other superficial aspect of the
              task.  This research will provide  an in depth investigation of cognitive
              explanations for this  phenomenon.  Children's failure to report learning
              something new  seems related to the way they understand the mind and their 
              concept of what it means to have knowledge.  The experiments will  test the
              hypothesis that children's developing knowledge about  the mind affects the way
              they encode learning events and retrieve  new information in memory.  In 
              addition, this work will explore  the factors affecting children's ability to 
              notice the  acquisition of new information.  The findings of this research 
              will provide new information about the development of children's  concept of
              knowledge, the extent that children's understanding of  mental life influences
              the way they encode everyday events  involving learning, and the conditions
              that help preschool  children become more aware of changes in their own
              knowledge.   This work will potentially have educational implications because 
              development in children's understanding of knowledge influences  the
              effectiveness of different metho ds of instruction and  children's motivation
              to engage in learning activities.    ***
