Title       : Neural Systems Analysis of Experience-Dependent Navigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9514880

Award Number: 9514880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200789             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheri J. Mizumori   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9514880  Mizumori    To study the process by which sensory-based, organism- 
              centered  spatial information is transformed into an allocentric  coordinate
              system, we will  examine the relative sensory and mnemonic contributions 
              within individual  tectolimbic structures to accurate navigation.  This first 
              step is essential in order  to define target structures within the neural
              system of  interest.  The original specific  aims also proposed to test the
              functional connectivity  between the target brain  structures so that we could
              begin to evaluate the dynamical  interactions between structures.  However, the
              latter  specific aim has been eliminated.  To facilitate  comparisons between
              structures, these experiments will focus  on one well  studied form of
              navigational learning, visual spatial  learning by rats on a  radial maze. 
              Comparison of the response properties of  information  representation in a
              variety of brain structures during a  single behavior  will allow future
              studies to begin to postulate the sort of  dynamical  interactions that must
              exist between brain areas if adaptive  consequences  of spatial processing are
              to be realized.    In order to understand how organisms utilize the tectolimbic
               circuit  in a behaviorally meaningful way, it is essential that we  determine
              how this  system affects the ongoing behavior of the animal.  We  hypothesize
              that  striatal structures such as the nucleus accumbens and  caudate nucleus
              serve  to integrate hippocampal spatial information with nonspatial 
              reward-related  information to direct the initiation of voluntary behavior  via
              efferents to  the ventral pallidum, a critical structure for the direct 
              control of  voluntary behaviors. Together, the results of this neural  system
              analysis  will not only provide new and important insight into how  multiple
              brain areas  might act in concert during navigation, but our findings  should
              also afford  new opportunities to learn about neuroplastic mechanisms  that
              might be  available during normal spatia l learning.    Single unit responses
              of the same 12 brain structures listed  in the  original proposal will be
              recorded as rats perform a  nonspatial and spatial  learning task on the radial
              maze.  The structures selected  comprise the  tectolimbic and limbic striatal
              systems.  Preliminary data  show that it is  possible to classify these various
              cell types as spatial or  nonspatial, and  that we can determine the relative
              mnemonic and sensory  contribution of  these cells to navigation.  A memory
              function will be  suggested if 1) there  is protracted shaping of the correlate
              during acquisition of  a spatial  task, 2) if there is evidence for contextual
              dependency of  the  representation, and/or 3) if there is short term
              persistence  of the  representation in the absence of environmental (visual) 
              cues.  Exps. 1-3  will test these possibilities.  Exp. 4 and 5 will evaluate 
              the  sensory-dependence of the representation by observing cell  responses 
              immediately after the removal of visual cues, and after  scrambling of the 
              cues.  Vestibular sensory contributions will be assessed by  rotating the 
              center portion of the radial maze, then observing unit and  behavioral 
              responses (Exp. 6).  Intramaze olfactory sensory influences  on the spatial 
              representations will be tested by observing unit responses  to rotation of  the
              entire maze (Exp. 7).  Exp. 8 will investigate the role  of voluntary  movement
              to spatial representations.  Finally, since  accumbens cells are  sensitive to
              differences in reward magnitude, Exps. 1-8 will  take place  using rewards of
              different magnitude.
