Title       : Reorganization and Computerization of the Robert S. Peabody Museum of
               Archaeological Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1993    
File        : a9307572

Award Number: 9307572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Bradley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Phillips Acad, Peabody Mus
	      
	      Andover, MA  01810    /   -

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307572  Bradley    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. James Bradley
              will  begin the task of reorganizing the archaeological collections of  the
              R.S. Peabody Museum which is a part of Phillips Academy.  Although the museum
              holds important scientific collections, these  are difficult to use because of
              cataloging and storage problems.  In this first phase of a long term project
              Dr. Bradley and his  colleagues will focus on materials recovered from
              archaeological  excavations in New England. They will check the physical 
              locations of individual collections and compare them against  handwritten
              catalog entries. After verification, information will  be entered into a
              computerized data base. Objects themselves  will, where necessary, be repacked
              both to enhance preservation  and permit easy access.    The R.S. Peabody
              Museum was established in 1901 and in addition  to serving as a repository, has
              played an extremely active role  in field research. Much of this was local and
              therefore the New  England collections are particularly strong and extensive.
              They  document thousands of years of prehistory in this region and  permit
              archaeologists not only to reconstruct culture history but  to look at issues
              such as environmental change and human-  environment interactions.   
              Archaeological collections in museums constitute an important  scientific data
              base and should play a central role in research.  However when they are
              improperly stored and catalogued they are  extremely difficult to use. Such is
              the case at the Phillips  Peabody Museum  and Dr. Bradley's project is
              important because it  will help to remedy this situation.
