Title       : Acquisition of a Paleomagnetics Laboratory at Institute of Human Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1993       
File        : a9307587

Award Number: 9307587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Renne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan L. Deino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl C. Swisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Human Origins
	      2453 Ridge Road
	      Berkeley, CA  947091211    415/845-0333

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Paul Renee and his                
              collaborators will establish a paleomagnetic dating laboratory at              
              the Institute of Human Origins in Berkeley California. They will               
              obtain both cryogenic and spinner magnetometers and house them in              
              a magnetically shielded space. The cryogenic magnetometer will                 
              have automated alternating field demagnetization and measurement               
              capability. The laboratory also will feature a conventional                    
              tumbling AF demagnetizer and a thermal demagnetization oven,                   
              magnetic susceptibility bridge and extensive computational and                 
              graphics capabilities. The facility will conduct a number of                   
              research projects, many of which relate to paleoanthropological                
              investigations. These include refinement of the paleomagnetic                  
              time scale and the dating of samples from sites which have                     
              yielded archaeological and fossil hominid remains.                             
                                                                                             
              Scientists have made use of the fact that the earth's magnetic                 
              field periodically reverses. Research over many years has                      
              produced a sequence of these reversals and determined the                      
              approximate age of each. Because iron particles in sediments                   
              align with the earth's magnetic field at time of deposition, they              
              in essence provide a compass and scientists can sample geological              
              sections and determine the position of the earth's magnetic pole               
              at particular moments in time. Through reference to a dated                    
              master sequence, approximate age can then be determined. This                  
              procedure has proven invaluable to geologists,                                 
              paleoanthropologists and other researchers who wish to date                    
              specific events in the past. Currently sufficient laboratory                   
              capacity does not exist in the United States to meet demand and                
              the establishment of a facility at the Institute for Human                     
              Origins will help to remedy the situation.                                     
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons. Research conducted              
              at the laboratory will help to refine paleomagnetic dating by                  
              providing more accurate dates for individual reversals. Samples                
              dated by the laboratory will help to answer a number of pressing               
              scientific questions.
