Title       : Feasibility Study of the Chunchucmil Regional Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9307435

Award Number: 9307435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19932              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Dahlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Bruce Dahlin and                
              Anthony Andrews will conduct exploratory archaeological research at            
              the site of Chunchucmil which is located in the Yucatan region of              
              Mexico. Although preliminary work has been done at this site which             
              consists of a cluster of Mayan ruins, relatively little is known               
              about it or the surrounding hinterland. It is even unclear exactly             
              when it was inhabited and whether occupation was continuous or                 
              episodic. Preliminary work by Dahlin based on aerial photographs               
              suggests it supported a large population. In this, the first stage             
              of a longer planned study, Drs. Dahlin and Andrews will conduct a              
              feasibility study. They will carry out a preliminary examination of            
              the site to determine the best way to map it. They will also                   
              undertake a preliminary reconnaissance of the surrounding region to            
              determine the types and densities of smaller sites and decide how              
              best to design a regional survey. Some areas, such as the                      
              associated lowland coastal swamps are difficult to access and                  
              consequently very poorly known. On the basis of the results of this            
              one season of field research, a larger long term project will be               
              designed.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The Mayans built cities with massive public architecture in regions            
              which today support very low human populations. Based on the                   
              archaeological evidence, prehistoric densities were likely much                
              higher than their modern counterparts and archaeologists wish to               
              understand the subsistence strategies these ancient Mayans                     
              employed. Preliminary analysis indicates that the Chunchucmil                  
              region lacked the carrying capacity to support the prehistoric                 
              population if one relied on local agricultural production alone.               
              Dahlin wishes to reconstruct prehistoric population densities                  
              determine the production potential of this environment and finally             
              try to understand the subsistence strategies employed.                         
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons. It will increase our            
              understanding of prehistoric Mayan civilization. It will also                  
              hopefully yield information useful for the present day utilization             
              of environments of this type.
