Title       : Causes of Diet Change in an Herbivorous Insect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1994       
File        : a9307804

Award Number: 9307804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Singer sing@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1183,
Abstract    :
              9307804  Singer   This project investigates the processes that cause herbivorous
              insects to feed on particular plants or to change those associations. One of
              the processes that influences insect diet is human manipulation of the
              landscape. This project investigates changes in diet of the butterfly
              Euphydryas editha, that have been brought about by two types of human activity:
              cattle ranching and clear-cutting of coniferous forest. In each case, human
              intervention has caused insects to change their preferences for egg-laying
              sites and incorporate new plant species into their diets. These populations are
              undergoing rapid diet shifts mediated by genetic changes of host preference. 
              Diet expansion may be aided by correlations between maternal oviposition
              preference and offspring performance. This project will determine whether such
              correlations are present at the first arrival of the novel host. The project
              also continues long-term assessment of the extensive geographical variation in
              host specificity of E. editha. Comparisons between populations that differ in
              diet breadth will show whether this variation is mechanistically caused by
              variation among plants, among insects, or both.  %%%  Understanding patterns of
              plant use by herbivorous insects has been a central concern of plant-animal
              interactions. The PI has documented extensive temporal and spatial variation in
              this association of a widespread butterfly and has shown that changes in diet
              may be due to human influences. These diet shifts have implications for the
              conservation of threatened insects that live on managed land. Understanding the
              processes that cause herbiv ores to expand their diets will also help to
              elucidate the mechanisms by which non-pest insects become converted to pest
              status when their diets change to incorporate crop plants.         s  t        
                 One major focus of this proposal seems to be the PI's laboratory
              hybridization attempts and field work to assess ecological and sexual
              isolation.  There is a problem, especially with sexual isolation, in that the
              PI has done preliminary testing with a species pair currently considered to be
              in different major clades and the                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            0
                .   3                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             !         !     
                 !         !              F                             #             #      
                                        <    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial    Dutch
              (scalable)                                 "             h      < %   e   e    
                             -        Laurel R. Fox Gayle Edmonds                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
