Title       : U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund Research on Photon Driven Processes at Adsorbate-Metal
               Interfaces and Surface Structure Characterization with Adsorbates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1993        
File        : a9307807

Award Number: 9307807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : May 5,  1996         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Frigyes Solymosi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Szeged
	      
	      Szeged, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Hungary Joint Fund research project on                                 
              "Photon Driven Processes at Adsorbate Metal                                    
              Interfaces" will be conducted by Dr. Frigyes                                   
              Solymosi at the University of Szeged and Dr. John                              
              M. White, University of Texas at Austin.  The                                  
              researchers will investigate photo-induced                                     
              reactions including oxidation of alkyl radicals                                
              and activation of unsaturated hydrocarbons.                                    
              Their experiments will be carried out under                                    
              ultra-high vacuum conditions at low temperature,                               
              where the thermal effects can be minimized.                                    
              Adsorbed species will be characterized, before                                 
              and after irradiation, by a number of surface                                  
              sensitive techniques.  The researchers will also                               
              characterize supported noble metals which play                                 
              important roles in many catalytic processes.                                   
                                                                                             
              This research in chemistry fulfills the US-                                    
              Hungary Joint Fund's objective of advancing                                    
              science by enabling leading experts in the United                              
              States and Hungary to combine complementary                                    
              talents and pool research resources in areas of                                
              strong mutual interest and competence.
