Title       : RUI: Male Dimorphism in Visual Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9307056

Award Number: 9307056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86904              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Clark clarkd@alma.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alma College
	      614 West Superior
	      Alma, MI  488011511    517/463-7111

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              9307056  Clark    Salticid spiders are important animals for studying visual
              communication because males of  many species are brightly colored and have
              decorations that are used to identify sex and  species.  While most animal
              species have only one type of male, the salticid spider Maevia  inclemens has
              two male morphs that are so different they look as if they should belong to 
              different species.  The morphs also have distinctly different behaviors during
              courtship, but  both appear to be equally successful, which raises questions
              about how females deal with two  males that look and behave very differently.  
               Dr. Clark will investigate mate selection by females, to determine if one male
              morph has a  reproductive advantage over the other male morph.  One morph has a
              conspicuous display,  which may attract female attention from greater
              distances.  However, this advantage may be  offset by the risk of predation
              from birds, wasps, or other spiders.  Dr. Clark will examine  the trade-offs of
              a conspicuous display versus a cryptic display performed at different 
              distances.  Mate-selection experiments will be conducted utilizing new video
              and computer-  animation techniques, allowing the experimenter to control male
              movement, distance from the  female, and natural background coloration.   
              Since very little is known about how such unusual male morphologies and
              behaviors evolve,  these studies will contribute to an understanding of the
              selection mechanisms maintaining a  unique male dimorphism in nature.  In
              addition, the continued development of the video and  computer-animation
              techniques will allow more detailed studies to be conducted on visual 
              processing systems.  These techniques allow animal morphology and behavior to
              be  manipulated in ways that are not possible with live animals, and will
              contribute to more  sophisticated animal behavior research projects in the
              future.
