Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Modeling and Computational Simulation of
               Platelet Aggregation in Large and Small Vessels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9307643

Award Number: 9307643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424390             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron L. Fogelson fogelson@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9216,9218,9263,BIOT,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9307643  Fogelson       The investigator extends earlier analytical and 
              computational work on a microscopic-scale model of aggregation of  blood
              platelets in small diameter blood vessels, and on a  continuum model of
              aggregation in large diameter vessels.  Both  models involve interactions
              between the blood's fluid dynamics  and the mechanics and chemistry of
              developing aggregates.  For  the microscopic-scale model, the project involves:
              1) completing  the development of the numerical tools needed to extend 
              simulations to three dimensions; 2) exploring and implementing  strategies for
              performing computationally intensive  three-dimensional calculations on
              high-performance parallel  computers; 3) constructing a computational analogue
              of the  experimental flow chamber of his collaborator J. Hubbell  (Chemical
              Engineering, University of Texas) and comparing  simulations with it to
              Hubbell's data on the dynamics of  aggregate growth; 4) modifying aspects of
              the model that concern  a platelet's response to pro-aggregating agents and the
               efficiency of platelet-platelet cohesion; and 5) exploring the  range of
              behavior of the model and its sensitivity to parameter  variations.  For the
              continuum model, the project requires: 1)  developing numerical methods to
              study forms of the model that  allow strain-dependent aggregate breakup; 2)
              developing  techniques for incorporating into this model platelet  interactions
              with the blood vessel's wall or the reactive surface  of a prosthetic cardiac
              valve; and 3) studying the behavior of  the model when aggregation is initiated
              by exogenous stimuli in  bulk flow, or by contact with a reactive wall of  a
              coronary-artery-sized vessel.  In the latter context, it is  of particular
              interest to study how the interaction between flow  and vessel geometry affects
              aggregate formation.       Platelet aggregates form on blood vessel walls in
              response  to vascular injury; they are also major constituents of  the
              life-threatening blood clots associated with vascular diseas e  and with the
              use of cardiovascular prostheses.  The modeling and  simulations carried out in
              this project complement  traditional laboratory experimentation.  They provide
              detailed  information, of a type that is generally not attainable in the 
              laboratory, about the dynamic interactions among the components  of the
              aggregation response.  This additional information will  increase our insight
              into the physical and chemical controls on  the aggregation process.  These
              studies also lay the foundations  for further development of aggregation models
              and for their  application to clinically interesting questions, including how 
              flow and vessel geometry interact to influence aggregation within  natural
              vessels, such as the coronary arteries, or prosthetic  devices, such as
              vascular grafts or artificial hearts.  The  numerical tools developed in this
              project should also be valuable  in solving a broad range of biofluid dynamics
              and engineering  problems.  ***
