Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1994     
File        : a9307781

Award Number: 9307781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Benedetto jjb@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
              9307781 Benedetto          This project will develop several themes within the
              general framework of harmonic analysis.  One is a continuation of work on
              weighted inequalities.  These are inequalities relating norms of functions with
              the norms of their transforms; i.e. through a partial differential operator or
              the Fourier transform.  The norms are computed against weighted measures and
              their comparisons provide fundamental information about the range of the
              transformation, that is, about the set of solutions.  Particular emphasis will
              be placed on the derivation of two- weight estimates of convolution operators. 
              Work will also be done on sampling problems.  There is an extensive theory
              which treats regular sampling but only scattered results are currently
              available for irregular sampling - which is often the only feasible means for
              gathering information.  This research continues efforts to expand on recent
              irregular sampling results by using either coefficients from inverse operators
              or by varying the representing functions.  A specific goal is that of
              constructing a genuine multidimensional version of existing theory.  Additional
              work on wavelet theory will also be pursued.  The object is the development of
              Riesz products from sets of quadrature mirror filters for the construction of
              wavelet packets and the construction of an L-1 theory of multiresolution
              analysis.           Harmonic analysis is a branch of mathematics which seeks to
              analyze complex phenomena through processes of decomposition and synthesis. 
              The classical models for such analysis can be found in Fourier series and
              Fourier integral representations.  Recent innovations have led to wavelet
              theory whic h has proved successful in yielding much a refined capability in
              analyzing local time and frequency characteristics.  New developments have had
              a major impact on studies related to signal analysis, data compression and
              sampling theory. ***                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
