Title       : U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund Mathematics Research on Chaotic Transients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9307806

Award Number: 9307806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 1,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Szepfalusy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eotvos Lorand University
	      
	      Budapest, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Hungary Joint Fund research project on                                 
              chaotic transients will be conducted by Dr. Peter                              
              Szepfalusy, Institute of Solid State Physics,                                  
              Eotvos University, Budapest and Dr. Celso                                      
              Grebogi, University of Maryland.                                               
                                                                                             
              Chaotic, unpredictable motion can be permanent or                              
              transient.  In the latter case chaos can be                                    
              observed on finite time scales only.  The main                                 
              objective of this research project is to improve                               
              understanding of transient chaos in both                                       
              dissipative and Hamiltonian systems.  The                                      
              importance of investigating such chaotic                                       
              transients lies in the fact that by analyzing the                              
              dynamics on finite time-scales, essential                                      
              features like sensitive dependence on initial                                  
              conditions and limited predictability of the                                   
              process can be observed.  The characterization of                              
              these transients is considered fundamental for                                 
              the understanding of the dynamics.  Results may                                
              lead to advances in applications in areas                                      
              involving laser systems and nuclear or chemical                                
              reactions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This theoretical research in mathematics fulfills                              
              the US-Hungary Joint Fund program objective of                                 
              advancing science by enabling leading experts in                               
              the United States and Hungary to combine                                       
              complementary talents and pool research resources                              
              in areas of strong mutual interest and                                         
              competence.  Funds for the project are provided                                
              through the US-Hungary Joint Fund, Budapest, in                                
              accordance with established guidelines.
