Title       : The Middle Paleolithic of the Crimea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9307743

Award Number: 9307743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89354              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. Marks amarks@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support and in close collaboration            
              with Ukrainian colleagues, Dr. Anthony Marks will conduct                      
              archaeological work in Crimea. Previous excavations have                       
              demonstrated the presence of rich Middle Paleolithic industries                
              which contain human remains in addition to faunal materials.                   
              However these sites were excavated many years ago and employed                 
              techniques which are inadequate by present day standards. Dr. Marks            
              and his collaborators will re-excavate and study seven of these. In            
              particular they will attempt to obtain absolute dates for                      
              individual stratigraphic levels and will employ a range of                     
              techniques. These include thermolumenescent dating of both burned              
              flint and sediment, uranium series dating and finally radiocarbon              
              dating for younger deposits. In addition to obtaining samples for              
              age determination, excavation will serve to clarify stratigraphic              
              problems and to obtain large samples of faunal and lithic remains              
              which will be analyzed to reconstruct Middle Paleolithic lifeways.             
                                                                                             
              Both archaeological and fossil data indicate that anatomically                 
              modern humans first appeared in Africa over 90,000 years ago. They             
              later occur in the Near East but it is not until 40,000 or so years            
              ago that they are found in the rest of the Old World.                          
              Archaeologists wish to trace this spread because until dates are               
              available for different parts of the world and patterns of movement            
              known, it is extremely difficult to understand the processes which             
              lead to the origins and spread of modern humans. The Crimea is                 
              known to contain important fossil bearing sites from the relevant              
              period but the data are scanty and poorly collected. Since Crimea              
              lies near one of the major routes out of the Near East it is an                
              area worthy of investigation.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              the archaeological data base for an important and little known                 
              region of the world. It will add to our understanding of the origin            
              and spread of modern humans and assist in the training of Ukrainian            
              archaeologists.
