Title       : Worker Regulation, "Heroism," and the Construction of Masculine Identities in
               the Fire Department of New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9307828

Award Number: 9307828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam L. Kaprow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Lovely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY John Jay College
	      444 West 56th Street
	      New York, NY  100193602    212/489-5183

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Kaprow  9307828    Members of hazardous occupations, such as test pilots,
              astronauts and firefighters, have commonly been reported as having high morale
              and autonomy, even in a period of extensive worker alienation.  Such morale
              appears to have been associated with an absence of bureaucratizing influences
              over the social organization of work.  This study, whose long-range goal is to
              contribute to our general understanding of the widespread problem of worker
              alienation, will examine the effects of recent introduction of external
              regulation on autonomy, morale and occupational culture in one such hazardous
              occupation: firefighters in the Fire Department of New York (the FDNY).   
              Morale in the FDNY appears to have been linked to an occupation culture of
              "heroism", one that celebrates voluntary sacrifice to others in the presence of
              material hazards.  This culture appears to have been further linked to the
              construction of masculine identities.  To explore how such a culture of
              "heroism" among firefighters may be changing along with worker autonomy and
              morale in the wake on increasing external regulation, the project will examine
              interrelations among these variables through two different time periods: one
              before significant regulation, and the other following, increasing regulation
              by the state and other institutions.    The investigators are particularly
              interested in the effects of recent increases in external control, such as
              state regulations about appropriate number of personnel to fight fires,
              appropriate firehouse behavior, modifications of entrance exams to comply with
              gender quotas, and other similar policies.  Th e study will examine the effect
              of such innovations on worker autonomy, morale, the culture of "heroism", and
              on the construction of masculine identities.  Thus, in addition to contributing
              to general knowledge about worker autonomy and morale, the findings of this
              research should contribute to knowledge about men's studies and to new
              viewpoints about gender stereotypes and relations, particularly in regard to
              women in environments where not just work, but also the culture, has been
              exclusively male.  ***     $         $                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        -   /                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     !           !                F                             n            
              n                                 (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial      
              l   l         l           "             h                       <   a         Y
                 kaprow abstract abstract kaprow abstract award  Raymond Hames Raymond Hames 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
