Title       : Systematics, Phylogeny, and Pollination System Evolution in Callitrichaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1993      
File        : a9307038

Award Number: 9307038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196314             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Thomas Philbrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rancho Santa Ana Bot Gdn
	      1500 North College Avenue
	      Claremont, CA  917113157    714/626-3922

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307038  Philbrick       Underwater pollination (hydrophily) is one of the most 
              enigmatic pollination systems in flowering plants.  Hydrophily  requires the
              abandonment or modification of a suite of characters  intimately tied to the
              dry, aerial flowering condition, and  represents a shift in floral biology with
              profound consequences for  flower and pollen morphology.  The mechanical and
              biochemical  modifications entailed in achieving wettability (underwater
              release  and capture of pollen) raise significant adaptive obstacles not 
              encountered during evolutionary shifts from one aerial pollination  system to
              another.  The goals of Dr. Philbrick's project are to  probe questions
              concerning the evolution of water pollination using  the genus Callitriche as
              an experimental system.  Callitriche is  the most appropriate group to conduct
              these studies because it is  the only genus of angiosperms that includes both
              aerial and  underwater pollination systems.  Phylogenetic analysis using 
              morphological and new DNA characters will provide an understanding  of the
              direction of change in floral and pollen features across the  species in the
              genus, and thereby help determine models of change  in adaptation to underwater
              pollination.  %%%       Underwater pollination is one of the more bizarre
              adaptations  found in certain groups of flowering plants.  Dr. Philbrick is 
              studying this phenomenon in an explicit phylogenetic framework for  the ca. 50
              species of the genus Callitriche that includes both  underwater and aerial
              pollination systems.  The direction of change  in floral and pollen features
              can be determined, and in turn this  knowledge will allow analysis of cellular
              and biochemical  mechanisms responsible for new floral structure.
