Title       : Development of Methods to Analyze Intraorganelle Calcium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1995  
File        : a9307746

Award Number: 9307746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Gill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9307746  Gill    The objectives of this research are to develop imaging methods
              to  characterize the calcium pools within cultured cells and ascertain  the
              biological significance of calcium within calcium-signaling  organelles.  The
              project aims to address an area of weakness in our  understanding of cellular
              signalling events, that is, the nature,  distribution, and function of the
              pools of calcium inside cells  which contribute to generation of intracellular
              calcium signals.   High resolution imaging techniques will be applied to study
              the  location, control, and biological significance of calcium  regulatory
              organelles functioning within established smooth muscle  cell lines.  The
              project will develop and utilize novel single cell  and subcellular imaging
              technologies to spatially resolve those  organelles that function as calcium
              signaling pools in cells.  The  specific goals are to answer the following
              questions:  (1) What are  the levels of calcium within calcium pools?  The
              objectives are to  visualize calcium pools directly, measure intraluminal
              calcium  levels, and correlate distribution of calcium pools with known 
              calcium regulatory proteins and specific organelle markers. (2) How  is calcium
              inside calcium pools controlled?  The question will be  addressed by
              investigating the function and interrelationship of  the mechanisms that pump
              calcium into pools, release calcium from  pools in response to intracellular
              mediators, and transfer calcium  between distinct intracellular pools activated
              by GTP-binding  proteins.  By developing and applying high resolution z-axis 
              controlled fluorescence imaging to the analysis of calcium pools,  the studies
              provide a novel approach to understanding the  distribution of calcium
              signalling pools, and address the  hypothesis that calcium levels within
              organelles are of fundamental  biological importance to cellular function.  %%%
               An early, measurable event in many cellular responses to external  signals is
              an increase in internal calcium.  A variet y of cellular  functions are
              regulated by calcium, so it is critical that cells be  able to regulate the
              internal levels and subcellular distribution  of this ion.  An active area of
              research in recent years has been  development of techniques to measure the
              levels of free calcium in  the cytoplasm of cells.  The goals of this research
              will complement  the available techniques for measurement of cytoplasmic
              calcium by  developing and using novel techniques to study the location, 
              control, and biological function of calcium sequestered within  regulatory
              organelles (calcium pools).  High-resolution, single  cell and subcellular
              imaging will be used to study calcium-  containing organelles in cultured
              smooth muscle cell lines.   Experiments will be designed to answer the
              questions:  What are the  levels of calcium within particular calcium pools,
              and how is  calcium inside these pools controlled?  The results of this 
              research will provide new techniques and information to fill an  important gap
              in our understanding of cellular signalling events.  ***
