Title       : Assembly of Cytoskeletal Proteins into the Cleavage Furrow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9307899

Award Number: 9307899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. Sanger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                The longterm goal of this project is to determine the mechanisms             
              that cells use for assembling and regulating the interactions of               
              the actin and myosin filaments that form the cleavage furrow.  A               
              number of microscopic imaging methods will be used with living                 
              cells that have been microinjected with various probes, to analyze             
              the distribution of the major component molecules of the cleavage              
              ring.  The first aim will be to determine how actin filaments are              
              assembled into the region of the cortical membrane where the future            
              contractile ring will form.  The source of the actin that composes             
              the contractile ring is uncertain.  Considering the importance of              
              this division process for the cells, there may be two independent              
              methods for directing actin to the cleavage furrow.  Experiments               
              are planned to test this hypothesis by determining if and when the             
              filaments move along the cortical surface to the cleavage furrow               
              and if there is elongation of the pre-existing actin filaments in              
              the furrow region, and to determine if actin monomers add to one or            
              both ends of the existing actin filaments in the furrow regions.               
              Experiments are also planned that will utilize aequorin to measure             
              fluctuations in calcium levels during the assembly and contraction             
              of the cleavage ring in these dividing tissue culture cells.  The              
              calcium levels inside cells are thought to be regulated by the                 
              endoplasmic reticulum.  Confocal microscopy of living cells is                 
              planned to determine if there is any co-distribution of the                    
              endoplasmic reticulum and actin filaments in the assembling and                
              contracting cleavage ring.  All of the proposed experiments are                
              designed to determine the mechanisms responsible for a basic                   
              process present in all animal  cells: cytokinesis.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The ability to reproduce is the most fundamental, defining property            
              of life.  Cell division is an intrinsic part of this phenomenon for            
              all cellular organisms.  For single-celled organisms, reproduction             
              is, simply, cell division.  For multicellular organisms, cell                  
              division is key to reproduction, by generating germ-line cells                 
              (gametes, spores) and for regenerating whole organisms from spores             
              or zygotes (development).  The division of one cell into two is a              
              remarkably controlled process; the precise geometry of cleavage is             
              critical to the survival of the daughter cells and/or the organism.            
              The cleavage mechanism in animal cells generally involves an                   
              actomyosin based contractile apparatus, the contractile ring, which            
              girdles the cell at the inside of the cleavage furrow.  This                   
              project will use experimental manipulations and state-of-the-art               
              microscopic observations directly on living cells to better                    
              understand the cleavage process.
