Title       : Uncertainty, Social Insurance, and the Micro Foundations of Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9307876

Award Number: 9307876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Diamond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project contributes to our understanding of the                            
              characteristics of important social insurance structures.  It                  
              continues research on the pricing of alternative health insurance              
              options, including analysis of whether premiums should be                      
              different for individuals changing policies and individuals                    
              continuing with the same policy.  It examines the way retirement               
              benefits should vary with the age of retirement in a model that                
              recognizes individual differences, stochastic employment                       
              possibilities, and limited observation of work opportunities.  It              
              studies the way taxes and expenditures should vary with the                    
              outcome of aggregate risks.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The project also continues research on the micro foundations of                
              macroeconomies.  It examines the importance of labor market                    
              tightness and of impediments to labor mobility for the efficiency              
              of the allocation of labor.  Of special interest will be                       
              estimates of the loss in efficiency due to the way the existing                
              system of health insurance locks workers into existing employers.              
              Another is the determination of the endogenous distribution of                 
              ownership of purchasing power and its effect on aggregate                      
              efficiency.  The CRAY supercomputer will be used to simulate this              
              extremely complex model.  A third is the effect of different                   
              forms of money illusion on equilibrium in the housing market.                  
              This research will be undertaken jointly with a psychologist and               
              will explore alternative ways of modeling individual decisions on              
              selling houses that integrate psychological and economic                       
              concerns.
