Title       : Mathematical Sciences: A Study of Weak Solutions for the Euler Equations and
               Related Equations from Plasma Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9307728

Award Number: 9307728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Majda majda@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307726  Majda       There are many unresolved fundamental problems about weak 
              solutions of the incompressible Euler equations, such as vortex  sheets, and
              regularizations of these weak solutions by smoothing  the initial data or
              adding viscosity.  Furthermore, since these  problems are extremely challenging
              ones to try to solve with  numerical methods, it is natural to first consider
              related   simpler model problems.  Recent research shows that the solutions  of
              the two-component Vlasov Poisson equations (2CVPE) for a  collisionless plasma
              of electrons and positively charged ions,  with the initial condition being an
              appropriate measure, have  many properties that are direct analogues of
              solutions of the 2-D  vorticity equation for an incompressible fluid with
              vortex sheet  initial data.  The 2CVPE is simpler to treat analytically and 
              easier to solve numerically.  It should be an extremely useful  and an
              important model problem for suggesting answers to the open  problems about
              vortex sheets.  The investigator conducts a  numerical investigation of the
              2CVPE and its "viscous"  regularization, the two-component Fokker-Planc
              equation.  The  goal is to determine properties of solutions to these systems
              of  equations when the initial data is a measure.  Recently  discovered exact
              solutions of the 2CVPE will focus this work.   The investigator also conducts a
              numerical investigation of the  2-D incompressible Euler and Navier-Stokes
              equations with  appropriate vortex sheet initial data.  He uses the insight 
              gained from the study of related model problems from plasma  physics to
              motivate and guide this work.  This work is designed  to provide answers to
              many of the open problems about properties  of solutions of the Euler equations
              with vortex sheet initial  data.       Fluid dynamics is the study of
              continuous media like air and  water.  Scientists formulate problems in this
              field by applying   the fundamental laws of physics such as the conservation of
              mass,  momentum and energy.  For most probl ems this procedure leads to  sets
              of mathematical equations that are too complicated to solve.  Based on physical
              or mathematical intuition, the scientist then  tries to find a simplified
              formulation of the original problem  that is simple enough to solve, but
              sufficiently complicated to  describe the essential features of the original
              problem.  The  mixing process between layers of fluid that have different 
              densities, like air and water, or layers of fluid moving at  different
              velocities, is very complicated and occurs in a wide  variety of important
              applications.  The flow of air over an  airplane is also very complicated.  In
              order to predict the  trailing wake behind an airplane, or the mixing process
              in a  fluid, scientists often use a simplified model of the fluid  called a
              vortex sheet.  This is the simplest realistic  description of not only these
              problems, but many other large  Reynold's number flows.  Unfortunately, despite
              the wide-spread  use of vortex sheet models in many problems in fluid dynamics,
               many mathematical properties of vortex sheets remain poorly  understood.  The
              goal of this proposal is to provide answers to  many of the fundamental
              questions about the mathematical  properties of vortex sheets.  Successful
              completion of the  proposed work will lead to an increased understanding of the
               strengths and limitations when using vortex sheets to model  complicated fluid
              flows.
