Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Symplectic and Contact Geometry in the Interaction with
               Topology and Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1995   
File        : a9307870

Award Number: 9307870
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yakov Eliashberg eliash@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project envisions the continuing development of                      
              symplectic geometry and topology in its interaction with other                 
              fields of mathematics.  The main progress under prior support was              
              achieved in 3-dimensional contact geometry, construction of new                
              invariants of high-dimensional closed and open contact manifolds,              
              in the description of invariant properties of boundaries of                    
              symplectic manifolds, and in the application of symplectic                     
              methods to the theory of 2-knots in real 4-space.  In the present              
              continuation, several new areas of research are suggested.  In                 
              particular, there is the study of newly discovered connections                 
              between symplectic geometry, pseudoisotopy theory and algebraic                
              K-theory, applications of Lagrangian intersection theory to Morse              
              theory for plurisubharmonic functions on complex manifolds, and                
              the development and application of contact homology theory.                    
              Other projected directions of research are:  3-dimensional                     
              contact topology and further development of symplectic methods in              
              4-dimensional topology.                                                        
                   It seems that in modern mathematics interdisciplinary                     
              research plays a very special and important role.  Many recent                 
              discoveries were made in areas which do not fit into any                       
              traditional classification.  For instance, a breakthrough in                   
              4-dimensional topology by Donaldson came from gauge theory, a                  
              topic in quantum physics, and many other recent topological                    
              discoveries were motivated by physics.  Symplectic topology at                 
              present is a beautiful blend of different mathematical sciences:               
              topology, Hamiltonian dynamics, complex analysis, differential                 
              geometry, etc.  It attracts more and more ideas from different                 
              fields and repays them with unexpected new applications, which                 
              makes research in this direction especially promising.
