Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Nonparametric Analysis andModel Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9307403

Award Number: 9307403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kjell A. Doksum doksum@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to address the question of how intuitive and  concise linear
              model concepts and techniques can be extended to  nonparametric settings and it
              is also proposed to develop  nonparametric techniques for model diagnostics
              that can be used  for dimensionality reduction and to address the question of 
              adequacy of particular models.  More precisely, it is proposed to  focus on
              procedures that are counterparts to such commonly used  linear model ideas as
              regression coefficients, correlation  coefficients, ANOVA decompositions, and
              principal components.  In  addition, it is proposed to consider nonparametric
              tools for  model building, identification, and diagnostics including tests  for
              linearity, partial linearity, additivity, etc. All estimators  to be considered
              depend on smoothing parameters needed in  estimation of curves and surfaces.  A
              large part of the research  will address the problem of developing reliable
              data-based  methods for smoothing parameter selection.  With the advent of
              computer data bases of unprecedented size and  complexity and with dramatic
              increase in computer power, it has  become increasingly more desirable and
              possible to develop  general models, concepts, and procedures that can be used
              to  study relationships between variables and to construct models  less
              dependent on specific assumptions. It is proposed to extend  commonly used
              linear model ideas and techniques to this more  general setting  and to assess
              the adequacy of models with  simpler structure.
