Title       : Dissertation Research: Symbolism and Ritual at Teotihuacan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9307740

Award Number: 9307740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6460               (Estimated)
Investigator: Saburo Sugiyama  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. George Cowgill, Mr. Saburo Sugiyama will            
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Over the course of many            
              years of excavation by both Mexican and U.S. archaeologists at the             
              site of Teotihuacan in central Mexico, many sacrificial human                  
              burials have been uncovered. Recently Dr. Cowgill and his                      
              colleagues conducted excavations at the large Feathered Serpent                
              Pyramid and discovered a number more. Although these materials have            
              the potential to provide insight into Teotihuacan political, social            
              and ritual organization they have been relatively little studied.              
              Mr. Sugiyama's project will help to remedy this. Evidence indicates            
              that the burials were carefully placed in relation to the pyramid.             
              Many contain rich grave offerings of carved stone and obsidian                 
              tools. As a first step, Mr. Sugiyama will plot the spatial                     
              distribution of the graves and then determine associations with                
              burial objects. He will then search for patterns in the arrangement            
              of materials and place the graves in a chronological context. On               
              this basis he hopes to reconstruct the rituals involved. Since                 
              these sacrifices were state ceremonies and ritual was manipulated              
              directly or indirectly for political goals, understanding of these             
              ceremonies will also shed light on the organization and maintenance            
              of the Teotihuacan state.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Teotihuacan was one of the largest and most influential cities in              
              Mesoamerica in Pre-Columbian times. It flourished in central Mexico            
              between approximately the first century A.D. and the eighth,                   
              covering about 20 km2 with a population of at least 100,000 during             
              its peak. The ecological setting, the politics, the economy, the               
              trade system, the technology, religion and other aspects of                    
              ideology have been studied for an understanding of the society and             
              its history per se and for theories about the evolution of ancient             
              states in worldwide contexts. It is now known that the city was a              
              unique example of ancient urbanization in the New World. However,              
              still poorly understood are the specific form of the government and            
              the nature of the ideological programs in the development and                  
              functioning of this state. Mr. Sugiyama's research will investigate            
              these questions.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our                  
              understanding of how complex societies developed and it will assist            
              in the training of a promising young scientist.
