Title       : A Genetic Analysis of Quantitative Variation in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1995 
File        : a9307733

Award Number: 9307733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim Helentjaris   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney G. Winkler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9307733 Helentjaris          Most of the natural variation we see between
              individuals of any species is under the control of multiple genes.  Use of
              molecular markers has begun to identify major loci involved in this variation. 
              Height in maize is chosen for study as there are ample data describing major
              quantitative factors, excellent molecular tools for this organism, several
              candidate genes which might contribute to this variation, and physiological
              correlations between these candidate genes and the quantitative variation.  The
              general approach would be to use isogenic lines for regions containing obvious
              candidate genes to reduce the complexity of the variation for height and then
              to determine precisely what is the contribution of individual genes to the
              natural quantitative variation within maize genotypes.  Clones for these genes
              will be obtained.  Variation within the coding region, will be studied using
              molecular techniques to identify whether gene product function or overall
              expression of the gene are affected.  Efforts will then be directed towards
              determining what aspects of this natural genic variation actually contribute to
              the variation in height observed in these maize lines.  The effects of
              environmental influences upon quantitative variation will also be studied.  The
              overall goal of this program is to develop an experimental system which bring
              together elements of quantitative, Mendelian, and molecular genetics to enhance
              our understanding of the functional basis for natural quantitative variation,
              and to develop strategies for translating positional information on major genes
              into practical methods for their isolation.   %%%          As many of our
              economical ly most important traits in domesticated plants and animals (as well
              as in humans and non domesticated species) possess a complex inheritance, this
              approach will help to lay the ground work for more improved approaches in
              understanding the genetic basis of inheritance, and improved breeding
              strategies for domestic species using either traditional or molecular
              strategies.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
