Title       : Computer-Aided Instruction of Surface Analysis Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a9307159

Award Number: 9307159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299787             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald H. Fleming rfleming@cea.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Charles Evans & Associates
	      301 Chesapeake Drive
	      Redwood City, CA  94063    415/369-4567

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              0108000   Software Development                    
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5373,
Abstract    :
              9307159    Fleming          To be competitive in today's environment of
              technological change  and global competition, firms need to develop and follow 
              sagacious technology strategies.  In order to make important  decisions
              regarding which particular technology strategies would  be optimal to follow, a
              firm needs reliable information to answer  questions such as:  how quickly and
              efficiently can its R&D  department develop and build on new technological
              innovations in  its industry relative to its competitors, and how effective is 
              the firm at appropriating the benefits of its R&D efforts and  withholding
              those benefits from others?  Results of the Phase I  Small Business Innovation
              Research (SBIR) study establish the  technical basis for using patent citation
              data as a valuable tool  for helping firms evaluate their own technological
              capabilities  and those of their competitors.  The objectives of the Phase II 
              research focus on (1) demonstrating the feasibility of  constructing a patent
              citation database that meets technology  managers' analytical needs easily and
              cost-effectively; (2)  extending the citation model developed in Phase I to the
              point  where it can function as a reliable tool for (a) correcting  citation
              data for censoring and (b) predicting future citation  levels;  and (3) using
              these prototype tools to examine the  validity of hypothesized relationships
              between citation patterns  and the technology strategies of companies.  The
              project aims to  provide analytical tools for developing and assessing
              corporate  technology strategies, including patent citation databases and 
              user-friendly search and analytical software, consulting  services, and
              publications.    The project addresses the need to understand the 
              interrelationships among patent citations, the technology  strategies of
              companies, and their economic performance.  The  project will use this
              knowledge as the basis for its contribution  to the future of US economic
              competitiveness, that is, to make  available analytical  tools useful for
              formulating and analyzing  corporate technology policies that will be valuable
              to companies  and investors.    ***
