Title       : The Regulation of Prostaglandin Synthesis at the Molecular Level of
               Cyclooxygenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9307206

Award Number: 9307206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Jackson bjackson@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9135,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jackson  9307206  The isolation of prostaglandin(PG) was achieved by von Euler
              in  1932.  In these experiments the first of many biological effects of  the
              compound was discovered; the contraction of uterine smooth  muscle.  Since
              these early studies, PG has become recognized as a  specific, highly active,
              short-lived local hormone synthesized in  all mammalian cell systems.  The
              local hormone is involved in lipid  metabolism, insulin release, the regulation
              of cardiac function,  body temperature and nervous system control, and the
              tissue  inflammatory response.  The overall objective of this research  program
              is to determine the molecular mechanisms which operate in  the regulation of
              cyclooxygenase (COX).  The COX enzymes play  central roles in PG biosynthesis
              by catalyzing the conversion of  arachidonic acid and certain other 20 carbon
              polyunsaturated fatty  acids.  Additionally the role of factors IL-1 and
              TGF-Beta will be  examined for their special effect on COX enzyme levels and
              turnover  relative to PG synthesis.  IL-1 and TGF-Beta are cytokines which 
              appear to regulate transcriptional regulation of the COX genes.   The present
              study will use human embryo lung fibroblasts and bovine  pulmonary artery
              endothelial cells.  Results will provide important  information about
              regulatory mechanisms which govern PG synthesis.  %%%  This is a research
              project to study the complex mechanism which  operates in mammalian systems to
              control prostaglandin formation.   Prostaglandins are so called local hormones
              that are produced  quickly in local tissue cells as a result of corporal
              stress, such  as temperature changes, fatigue, or wounding.  To begin to 
              understand how the body produces the hormone and controls its  level, we need
              to learn about the action of key enzymes that  operate in its production.  This
              control systems seems to be very  complicated and involves the action of
              special components that  operate to control reading messenger RNA(mRNA).  mRNA
              contains the  information the cells need t o form the enzyme for prostaglandin 
              production.  This research will help in our understanding about how  the
              mammalian body controls its temperature and combats fatigue,   how fat is
              formed and used, and how tissue becomes inflamed and  irritated.  ***
