Title       : Ozette Curation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9307589

Award Number: 9307589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71618              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Mauger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary C. Wessen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Makah Cultural & Rsch Ctr
	      P.O. Box 160
	      Neah Bay, WA  983570160    206/645-2711

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, the Makah tribe will                 
              upgrade the storage and accessibility of archaeological materials              
              and data from the Ozette archaeological site. Ozette village                   
              results from approximately 2000 years of habitation by Northwest               
              Coast Native Americans. Occupation was finally terminated by a mud             
              slide which buried entire houses intact therefore preserving an                
              astonishing range of material culture. Because the sediments                   
              remained waterlogged the state of these materials is excellent and             
              many fragile organic items are well preserved. They provide a                  
              unique insight into a disappeared way of life. The specific goals              
              of the project are to: complete a physical inventory of the                    
              collection; develop location inventories for stored materials;                 
              organize portions of the collection in terms of archaeologically               
              visible social units; acquire and install storage equipment; and               
              finally develop documentation for accessing and using the                      
              collection.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This work is important for several reasons. It represents an                   
              important step in collaboration with Native American groups to                 
              permit both tribal control of culturally significant materials and             
              scientific access to them. The Makah tribe has invested over 1.3               
              million dollars in the curatorial facility and NSF funds provide a             
              modest and needed supplement to this amount. Because of their                  
              present condition the materials are not adequately available for               
              scientific study and this grant will remedy this situation.                    
              Finally, these funds will help to preserve the artifacts from                  
              disintegration.
