Title       : Voters Expectations About the Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1993    
File        : a9307340

Award Number: 9307340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helmut Norpoth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9307340  Norpoth    Many people, candidates for elected office, political
              commentators,  and academic students of elections all believe that the economy 
              holds the key to electoral success.  "It's the economy, stupid" was  a slogan
              supposedly posted at the headquarters of a recent  presidential candidate.  But
              how does the economy exercise this  electoral power?  How do voters grasp the
              reality of something as  complex as the economy?    This research focuses on
              the economy in the future tense, the  expectations of ordinary voters about the
              state of the economy.  Do  they see the economy getting better or getting
              worse?  What makes  them optimistic rather than pessimistic?  One school of
              thought  believes that they do so solely by looking back at how things have 
              gone lately (as they see it).  In other words, people extrapolate  past trends
              into the future.  But a rival school of thought claims  that people are far
              more farsighted than that.  They are capable of  discerning important
              developments that portend future turns of  events not dictated by past trends. 
              Not being professional  economists, ordinary voters may be hard pressed to
              divine the  future in a rational fashion.  But in following the coverage of 
              economic news by the media, voters may be able to catch the key  "indicators"
              of future performance whose workings only the experts  understand.    The
              research charts voter expectations over a time span now  covering more than 30
              years, going back for some items to the late  1940s.  To understand how voters
              form economic expectations is  significant not only for students of elections,
              but also for what  it tells us about the ability of government to handle the
              economy.   Should the electorate turn out to be naive, ignorant, and backward 
              looking, government has considerable latitude for a policy of quick  fixes.  On
              the other hand, with a more discerning and farsighted  electorate, government
              cannot expect to win popular favor with such  policies.  ***
