Title       : Collaborative Research: The Population Genetics of Plant- Fungal Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9307163

Award Number: 9307163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78515              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher C. Mundt mundtc@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9222148  Scott       Reproductive cooperation and conflict lie at the heart of
              the  evolution of sociality.  Communal breeding in which adults share a  nest
              or mate and may provide care for unrelated young, has been  identified as one
              path leading to complex social systems in both  insects and vertebrates.  But
              even in social insects and birds,  facultative reproductive cooperation among
              non-relatives is rare.   To understand the origins of alternative reproductive
              strategies,  where individuals can breed either independently or communally, it
               is essential to identify the options open to each individual and  assess the
              relative success of each alternative.  %%%       Both male and female
              Nicrophorus tomentosus (Coleoptera:   Silphidae) demonstrate facultative
              communal brood care.  More than  one male and/or female may help to rear young
              that may not be  related.  The aims of this research are to examine the
              frequency of  communal breeding in a natural population and to identify the 
              parentage of these offspring using a DNA fingerprinting technique.   %%%      
              This study will examine why the reproductively dominant  individuals allow
              communal breeding and how this might be achieved.   Several hypotheses for the
              evolution of sociality and of communal  breeding in particular, have been
              constructed with considerable  general application.  These have been tested in
              communally-breeding  vertebrates and in social insects with joint nest
              foundation.  They  can and should be tested in other groups.    %%%  The study
              is of practical value because the survival of the many  species committed to a
              Social way of life is dependent on survival  of individuals and the well-being
              of their social organizations.***
