Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hydrodynamics and Magnetohydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9307644

Award Number: 9307644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daljit S. Ahluwalia                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Turkington turk@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is directed toward some models of turbulence in fluids and
               magnetofluids.  Deterministic and statistical equilibrium theories of coherent
               structures in turbulence will be explored using both analytical and numerical 
              methods.  These theories, which  complement the cascade-oriented concept of a 
              driven and dissipative system, provide models for the long-time, large-scale 
              behavior of flows and fields governed by conservative evolution equations.   
              Their equilibrium solutions are characterized by variational principles,  such 
              as a maximum entropy principle with constraints dictated  by the conservation 
              laws for the governing dynamics.  Theoretical tools and computational
              algorithms will be developed  to solve the  constrained optimization problems
              that arise from these general principles.      A variety of fundamental,
              prototype problems derived from specific physical  applications will be treated
              with these methods; they include, for instance,     the organized vortex
              structures in a shear layer, and the most probable          state of a
              magnetically-confined plasma.  Most of the tractable problems of this  kind are
              essentially two-dimensional; however, some aspects of the analogous 
              three-dimensional problems will be also tackled using extensions of the same 
              methods.    The principal aim of this research is to develop a basic
              understanding  of the  physics of turbulence.  The turbulent medium can be an 
              ordinary fluid, such as  water flowing in a pipe or air streaming past a wing;
              or, it can be a magnetized  plasma, such as ionized gas  in a thermonuclear
              fusion reactor.  Simplified  mathematical models  of these complex physical
              problems are formulated in order  to  investigate some fundamental properties
              of the phenomena they exhibit.   Particular attention is focussed on the
              coherent or organized structures that  emerge and persist in the presence of
              turbulent disorder.   These structures are  studied quantitatively by deriving
              and then solving equations that captu re the  coarse-grained behavior of the
              system while partially ignoring its fine-grained  fluctuations.    In this way,
              useful predictions can be made of physical systems  having a very  large number
              of degrees of freedom, which otherwise would be beyond the grasp of  current
              methods of mathematical analysis or computer simulation. An  interdisciplinary
              approach will be adopted in which abstract analytical tools,  modern computing
              techniques, and solid physical reasoning are employed in a  unified manner.
