Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1993       
File        : a9307289

Award Number: 9307289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ann K. Boyle                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Wiegand rwiegand@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Marley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sylvia M. Wiegand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Harbourne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports research in commutative algebra and                   
              algebraic geometry.  Roger Wiegand and Sylvia Wiegand will study               
              direct-sum decompostions of Cohen-Macaulay modules, particularly               
              over Noetherian rings of dimension two.  They will also study the              
              prime ideal structure of two-dimensional rings.  Brian Harbourne               
              will investigate points in good position in the projective plane,              
              with a goal of understanding the behavior of the dimension of the              
              space of global sections of complete linear systems on blowings                
              up of the plane at n points.  Thomas Marley will study the depth               
              properties of Rees algebras and associative graded rings of                    
              m-primary ideals of a local ring (R,m).                                        
                   This is reasearch in the field of algebraic geometry, one of              
              the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a                
              revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century.  In its                   
              origins, it treated figures that could be defined in the plane by              
              the simplest equations, namely polynomials.  Nowadays the field                
              makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from analysis and              
              topology, and conversely is finding application in those fields                
              as well as in theoretical computer science and robotics.
