Title       : Molecular Structure and Dynamics Beyond the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9307131

Award Number: 9307131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Grant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project of the Physical Chemistry Program in the                       
              Chemistry Division Prof. E.R. Grant of Purdue University will                  
              pursue a program of research on the state-to-state-dynamics of                 
              intramolecular relaxation and electron ejection in highly                      
              excited small molecules.  Specific systems to be investigated                  
              are hydrocarbon and metal-centered free radical molecules.                     
              Multiple-resonance laser methods will be used to isolate                       
              individual transitions that bring the molecules close to their                 
              ionization thresholds.  Experiments will also be performed to                  
              obtain high-resolution information on ionization potentials,                   
              photoionization cross sections of free radicals and the                        
              rotational-vibrational structure of the corresponding cation,                  
              as well as on the vibrational structure of excited electronic                  
              states that lie below the adiabatic ionization thresholds.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              The conventional view of the properties of a polyatomic                        
              molecule is based on the Born-Oppenheimer (B-O) approximation                  
              according to which its total energy is the sum of independent                  
              energies associated with the translational, rotational,                        
              vibrational, and electronic degrees of freedom, the actual                     
              non-vanishing couplings between these being assumed to be small                
              and negligible in the first approximation.  Chemical reactions,                
              however, often involve highly excited electronic and                           
              vibrational degrees of freedom and the B-O approximation may be                
              of questionable validity.  Processes that involve energies near                
              or above the first ionization threshold, where the dynamics of                 
              intramolecular energy relaxation leads in particular to                        
              electron ejection, are not amenable to be treated in the B-O                   
              approximation.  This research concerns fundamental questions                   
              about the processes that occur in excited molecular states near                
              the ionization threshold and will provide information suitable                 
              for the development of theoretical models of chemical                          
              reactivity.
