Title       : Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity of Selection in an Early Successional Field:
               Patterns and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9307202

Award Number: 9307202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Stratton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307202 Stratton Environmental heterogeneity is often invoked in theories of
              microevolution but little is known of the spatial or temporal scale of
              variation in selection.  The evolutionary outcome of natural selection depends
              critically on whether variation in fitness is fine grained or course grained. 
              For example, dispersal of offspring in microsites with similar fitness effects
              will promote local adaptation, while heterogeneity within the dispersal radius
              favors the evolution of generalists.  Variation in selection is defined by
              reversals in the relative fitness of genotypes (genotype x environmental
              interactions for fitness).  My previous work has shown that soil nutrients and
              vegetation patterns vary on scale of meters and affect the absolute fitness of
              Drigeron, but changes in rank fitness among genotypes occur on a scale of
              centimeters.  Selective heterogeneity may thus qualitatively different from
              easily observed ecological heterogeneity. %%% Spacial autocorrelation analysis
              will be used to measure spatial and temporal variation in the relative fitness
              of 12 genotypes of Erigeron annuus over two years.  I will compare the
              magnitude of pure spatial and temporal variation in selection with second order
              changes in the location of fitness peake among years.  Simultaneous
              measurements of soil nutrients, light, water, and background vegetation will
              identify factors correlate with the relative fitness in the field; greenhouse
              experiments will then be used to confirm the casual relationships. 
              Furthermore, I will test whether variation in selection is caused by frequency
              dependent, genotype genotype interactions at several spatial scales.  This
              research will be among the first studi es of temporal variation in selection in
              natural plant populations, and the first to test the stability of spatial
              patterns of selection through time.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
