Title       : RUI: The Analysis of Three-dimensional Spatial Information of Tree and Forest
               Canopy Structure: A Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1995   
File        : a9307771

Award Number: 9307771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Beach                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini M. Nadkarni nadkarnn@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey G. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              Forest canopy communities are important in maintaining the                     
              diversity, resiliency, and functioning of the ecosystems                       
              they inhabit.  With the increasing interest and amounts of                     
              data on forest canopies that are resulting from new access                     
              techniques, ecologists require the development of tools to                     
              manage and analyze their data and a means for comparing data                   
              from disparate studies.  Ecologists will need to deal with:                    
              1) new types of data, 2) a great deal more data, and 3) the                    
              necessity of sharing data among researchers who have                           
              separate research questions.  The project will bring                           
              together forest canopy researchers ("domain scientist"),                       
              quantitative scientists, and computer scientists to work                       
              towards establishing methods to collect, store, display,                       
              analyze, and interpret three-dimensional spatial data                          
              relating to tree crowns and tree canopies.  This award will                    
              support the following planning activities to: 1)  compile an                   
              array of research questions and needs that involve canopy                      
              structure from domain scientists; 2) examine potentially                       
              applicable information models and software tools that are in                   
              used in allied fields; and 3) develop conceptual models and                    
              recommendations for the types of format of information and                     
              analyses necessary to answer research questions posed by                       
              forest canopy researchers.  Anticipated products include:  a                   
              specifications list of questions and needsof domain                            
              scientists; and annotated compilation of potential tools                       
              from allied fields; an information model that will be tested                   
              with data collected from a forested study site were we can                     
              gain access to the canopy with a large construction crane;                     
              and an explicit set of steps to implement the model and                        
              generate the methods to collect and analyze three-                             
              dimensional spatial data. This award is being jointly                          
              supported by the Ecological Studies and the Database                           
              Activities in the Biological Sciences programs.
