Title       : Function-Space Neural Networks for Spatio-Temporal Transformation and Pattern
               Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9307632

Award Number: 9307632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irwin W. Sandberg sandberg@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joydeep Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9307632  Sandberg  Nonlinear transformation and  recognition of continuous-time 
              signals or signal sequences is  fundamental to a wide range of  cognitive
              processes. This work aims  to build a comprehensive  understanding of the
              processing of  spatio-temporal signals.  It is  founded on recent results
              obtained  by the proposer showing that very  large classes of continuous 
              functionals and shift-invariant  functional maps can be uniformly  approximated
              by certain  conceptually simple neural-like  structures.  These structures are 
              the Function Space Neural Networks  (FSNNs) that involve a  preprocessing
              linear operation  stage such as convolution with  suitable kernel functions,
              followed  by a network of nonlinear cells.   The project shall address key 
              issues pertaining to the design and  use of FSNNs.  These include 
              determination of suitable kernel  functions, network size,  connectivity
              patterns and form of  nonlinearity for different problems  classes,
              effectiveness of alternate  learning algorithms and their  convergence rates,
              and techniques  for constructive/destructive  network growth.  Anew call of
              FSNNs  based on higher order networks that  have proved very effective for 
              static classification, will also  propose be evaluated.  Theoretical  studies
              shall be supplemented by  extensive simulations using several  suites of
              spatio-temporal signals  ranging form low-dimensional  artificial patterns to a
              set of  over 1000 short duration signals  representing actual passive sonar 
              returns form underwater biologics.   This work shall try to raise the 
              understanding of the capabilities  and usability of artificial neural  network
              structures for the   processing of spatio-temporal  signals to a level
              comparable to  that achieved at present for  (static) multilayered feedforward 
              networks.  ***
