Title       : Signals in a Rapid Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1994       
File        : a9307759

Award Number: 9307759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandler M. Fulton fulton@binah.cc.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9307759  Fulton    The ultimate goal of this laboratory is to elucidate the 
              orchestration of causal pathways during cell differentiation.  The  paradigm
              employed for this purpose is the 100-minute change of  Naegleria gruberi from
              amoebae to flagellates--from one eukaryotic  motility form to another--a
              differentiation that is exceptionally  accessible for analysis except for lack
              of molecular genetics.  The  quest continues via three ongoing studies, each of
              interest  separately but all converging toward the goal.  1) Surprisingly  this
              quick change has two "checkpoints," at 10 min and at 20 min,  at which the
              strength of some signal(s) is evaluated and decisions  are made whether to
              progress toward differentiation or to "hold."   Experiments are planned to
              define these checkpoints.  2) Certain  conserved proteins are synthesized
              during differentiation in  processes that involve signals regulating gene
              expression, mRNA  stability, and localization of these proteins in flagella and
               associated organelles.  These proteins include four calcium-binding  proteins:
               a flagellar and a cell-body calmodulin, calcineurin B  and centrin (a.k.a.
              caltractin), which becomes associated primarily  with the basal bodies when
              these organelles form de novo during  differentiation.  Studies are continuing
              to define these calcium-  binding proteins by examining gene expression,
              sequence, and  protein localization.  3) The essential tool of DNA-mediated 
              transformation of Naegleria is being developed using an homologous  selectable
              marker, the OMP decarboxylase gene.  The description of  checkpoints and the
              study of conserved localized proteins is  expected to yield results of
              immediate interest while the molecular  genetic system is achieved.  Once gene
              introduction is possible in  Naegleria, the information from the first two aims
              will make it  feasible to determine causal pathways for signals from initiation
               of differentiation to assembly of components into basal bodies and  flagellae.
               %%%  This research takes  advantage of a unicellular organism, Naegleria 
              gruberi, to study the principles involved in cellular  differentiation.  In
              response to chemical, mechanical, or physical  changes in its environment, this
              organism, within one hundred  minutes, can change from an ameba to an actively
              swimming,  streamlined form with two flagellae.  These two forms move by two 
              very different mechanisms which involve very different sets of  cellular
              machinery .  This quick change represents an excellent  model to study the
              biochemical signal pathways and changes in gene  expression involved in a
              well-defined developmental process.   The  results should shed light on the
              mechanisms of cellular  differentiation common to all living things, and will
              also expand  our knowledge of the diversity of mechanisms by which a variety of
               organisms respond to environmental signals.  ***
