Title       : Microscopic Theory of Quantum Fluids and Nuclear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1995     
File        : a9307484

Award Number: 9307484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia R. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Clark jwc@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Willem H. Dickhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1245      THEORETICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9307484  Clark   Ongoing advances in computational physics will be exploited to
              characterize and predict the behavior of strongly coupled quantum many-particle
              systems under realistic conditions of density and interaction strengths.  Two
              complementary microscopic approaches will be pursued:  one is based on explicit
              descriptions of the correlation structure of the quantum system in space and
              spin degrees of freedom; the other focuses on the modification in intrinsic
              properties and interactions experienced by a particle emerged in a
              many-particle medium.  These powerful computational methods give access to a
              wide range of systems and phenomena of fundamental interest, including the
              superfluids and superconductors that exist at superhigh temperatures inside
              pulsars; the superfluid phase transition in liquid helium near sero
              temperature; lattice-gauge models that offer insights into the nature of the
              vacuum and the mechanism of quark confinement; short-distance processes in
              nuclei and the link between nucleonic theories and quantum chromodynamics; and
              the rich panorama of excited states of nuclei and strongly coupled electronic
              systems.  Projected research on these problems will provide theoretical support
              for existing or planned experimental efforts, including projects at CEBAF and
              observations of neutron stars by orbiting X-ray observatories.  In a novel
              interdisciplinary initiative, neural network computational structures will be
              used for phenomenological analysis of nuclei and of materials of potential
              technological importance.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       !         !              A                            
                                                              (    Times New Roman    Symbol 
              & Arial                                 "             h      ; % ; %          ?
                          /        terri l. hicks terri l. hicks                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
