Title       : Laser Spectroscopy of Ferroelectrics and Dynamics of Phononsin Glasses and
               Crystalline Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1994   
File        : a9307610

Award Number: 9307610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Yen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,5939,5973,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to extend a collaborative research effort between             
              the Russian research group at the Ioffe Institute in St. Petersburg            
              and the U.S. laser spectroscopy group at the University of Georgia.            
              The current cooperation in phonon dynamics in single crystal fibers            
              will be broadened to include the dynamics of phonons in glasses and            
              into the application of high resolution laser spectroscopy to the              
              study of ferroelectrics.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will match the expertise of the Russian                  
              investigators in phonon dynamics and spectroscopy of ferroelectrics            
              with the state-of-the-art facilities and expertise in laser                    
              spectroscopy at the University of Georgia.  These facilities                   
              include a system for the preparation of single crystalline fibers              
              using the techniques of laser-heated pedestal growth, a line                   
              tunable pulsed far infrared laser for monochromatic phonon                     
              generation and a single frequency tunable dye laser for coherent               
              transient and spectral hole-burning spectroscopy.                              
                                                                                             
              The anticipated results for this research effort will provide                  
              information on the domain structure and the possibility for optical            
              holeburning memories in the ferroelectric chromium doped lithium               
              germanate glasses using photon-gated photoionization holeburning,              
              information on the spatial, spectral and temporal phonon dynamics              
              of glasses, and a better understanding of phonon-surface                       
              interactions and phonon transport in crystals using the special                
              geometry of single crystalline fibers.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This study treats three basic problems in materials science.  The              
              first project will be to examine the dynamics of high frequency                
              phonons in disordered materials such as glasses.  This problem                 
              relates to the understanding of heat transport, the structure, and             
              the dynamics of glassy systems.  The second project will be to                 
              study the domain structure of ferroelectric materials using state-             
              of-the-art high resolution laser spectroscopy.  The results of this            
              exercise should provide new information on the fundamental                     
              properties of ferroelectric materials.  Finally, ferroelectric                 
              materials containing known impurities will be investigated as                  
              possible new candidates for high density optical computer memories             
              using persistent optical holeburning.  This research will be                   
              conducted as a collaborative effort between the U.S. laser                     
              spectroscopy group at the University of Georgia and the Russian                
              research group at the Ioffe Institute in St. Petersburg.  It will              
              utilize the expertise and facilities at the University of Georgia              
              in high resolution laser spectroscopy, far infrared lasers and                 
              materials preparation capabilities using laser heated pedestal                 
              growth coupled with the expertise at the Ioffe Institute in the                
              properties and preparation of ferroelectrics and their experience              
              with phonon studies in glasses.
