Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and the Laplace Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1994   
File        : a9307872

Award Number: 9307872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Wolff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work to be supported by this award will focus on                          
              Mathematical  questions centering on elliptic partial                          
              differential equations.   The theme is that of unique                          
              continuation of solutions and related issues.  By unique                       
              continuation one understands the problem of showing that there                 
              are no (non-zero) solutions vanishing in an open set.  A second                
              question, whereby one asks whether a solution can vanish to                    
              infinite order at a point is called the strong continuation                    
              property.  Both are variations on the question of whether two                  
              solutions which agree on an open set (of infinite order at a                   
              point) must agree forever. A number of positive results are                    
              known, depending both on the smoothness of the equation and the                
              underlying dimension.  Recent examples show that in the case of                
              certain classical equations, Schrodinger with Kato class                       
              potentials, unique continuation fails.  One of the specific goals              
              of this project is to extend the basic tool underlying the best                
              results, known as the Carleman inequalities. These inequalities                
              only apply to constant-coefficient equations. Further analysis of              
              more general inequalities suggest that progress can be made in                 
              establishing good estimates which can be applied to general                    
              elliptic equations.  Related work will be carried out on the Bers              
              problem which asks whether solutions whose gradient vanish to a                
              certain degree at the boundary must reduce to constants.                       
                   Abstract as these problems appear in there generic form,                  
              they are easily seen to be important from the point of view of                 
              users of mathematics, especially in those cases where                          
              approximation of solutions can lead to spurious ones.  Knowledge               
              of uniqueness of continuation can provide a level of confidence                
              that reasonable approximations lead to the correct answer.
