Title       : Travel and Subsistence Support for Professor Haifan Xiang
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9307214

Award Number: 9307214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mahendra P. Singh                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Y.K. Lin linyk@casr.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is to support international and travel within                     
              the U.S. and living expenses for Professor Haifan Xiang for                    
              technical consultations and cooperation on the following                       
              research topics:  (1) evaluation of structural response                        
              under severe earthquake and wind excitation, (2) active and                    
              passive controls of structures under severe earthquake and                     
              wind excitations.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Professor Haifan Xiang is Vice Dean of the College of                          
              Structural Engineering, and Director of the Institute of                       
              Bridge Design and Research at Tongjie University, Shanghai,                    
              China.  He has been a faculty member of Tongjie since 1958,                    
              rising through various academic ranks to a Ph.D. Supervisory                   
              Professor, the highest distinction conferred by the Chinese                    
              Ministry of Education.  He was awarded the Certificate of                      
              State Expert in Bridge Engineering in 1986.  He is an                          
              Executive Deputy Director of the Chinese National Laboratory                   
              for Natural Disaster Prevention, Vice President of the                         
              Chinese Wind Engineering Society, a Director on the                            
              Executive Board of the Chinese Society of Civil Engineers,                     
              and General Secretary of the Institute of Bridge and                           
              Structural Engineering of Chinese Society of Civil                             
              Engineers.  He led the research team at Tongjie that                           
              investigated the wind resistance for nearly all the recently                   
              constructed long-span bridges in China, including Nanpu                        
              Cable-Stayed Bridge, Yanpu Cable-Stayed Bridge, Wuhan                          
              Yangtze River Bridge, Jiangyin Yangtze River Bridge, Shantou                   
              Bay Bridge, and Jiujiang Yangtze River Bridge.  He is                          
              currently a consultant for the designs of three suspension                     
              bridges and five cable-stayed bridges in China.                                
                                                                                             
              Professor Xian will visit the United States for five weeks,                    
              with approximately four weeks at the Florida Atlantic                          
              University, and the remaining week at the National Center                      
              for Earthquake Engineering Research and the University of                      
              California at Irvine.  The research programs in the above-                     
              mentioned institutions will be benefited greatly from                          
              Professor Xiang's consultation and cooperation.
