Title       : U.S.-Hungary Research on Ultrashort Electron Pulses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1993  
File        : a9307718

Award Number: 9307718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Weber Peter_Weber@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5916,
Abstract    :
              Dwoskin  9301279    In response to NSF REP No. SEE 92-008, the  Office for
              Central Europe and Eurasia (OCEE) of  the National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
              will  continue a postdoctoral fellowship program  which supports collaborative
              research between  American scientists and their colleagues from  the former
              Soviet Union (FSU) and Eastern  Europe (EE) for the period of January 1, 1993 
              through December 31, 1994.    The funding from the National Science  Foundation
              (NSF) will support primarily  individual American scientists to either travel 
              to or host colleagues from the former Soviet  Union and Eastern Europe for one
              to six months.   Up to 40 percent of the fellowships will be  provided for
              two-week project development  visits which allow participants to develop  plans
              for long-term cooperative research  projects, with special emphasis on
              developing  concrete proposals for submission to NSF's  FSU/EE cooperative
              science programs.  The  project development visits are also intended to 
              provide support for scientists to respond, with  relatively short lead time, to
              unusual  scientific opportunities of exceptional merit  and potential benefit
              to U.S. science.    Young investigators will be given special  consideration in
              the selection.  At least 25  percent of the fellowships, both in long-term 
              research and project development visits, will  be awarded to young
              investigators as an  encouragement to and investment in long-term 
              collaboration.  In the absence of a U.S.  government science and technology
              agreement  with Romania, the Romania twinning program will  continue to foster
              interaction between American  scientists and their Romanian colleagues, who 
              remain largely isolated from the international  scientific community.    A
              small portion of the requested funds will  support compilations of information
              about  science and technology development in the  region obtained through these
              individual visits  and other OCEE activities.    This project fulfills the
              program objective of  advancing scientific  knowledge by enabling  leading
              researchers in the United States and  Eastern Europe, including the former
              Soviet  Union, to combine complementary efforts and  capabilities in areas of
              strong mutual interest  and competence in the field of basic scientific 
              research on the basis of equality, reciprocity,  and mutuality of benefit.  ***
