Title       : Studies of Structure and Conformation Using NMR Spectroscopyand X-Ray
               Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1991       
File        : a9005618

Award Number: 9005618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Noe noe@tiger.jsums.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey D. Zubkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed research consists of four parts, as follows:                      
              (1) NMR studies of cyclopropyl conjugation, for comparing                      
              the  - donating abilities of the three-membered ring,                          
              double bond, and phenyl group; also studies expected to                        
              show that negatively-charged divalent phosphorus can be an                     
              effective  -electron donor; (2) 2-D NMR studies of                             
              structure and dynamics for thioureas aimed at elucidating                      
              conformational equilibria and associative phenomena; (3)                       
              Synthesis and X-ray structural determination of novel                          
              organometallic compounds having two metal atoms joined by                      
              a ligand attached to one metal as a  -arene ligand, and                        
              attached to the second ligand by a lone pair of electrons;                     
              (4) Formation of metal-carbon bonds on group 6 elements                        
              containing metal-oxo groups; the newly synthesized                             
              complexes are expected to show an interaction between the                      
              oxo and alkyl groups and a possibility exists of a                             
              transfer reaction of oxygen to an alkyl ligand.                                
                                                                                             
              The four projects will make extensive use of NMR                               
              spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography.  Multinuclear                          
              variable temperature one- and two-dimensional NMR                              
              experiments will allow analysis of exchange, structure and                     
                                                                                             
              conformations of organic and organometallic compounds.  In                     
                                                                                             
              addition, the structure of the organometallic complexes                        
                                                                                             
              synthesized will be determined by X-ray crystallography.                       
                                                                                             
              The projects will provide minority students with                               
                                                                                             
              experience in using both methods of assigning structure                        
                                                                                             
              and conformation and in the study of chemical and                              
                                                                                             
              magnetization exchange.//
