Title       : Regulation of Hepatic Carbohydrate Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1991       
File        : a9005316

Award Number: 9005316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene L. Cottam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
              The hypothesis that lipopolysaccharide interacts with liver                    
              nonparenchymal cells producing an intercellular chemical                       
              mediator(s) which can interact with liver parenchymal cells                    
              increasing their fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (Fru 2,6-P2)                        
              concentration and phosphofructokinase activity is strongly                     
              supported by preliminary data and published investigations.  The               
              presence of these intercellular chemical mediator(s) is being                  
              established by determining whether addition of lipopolysaccharide              
              to isolated rat liver Kupffer cells (macrophages) produces a                   
              factor(s) in the medium that mediates Fru 2,6-P2 concentration                 
              and phosphfructokinase activity in cultures of rat liver                       
              parenchymal cells.  To test the possibility that the                           
              intercellular mediator formed by the nonparenchymal cells is a                 
              lipid, inhibitors of cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase, and                         
              arachidonate released from membrane phospholipids are being used.              
              The possibility that the factor secreted into the conditioned                  
              medium is a cytokine is also being tested by removing individual               
              cytokines from the conditioned medium with specific antibodies.                
              The effects of specific lipids and cytokines in the conditioned                
              medium on parenchymal cell responses is being confirmed by direct              
              testing using authentic compounds.  Intercellular mediators                    
              formed as a result of incubation of lipopolysaccharide with                    
              Kupffer cells are being identified and any unique factor(s) which              
              affect regulation of parenchymal cell Fru 2,6-P2 concentration                 
              and phosphofructokinase activity will be isolated and the                      
              chemical structure identified.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Liver parenchymal cells (hepatocytes) comprise over 90% of the                 
              liver by mass and are the site of principal metabolic functions                
              associated with the liver.  The liver also contains non-                       
              parenchymal cells which comprise approximately 35% of the liver                
              by cell number.  In response to a variety of stimuli, these non-               
              parenchymal cells synthesize and secrete biologically active                   
              lipids and peptides.  The importance of these locally released                 
              peptide and lipid factors as intracellular communicators which                 
              regulate and amplify specific physiological processes has been                 
              suggested for many years.  Recent studies have now implicated                  
              intra-organ communication between parenchymal and non-parenchymal              
              cells.  Evidence suggests that non-parenchymal cell mediate                    
              regulation of parenchymal cell carbohydrate metabolism.  This                  
              research examines this phenomenon with the intent of increasing                
              our understanding of how liver carbohydrate metabolism (an                     
              essential life function) is regulated.
