Title       : Growth-Related Esterification of Plant Cell Wall Pectins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1990    
File        : a9005291

Award Number: 9005291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas C. Carpita   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Pectins are major structural polysaccharides of the cell wall                  
              in higher plants and are of enormous complexity.  They have                    
              been thought to play a multiplicity of roles in the biology                    
              of the cell in connection with wall hydration, plasticity and                  
              cell adhesion.  Pectins also appear to be involved in plant                    
              defense responses.  This project will examine some of the                      
              detailed modifications in chemical structure of pectins that                   
              take place during cell growth.  Particular attention is to be                  
              paid to the specific type of esterification of uronic acid                     
              residues in maize cells and how this changes as the cells                      
              grow.  Evidence that the esterified galactosyluronic acid                      
              units cannot be completely accounted for by methyl esters                      
              leads to the need for further work to characterize more fully                  
              these esterified compounds.  This project is intended to                       
              elucidate details of esterification and how thesse may relate                  
              to polysaccharide interactions resulting from the pectin                       
              esterifications that are associated with cell enlargement.                     
                                                                                             
              The cell wall of higher plants is largely responsible for the                  
              support of plants and is a major determinant of the form of                    
              plants.  Plant cell walls comprise of a number of complex                      
              polymeric carbohydrates, including cellulose, hemicellulose                    
              and pectic compounds.  Pectic compounds are polymeric                          
              compounds consisting of a series of sugar-acids that are                       
              linked together in complex patterns.  These pectic compounds                   
              undergo subtle changes in their chemical structure during                      
              growth, and these changes may play an important role in                        
              determining how plant cells are able to grow in size.  In                      
              this project Dr. Carpita continues his detailed exploration                    
              of the chemistry of maize pectins, making use of state-of-                     
              the-art technology in fully characterizing these important                     
              compounds.***//
