Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Orthogonal Polynomials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1990    
File        : a9005944

Award Number: 9005944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Geronimo geronimo@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project will continue investigations into  the               
              nature of orthogonal polynomials defined on subsets of the real                
              and complex numbers.  The orthogonality is defined with regard to              
              some measure (density) and, depending on the nature of that                    
              measure, one encounters radically different sets of polynomials.               
              The polynomials may arise in different contexts - as solutions of              
              differential equations or as the result of recurrence relations.               
              But the measure always exists in the background.                               
                   Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding                       
              polynomials orthogonal to measures supported on several disjoint               
              intervals. Asymptotic formulas for polynomials have been                       
              developed in terms of integral representations when measures are               
              supported on a single interval.  Efforts will be made to carry                 
              over this work to the case of support on several                               
              intervals.Another line of investigation will consider polynomials              
              orthogonal with respect to measures supported on Julia sets in                 
              the complex plane.  Two goals are set forth.  The first is to                  
              show that in general the Jacobi matrix with these polynomials is               
              limitperiodic when the Julia set is a Cantor set.  A second goal               
              is to determine the moments of the orthogonality measure via the               
              recurrence formulas.                                                           
                   A new line of investigation uses ergodic theory to study                  
              properties of orthogonal polynomials on the unit circle.  When                 
              the recurrence relation is generated by a stochastic process,                  
              there is a Lyaponov exponent.  When the exponent is zero, there                
              is evidence that the measure has an absolutely continuous part.                
              Efforts will be made to verify this.
