Title       : Genetics of Rabbit Latent Ig Allotype Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9005021

Award Number: 9005021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin Wolf   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Rabbit immunoglobulin allotypes are presumed to be inherited via               
              codominant allelic segregation.  However, latent or non-allelic                
              gene activation has been documented for the Ig heavy (H) chain                 
              and kappa-1 light (L) chain loci.  This laboratory has recently,               
              for the first time, verified the existence of latent kappa-1                   
              light chain mRNA.  Latent b5 kappa-1 mRNA was induced in two b4,4              
              homozygous rabbits following infection with Trypanosoma brucei.                
              In addition, latent b6 cDNA sequences have recently been cloned                
              from an heterozygous b4, b9 rabbit.  Employing the polymerase                  
              chain reaction and molecular cloning techniques, it has been                   
              established that latent b5 and b6 are identical to their nominal               
              b5 and b6 counterparts.  The long term goal of this laboratory is              
              to investigate the regulation of these allelic and non-allelic                 
              genes.  The following studies will be pursued.  1) Using the                   
              latent b5 C kappa 1 gene as a model, genomic sequences encoding                
              latent b5 will be investigated employing lymphoid tissue                       
              preparations as well as FACS-sorted B cells expressing latent b5.              
              Linkage of the latent b5 to the nominal b4 gene will be explored               
              using in situ hybridization, chromosome mapping, and pulsed field              
              electrophoresis.  2) The functional rearrangement of the latent                
              b5 and b6 genes with V-kappa and J-kappa gene segments will be                 
              investigated.  3) It will be determined whether latent b9 kappa-1              
              sequences exist, and if so, functional recombination with V-kappa              
              and J-kappa regions will be probed.  4) Since rabbits have been                
              found also to be expressing latent a2 and e14 following T.brucei               
              infection, mRNA encoding e14 will be identified by molecular                   
              cloning, and functional recombination with V-H, D-H, and J-H gene              
              elements for the chain will be investigated.  These studies                    
              focused on the expression and genomic organization of three                    
              separate latent allotype loci (kappa-1, VHa, CH-gamma) should                  
              unequivocally establish their existence at the DNA level,                      
              and begin to shed light on their function.                                     
                                                                                             
              The structure of immunoglobulin molecules is determined                        
              genetically, i.e., by the structure of the immunoglobulin genes                
              which encode them.  The mechanisms by which immunoglobulin genes               
              undergo rearrangements and small changes in the structure of                   
              their antigen combining sites is the subject of much current                   
              research.  Apart from their antigen combining sites, however,                  
              immunoglobulin molecules have other distinct stuctural features                
              which vary from one individual to another and are characteristic               
              for the immunoglobulins of a particular individual.  Allotypes                 
              are examples of such structural features.  Since allotypes                     
              correspond to segments of immunoglobulin molecules, they would be              
              expected to be inherited by the same rules as other genes.  It                 
              has been known for some time that in rabbits genetically                       
              unexpected allotypes are sometimes expressed.  This seems                      
              contrary to established principles of inheritance.  The proposed               
              research is a continuation of a project directed toward                        
              understanding the molecular basis for this long-standing genetic               
              enigma.  The results may demonstrate important exceptions to our               
              current ideas about immunoglobulin gene regulation.  In any case,              
              they will contribute to our overall understanding of                           
              immunoglobulin gene expression.
