Title       : A Study of the Altered Nitrogen-Carbon Economy in Selected Oat Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1990      
File        : a9005901

Award Number: 9005901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Knight tknight@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Oat plants (Avena sativa 1. lodi) selected for tolerance to                    
              rhizosphere infestation by the tobacco leaf pathogen                           
              Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci experience a spacial                           
              alteration of ammonia assimilatory capabilities between                        
              different plant organs due to selective inactivation of                        
              isoforms of the enzyme glutamine synthetase(GS) by                             
              tabtoxinine-beta-lactam (TBL).  Enhanced growth is the net                     
              outcome of selective GS inactivation.  How alteration of                       
              ammonia assimilatory potentials in these plants result in                      
              increased growth is not fully understood.  It is hypothesized                  
              that selective GS inactivation alters the nitrogen-carbon                      
              economy of the plant by partitioning fixed carbon flow away                    
              from sucrose/starch synthesis and into amino acid                              
              biosynthesis, and this partitioning leads to increased total                   
              carbon fixation rates.  This research determines 1) how                        
              provision of GS substrates is being met in these tolerant                      
              oats, 2) how increased demand for 2-oxoglutarate influences                    
              pathways responsible for maintaining tricarboxylic acid                        
              cycle integrity, and 3) how elevated leaf GS                                   
              levels affect total carbon fixation rates.                                     
                                                                                             
              Tabtoxinine-beta-lactam (TEL) is a toxin produced by a                         
              tobacco leaf pathogen.  It is proving to be a valuable tool                    
              for studying plant nitrogen metabolism because it                              
              irreversibly inhibits a key enzyme for the assimilation of                     
              ammonia into organic nitrogen.  The value of TBL lies with                     
              the toxin's ability to selectively inactivate certain forms                    
              of the enzyme.  The net outcome of this selective                              
              inactivation is a dramatic enhancement of vegetative                           
              growth.  This research provides an explanation of how                          
              selective inactivation of the enzyme results in enhanced                       
              growth.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                //
