Title       : Main Group-Transition Element Clusters. Synthesis, Structure and Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9005978

Award Number: 9005978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Fehlner thomas.p.fehlner.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The main thrust of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic                 
              and Organometallic Chemistry Program is the synthesis of new                   
              cluster compounds containing boron linked to such transition                   
              metals as cobalt and iron. In addition to providing interesting                
              new compounds and contributing to an understanding of the                      
              forces which hold large cluster compounds together, the project                
              is expected to provide new routes for the preparation of thin                  
              films made up of the cores of the boron-transition metal                       
              clusters.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Following on the isolation and characterization of a discrete                  
              transition metal boride, the first objective is to define the                  
              chemistry of six-metal borides and to synthesize related, but                  
              presently unknown, systems. Metallacycles will be used as                      
              convenient precursors for metal-carbon cages containing boron                  
              or aluminum atoms. The facile replacement of the aluminum                      
              fragment by other fragments, such as BF, will be investigated                  
              as a route to new cages. A transition metal carbido cluster,                   
              which has been shown to serve as an exceedingly bulky, strongly                
              pi-donating ligand to boron, will be investigated as a means of                
              stabilizing unusual bonding modes of orbitally-rich ("electron                 
              deficient") main group atoms. Since clusters can be coupled or                 
              condnsed in a variety of ways to form larger assemblies, the                   
              final objective is to demonstrate the usefulness of B-O-B bonds                
              as covalent cluster links; of bipolar cluster ligands in                       
              assembling cluster precursors or clusters themselves; and of                   
              main group-transition element clusters as precursors to solid                  
              thin films made up of the cluster cores.
