Title       : Optical Systems For Materials and Communication Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1990 
File        : a9005891

Award Number: 9005891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333639             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larryl K. Matthews lmatthew@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Current research is being performed in the Optics and                          
              Material Science (OMS) Lab at New Mexico State University                      
              in several areas of technical importance.                                      
                                                                                             
              Among the several projects currently underway and being                        
              proposed for the future, two specific areas are being                          
              currently emphasized.  These areas are:  a) optical                            
              communications and b) optical methods in material                              
              evaluation.  New and exciting methods for communications,                      
              ultrastable solid state lasers and infrared imaging are                        
              currently being explored for which the proposed optical                        
              systems can greatly enhance the opportunities for success.                     
              A new ultra-high noise rejection high efficiency quantum                       
              filter, which holds the record for the narrowest bandwidth                     
              wide field-of-view operation, is under development in the                      
              OMS Lab.  The device is well suited to optical                                 
              communication applications where a weak narrow-bandwidth                       
              signals are buried in strong non-resonant noise.  Pulsed                       
              optical systems of high quality and the associated                             
              equipment will be put to good use in the further                               
              development of the filter.  Fast and accurate testing of                       
              materials and material processing is also an area being                        
              studied in detail.  The OMS Lab is studying new techniques                     
              for the analysis of materials and the complex structures                       
              which embody the materials.  Infrared and laser                                
              optical systems will be used to study the failure of                           
              airframe structures and highway bridges.  Each of these                        
              areas are critical to several industries in the                                
              U.S.  Further development and transfer of technology in                        
              these areas to industry will help to strengthen the                            
              industrial base in the U.S.
