Title       : Multiple Calmodulin-Like Proteins in a Unicellular Eukaryote
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9005589

Award Number: 9005589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandler M. Fulton fulton@binah.cc.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The dramatic cell differentiation undergone by Naegleria gruberi,              
              from amoebae to flagellates, is unique as a model system in the                
              rapidity, synchrony, reproducibility, homogeneity, and                         
              Accessibility of a major phenotypic change.                                    
              Differentiation-specific molecules synthesized during this change              
              include two calmodulins, one that becomes localized in the                     
              flagella and the other that remains in the cell body.  Cloning                 
              and sequencing of the single flagellar calmodulin gene revealed                
              provocative structural features that may be implicated in                      
              regulation of its programmed transcription, in the stability of                
              its mRNA, and in the localization of its protein.  In order to                 
              test these possibilities, and to make this system advantageous                 
              for other studies, this laboratory is working vigorously to                    
              obtain DNA-mediated transformation of Naegleria. In addition,                  
              initial searches for DNA clones to cell body calmodulin have led               
              to the discovery of two additional calcium-binding protein genes               
              expressed during differentiation.  One encodes a calcineurin                   
              B-like protein; the other and undefined calcium-binding protein                
              whose gene sequence is related to flagellar calmodulin DNA but                 
              which is expressed earlier in differentiation.  The goals of this              
              research are to find the calmodulin-2 gene and to dissect these                
              multiple calmodulin-like proteins in Naegleria, while continuing               
              to seek DNA-mediated transformation in this remarkable organism.               
                                                                                             
              The unicellular eukaryote, Naegleria gruberi reproduces as                     
              amoebae.  If conditions are suitable, the amoebae undergo a                    
              rapid, dramatic differentiation into lively, swimming flagellates              
              with a fixed, streamlined body contour.  The flagellates are                   
              temporary, do not reproduce, and eventually revert back to                     
              amoebae.  The long-term goal of this research is to elucidate the              
              sequence of events (from environmental trigger, through                        
              programmed changes in gene expression, to localization of                      
              differentiation-specific gene products) that underlie these                    
              differentiation events.  The current goals of this project are to              
              identify and characterize genes for proteins involved in the                   
              regulation of cellular functions by calcium.  Since the genes for              
              these regulatory molecules are expressed differently at different              
              stages of the differentiation process in different parts of the                
              organism, it is likely that they represent an important link in                
              this chain of events.
