Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Ribonucleic Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1992       
File        : a9005767

Award Number: 9005767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Harvey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The ribosome is a small particle composed of molecules of                      
              proteins and ribonucleic acid which is responsible for the                     
              synthesis of proteins in the cell.  A wide variety of                          
              experimental methods are providing information on the                          
              structure of this particle.  Dr. Harvey is developing                          
              computer modeling methods for integrating that information                     
              into models for the ribosome and for other ribonucleoprotein                   
              complexes.  The procedures are capable of producing low or                     
              high resolution models, depending on the available data.  The                  
              lowest resolution "succinct" models identify only the                          
              locations of the principal substructures, such as individual                   
              proteins and RNA stems, but no more detailed information; at                   
              the other extreme are all-atom models.  Models of mixed                        
              resolution are also produced, with succinct models for most                    
              of the structure and all-atom detail only where sufficient                     
              information exists.  These procedures produce a range of                       
              models, all consistent with the experimental data and provide                  
              quantitative statements about the uncertainties in various                     
              parts of the structure, which should be useful in guiding                      
              future experimental studies.  The study will involve                           
              extensions and improvements to the methodology, including                      
              more powerful algorithms for energy minimization, Monte                        
              Carlo, and molecular dynamics simulations on all-atom models.                  
              It also describes applications to the E. coli ribosome,                        
              eukaryotic small nuclear ribonucleoproteins, RNase P, and the                  
              Tetrahymena ribozyme.
