Title       : Dorsal-Ventral Polarity in the Drosophila Embryo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9005251

Award Number: 9005251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Steward   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A critical step in pattern formation in Drosophila is the                      
              establishment of polarity along the two major body axes. At least              
              20 maternally active genes are involved in creating dorsal-                    
              ventral polarity. A variety of experiments have shown that                     
              dorsal represents the last step in the process, it acts as the                 
              ventral morphogen relating the maternal positional information to              
              the zygotic genome. Dr. Steward has cloned and characterized the               
              dorsal gene and found it is closely related to the vertebrate                  
              proto-oncogene c-rel. In wild type embryos, the dorsal protein is              
              present in the cytoplasm during cleavage. After the nuclei                     
              migrate to the periphery of the embryo, a ventral to dorsal                    
              gradient of nuclear dorsal protein is established. The formation               
              of the nuclear gradient is disrupted in mutant embryos from other              
              maternally active dorsal-ventral polarity genes. In dorsalized                 
              mutant embryos, only cytoplasmic protein is observed, while in                 
              ventralized embryos, the nuclear gradient is shifted dorsally.                 
              Relocalization of the dorsal protein from the cytoplasm to the                 
              nucleus appears critical for dorsal to function as a morphogen.                
              Dr. Steward proposes a number of experiments that address the                  
              question of what genes either interact with dorsal to effect the               
              cytoplasmic versus nuclear localization or are essential for                   
              dorsal function once the protein is in the nucleus. Specifically               
              she will perform genetic screens to isolate second site                        
              suppressors of specific dorsal mutations.
