Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Interpolation Theory and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1992   
File        : a9005436

Award Number: 9005436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoram Sagher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project focuses on two general areas of                      
              harmonic analysis.  The first concerns stability of Fredholm                   
              properties in interpolation scales.  It is motivated by a                      
              recurring theme inthe theory of partial differential equations                 
              defined in domainswith relatively irregular boundaries (Lipschitz              
              domains).  Namely, when the operators which associate boundary                 
              values with solutions are known to be bounded in a certain                     
              Lebesgue p-norm say the quadratic - then they turn out to be                   
              bounded across alarger range of values of p.  The work to be done              
              involves extensions of 'stability range' to larger classes of                  
              operators on Banach spaces.  Goals include finding upper bounds                
              for the length of the range and reducing assumptions currently in              
              force regarding the dimension of the null space of the operators.              
                   The second line of investigation relates to efforts                       
              extending classical results on Rademacher and Walsh series,                    
              especially in the context of series with large gaps.  It is known              
              that in such circumstances, the quadratic norm the coefficients                
              of a series is bounded by the maximum norm of the sum of the                   
              series.  If the series involved are trigonometric, then the                    
              maximum norm must be replaced by p-norms.  Recent results have                 
              extended the classical comparisons to include the bounded mean                 
              oscillation norm.  Work will now be done to obtain more general                
              BMO estimates for the same type of problem where the series are                
              restricted to measurable sets rather than intervals.  The first                
              hurdle to be overcome is that of drafting a proper definition of               
              BMO for sets of functions defined on other than intervals.                     
                   Support for this project will be restricted to graduate                   
              student stipends and travel allowance.
