Title       : Signal Transduction Across Plant Plasma Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1992   
File        : a9005173

Award Number: 9005173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Low   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Heinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Prior results from this laboratory have shown that elicitors of a              
              plant's defense response bind to receptors on the plant cell                   
              surface and within 0-8 minutes stimulate a burst of hydrogen                   
              peroxide.  This sudden production of hydrogen peroxide serves not              
              only to destroy certain pathogenic compounds but may also                      
              stiimulate subsequent phytoalexin production.  The next goals of               
              this research are to characterize the oxidative burst, determine               
              its role in triggering phytoalexin biosynthesis, evaluate whether              
              other defense compounds are induced by the oxidative burst, and                
              identify the enzymes and substrates involved in its synthesis.                 
              Recent results also indicate that the elicitor molecule is                     
              internalized via endocytosis following association with its                    
              receptor on the plant cell surface.  In further experiments, the               
              kinetics of internalization of the receptor will be examined, and              
              its path will be monitored as it moves from the cell surface to                
              its final intracellular destination .  Whether receptors for                   
              different elicitors follow identical pathways will also be                     
              evaluated.  Finally, it has been found that plant cells have                   
              receptors for biotin and that macromolecules can be delivered                  
              into a living plant cell via biotin receptor-mediated endocytosis              
              if the macromolecules are first covalently derivatized with                    
              biotin.  The use of this pathway to deliver enzymes, nucleic                   
              acids, toxins and antibodies, etc into living plant cells will be              
              explored.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Just as higher animals have well developed immune responses to                 
              defend against pathogens, higher plants also have defense                      
              responses that allow them to resist invasion and damage.  The                  
              mechanisms by which plant defense responses are regulated is a                 
              very important fundamental problem about which, thus far, little               
              is known.  With prior NSF support, Drs. Low and Heinstein                      
              discovered that exposure of soybean cells to a chemical trigger                
              ("elicitor") of a defense response is followed very quickly by                 
              production of hydrogen peroxide by the plant cells.  The further               
              goals of this research are to clarify the role of hydrogen                     
              peroxide in the defense response, and to pursue other leads                    
              concerning the sequence of events between exposure of a plant to               
              a potential pathogen and the production by the plant of                        
              protective chemicals.  The results of this project should                      
              contribute to our understanding of the cellular signaling                      
              mechanisms that regulate plant defense responses.
