Title       : ROW: Composition and Evolution of the Lower Crust and Crust-Mantle Boundary of
               the Basin and Range-to-Colorado Plateau Transition Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1990       
File        : a9005414

Award Number: 9005414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne V. McGuire   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
              Modeling of continental crustal evolution requires improved                    
              understanding of lower crustal rock types, compositions, and                   
              structure.  Recent geophysical transects in the Basin and Range                
              and the Basin and Range-to-Colorado Plateau (BR-CP) transition                 
              zone have raised questions about the nature and development of                 
              the lower crust and the crust-mantle boundary in this region.                  
              Flat Moho topography beneath the Basin and Range, and multiple,                
              sub-horizontal Moho reflectors beneath the Basin and Range and                 
              the BR-CP transition zone have lead to suggestions that basaltic               
              underplating played an important role in the development of the                
              Basin and Range lower crust and crust-mantle boundary during                   
              Cenozoic extension.                                                            
              Xenoliths from Wikieup, Arizona provide actual rock samples from               
              the crust-mantle boundary beneath the BR-CP transition zone.                   
              This xenolith suite includes abundant composite nodules of upper               
              mantle peridotite in contact with lower crustal gabbro and                     
              granulite.  Complete petrographic and compositional analysis                   
              (minerals, whole rock major, trace, and rare elements, isotopes)               
              will be used to determine the petrogenesis of lower crustal rock               
              types.  Xenolith thermobarometry will provide estimates of the                 
              thermal state of the lower crust in this region.                               
              Integration of complete petrologic data with existing geophysical              
              data will allow evaluation of the role of processes such as                    
              basaltic underplating in the evolution of the Basin and Range                  
              lower crust and the development of the crust-mantle boundary.
