Title       : Genetic Modification of Chloroplast Rubisco
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9005547

Award Number: 9005547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Spreitzer rjs@unlinfo.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,9145,
Abstract    :
              The chloroplast enzyme ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate                               
              carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco) catalyzes the rate-limiting step               
              of photosynthetic CO2 fixation, and thus limits plant                          
              productivity.  Oxygenation of substrate ribulosebisphosphate                   
              leads to the loss of fixed carbon, and the competition of O2 with              
              CO2 at the enzyme active site reduces the maximum rate of                      
              carboxylation.  Genetic engineering is expected to improve                     
              carboxylation by changing the CO2/O2 specificity of the enzyme.                
              However, there has been no rationale for accomplishing this goal.              
              Directed mutagenesis has so far been limited to confirming the                 
              essential role of a variety of "active-site" residues, and the                 
              Rubisco primary and x-ray-crystal structures have failed to                    
              identify potential sites for beneficial modification.  In                      
              contrast, the neoclassical genetic approach that can be pursued                
              in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii has been able to                   
              define structural regions of the chloroplast-encoded large                     
              subunit that influence the CO2/O2 specificity of the holoenzyme.               
              A more methodical approach for the application of induced                      
              mutations is underway.  Mutations are being defined by sequencing              
              appropriate chloroplast or nuclear genes, and mutant enzymes are               
              being characterized biochemically to correlate changes in                      
              structure with changes in function.  Directed mutagenesis and                  
              chloroplast transformation are also being used to test hypotheses              
              formulated from the study of these mutations.                                  
                                                                                             
              The photosynthetic enzyme Rubisco is present in all green plants               
              and algae and is considered to be the most abundant protein in                 
              nature.  Since it catalyzes a reaction which can limit                         
              photosynthetic CO2 fixation and, therefore, plant growth, the                  
              long-term objective of this work is to make a better Rubisco.                  
              Since the primary structure of the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii                   
              Rubisco is quite similar to that of plants, it is a good model                 
              for defining potential modifications in crop-plant Rubisco                     
              enzymes.
