Title       : Miocene Phosphogenesis and Depositional History of the Florida Platform:
               Implications for Changes in the Carbon Isotopic Composition of Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1993     
File        : a9005054

Award Number: 9005054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : October 30,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148642             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Compton   (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Hodell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen W. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Previous studies of the Miocene Hawthorn Group of the Florida                  
              Platform indicate that phosphogenesis occurred primarily during                
              the early to early middle Miocene.  The timing of Phosphogenesis               
              appears to be synchronous with a global positive excursion of the              
              carbon isotopic composition (delta13C) of seawater.  Preliminary               
              examination of the Hawthorn in northeastern Florida shows that                 
              these sediments are rich in phosphorite, dolomite, silica and                  
              other minerals indicative of intense upwelling, but contain                    
              little organic carbon or pyrite.  Burial of isotopically light                 
              carbon by deposition of organic-rich, continental margin                       
              sequences in the SE U.S. during the early Miocene likely resulted              
              in a global increase in the delta C of seawater.  Multiple                     
              reworking and supergene weathering from subaerial exposure after               
              the middle middle Miocene oxidized and removed most of the                     
              organic carbon and diagenetic pyrite.  Rapid oxidation of the                  
              buried organic carbon resulted in the delta C of seawater                      
              returning to its pre-excursion value.  We will test this                       
              hypothesis by determining the mechanism and timing of                          
              phosphogenesis, the timing of sediment oxidation, and the                      
              relationship of these events on the Florida Platform to global                 
              sea-level changes and variations in the delta C and delta O of                 
              seawater during the Miocene.  The research program relies on                   
              integrating the seismic sequence stratigraphy, sediment                        
              mineralogy and texture, and elemental and isotopic composition of              
              the phosphorite and associate minerals.  The Sr isotope                        
              stratigraphy of the Hawthorn sections will be compared to the                  
              delta C, delta O, and Sr isotope stratigraphy of the Miocene                   
              sediments from the southwest Pacific (DSDP Site 588).
