Title       : The Economic Foundation for Neural Computing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1990  
File        : a9005969

Award Number: 9005969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lou L. Rosenberg                        
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1990      
Expires     : February 28,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18602              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Whinston abw@uts.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research which uses the             
              framework of mathematical economics to model the coordination of               
              amultitude of computational units engaged in large-scale problem               
              solving.  The authors are working on developing a detailed formalism           
              of a massively parallel computing system that lends itself to a                
              representation as an economic resource allocation problem.  A                  
              computation will be regarded as a production process that yields a             
              specific output and requires certain inputs.  Just as production of            
              commodities are organized into parallel and serial stages with                 
              intermediate goods, a computational problem will be organized into             
              parallel and serial steps with intermediate outputs.  Inputs and               
              outputs will be priced, and profits will be defined for each                   
              computational unit.  Entry and exit of individual units based on               
              rofitability can be interpreted as a form of adaptive learning.                
              Mathematical economic will allow the characterization of optimal               
              prices that will achieve the system objective efficiently.  The                
              authors will study the existence, optimality, and stability of                 
              equilibrium prices and allocations, the practical implementation of            
              this economic solution, and the potential learning behavior driven             
              by profitability.  The research is significant in that it explores             
              the way in which knowledge from economic science and knowledge                 
              fromcomputer science can be integrated to produce new knowledge.
