Title       : Development of Immunological Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1993    
File        : a9005061

Award Number: 9005061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin L. Cooper cooper@mednet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Past studies have demonstrated substantial physiological                       
              similarities between invertebrate and vertebrate immunity.                     
              However, such functional similarities might also reflect the                   
              convergent evolution of otherwise unrelated systems.  Only                     
              detailed molecular comparisons will confirm true homology.  The                
              long term goal of identifying and characterizing invertebrate                  
              recognition molecules is specifically designed to provide such                 
              molecular comparisons.  Urochordates represent the closest extant              
              ancestor of the chordates, and so have a substantial chance of                 
              yielding identifiable molecular homologies with vetebrate immune-              
              related molecules.  Monoclonal antibodies directed against                     
              urocordate cell surface antigens will be obtained and screened                 
              for their capacity to inhibit immunological reactivity in in                   
              vitro assays of cytotoxicity and cell proliferation.  Inhibitory               
              monoclonal antibodies will be used to purify putative recognition              
              molecules.  Unlike previous, unsuccessful investigations, this                 
              protocol does not assume that invertebrate recognition structures              
              share similarity with their vertebrate equivalents.  i.e. It does              
              not rely on the capacity of anti-vertebrate molecular probes to                
              cross-react with invertebrate determinants, but should identify                
              urochordate recognition structures in the context of their native              
              functions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project aims to identify and characterize molecules that                  
              mediate immunological recognition among invertebrates.  Previous               
              analyses suggest that specific immunological recognition is not                
              solely a vertebrate trait.  Many invertebrates exhibit adaptive                
              histocompatibility responses that bear considerable similarity to              
              vertebrate immune reactions.  Indeed, it is postulated that the                
              adaptive immune systems of higher (vertebrate) animals evolved                 
              directly from more primitive systems of recognition that are                   
              still expressed among advanced invertebrates.  If this hypothesis              
              proves to be true, invertebrates may assume an important role as               
              model systems for the analysis of fundamental imunological                     
              mechanisms that remain disguised by the complexity of vertebrate               
              systems.  However, before such invertebrate models can be applied              
              to the rationalization of complex problems, the evolutionary                   
              homology of vertebrate and invertebrate immunorecognition must be              
              examined.  The results of this research on the immunorecognition               
              structures in tunicates should make a substantial contribution                 
              toward this goal.
