Title       : RUI: Pancreatic and Intestinal Insulin Secretion in the Turtle: Anatomic and
               Functional Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1993     
File        : a9005353

Award Number: 9005353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257971             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Gapp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamilton College
	      198 College Hill Rd
	      Clinton, NY  13323    315/859-4011

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Pancreas and intestine from the painted turtle (Chrysemys picta) will          
              serve as models for investigating insulin secretion in two diffuse             
              endocrine systems.  Chrysemys lacks the compact, highly ordered islet          
              common to most other vertebrates and exhibits (as do other turtles) a          
              substantial population of intestinal insulin cells a condition which is        
              virtually unique among vertebrates.                                            
                                                                                             
              Constituent pancreatic endocrine cell population will be determined            
              morphometrically to assess relationships among cell types with respect         
              to sex, season and distribution within the pancreas.  The Chrysemys            
              pancreas also will be examined at the ultrastructural level to further         
              characterize the endocrine cell types using conventional electron              
              microscopy and EM immunocytochemistry.  The morphological basis for            
              peptidergic regulation of insulin secretion will be determined                 
              immunocytochemically at the light and EM level.                                
                                                                                             
              Perifused trypsin-dispersed intestinal mucosa cells enriched for B             
              cells will be used for characterizing intestinal cell secretory                
              function.  Attempts will be made to determine in regulation on                 
              intestinal insulin secretions in vivo and the proportional                     
              contribution made by the pancreas and intestine to circulating insulin.        
                                                                                             
              Results from these studies will provide important basic information on         
              insulin secretion from the endocrine pancreas and gut of Chrysemys, two        
              diffuse endocrine systems which are atypical among vertebrates.                
              Moreover, these investigations may provide important insights into the         
              evolution of the vertebrate gastro-entero pancreatic endocrine systems         
              and into the importance of local (paracrine) regulation of endocrine           
              function.
