Title       : Development of the Genetic Map of Volvox
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1992     
File        : a9005233

Award Number: 9005233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194642             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirk kirk@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Volvox carteri is a potentially powerful model for analyzing the               
              genetic control of cellular differentiation and morphogenesis.                 
              Each individual contains two entirely different cell types that                
              exhibit a complete division of labor between vegetative and                    
              reproductive functions, and that are arranged in a highly regular              
              pattern within a simple spheroid.  Because the organism is haploid             
              and reproduces rapidly in the asexual cycle, individuals possessing            
              mutations affecting key developmental processes are readily                    
              isolated, and grown into large, genetically homogeneous                        
              populations.  But because the organism can be switched from asexual            
              to sexual reproduction at will, formal genetic analysis is also                
              possible.  Our objective is to make the genetic linkage map of                 
              Volvox more useful for future developmental- and molecular-genetic             
              studies, by extending it to include additional drug-resistance                 
              markers, restriction fragment length polymorphisms and                         
              rearrangement breakpoints.  And, as a major step toward elucidating            
              the genetic programs that regulate differentiation of reproductive             
              cells, we will attempt to identify and map all of the loci at which            
              mutations either result in a breakdown of the division of labor                
              between somatic and reproductive cells, or result in constitutive              
              sexual reproduction.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Volvox bridges the gap between single-celled chlamydomonas, and                
              multicellular higher plants.  Therefore, basic studies of Volvox               
              are important in evolutionary and developmental studies.***//
