Title       : Control of Gene Expression During Lens and Eye Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9005468

Award Number: 9005468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Grainger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the past several years Dr. Grainger has been investigating              
              the mechanisms of determination of the lens during embryogenesis.              
              This system provides an excellent general model for the study of               
              vertebrate cell determination because it has been possible to                  
              carefully study all of the stages of the determination process.                
              This process has been found to require several inductive                       
              interactions, and recent evidence argues that lens determination               
              is tightly coupled to formation of the eye rudiment during                     
              gastrulation. This finding has prompted the initiation of studies              
              on eye formation as a complement to work on lens induction. In                 
              this proposal experiments are described to continue analysis of                
              gene regulation in this system, addressing three levels of gene                
              expression that are important in lens and eye formation in                     
              Xenopus, from terminal differentiation to the initial stages of                
              determination. First, the regulation of cell type specific                     
              proteins in these two tissues will be examined: primarily                      
              crystallin gene regulation in the lens and opsin gene regulation               
              in the eye rudiment. Second, several cDNA screening procedures                 
              will be pursued for identifying gene products which may regulate               
              the early stages of lens and eye determination, or which may                   
              serve as markers of these early stages. Characterization of                    
              several gene products which have already been identified in these              
              screens will continue. Finally, an experimental approach is                    
              proposed for identifying gene products that may control the very               
              precisely regulated ability, or competence, of ectoderm to                     
              respond to inductive signals that initiate the events lens and                 
              eye determination. While evidence has been accumulating about the              
              molecular genetic controls which govern organization of many                   
              regions of the vertebrate embryo, there is virtually no                        
              information about how the eye and lens regions are established                 
              early in development. A long range goal is to construct and test               
              models for these early processes.
