Title       : Biosynthesis of Xyloglucan by Plant Golgi Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1993     
File        : a9005590

Award Number: 9005590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. White alan_white@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,9145,
Abstract    :
              Xyloglucans are plant cell wall matrix polysaccharides that are                
              synthesized by enzymes in the membranes of the Golgi apparatus.                
              Xyloglucan plays a central role in both cell wall structure and                
              function.  In addition, it may have a regulatory function in the               
              process of controlling plant growth and development.  It is a                  
              complex polysaccharide, yet compared to some it is relatively                  
              simple.  This proposal describes a program of research designed                
              to clarify the activities of xyloglucan synthase enzymes and the               
              products they make.  The overall objective of this project is to               
              refine the xyloglucan biosynthesis system for use as a model for               
              the study of both plant cell wall polysaccharide biosynthesis and              
              the structure and functional organization of the plant Golgi                   
              apparatus.  These two research topics are closely related and                  
              completion of this research will significantly increase our                    
              understanding of both.  Golgi membranes isolated from suspension-              
              cultured Acer pseudoplatanus (sycamore maple) cells are being                  
              subfractionated and these partially purified membrane fractions                
              are being used as a source of xyloglucan synthases.  Combinations              
              of glycosyl composition analysis, methylation linkage analysis,                
              and radiogas proportional counting are being used to determine                 
              identities of incorporated radiolabeled residues and the linkages              
              between them.  The glycosyl transferases involved with xyloglucan              
              synthesis is being purified so that eventual subcellular                       
              localization and compartment mapping of plant Golgi are possible.              
              Successful completion of this study will result in a greater                   
              understanding of the process of plant cell wall synthesis as well              
              as the structure and function of the plant apparatus.                          
                                                                                             
              There are many unanswered fundamental questions in plant biology.              
              What influence cell wall biogenesis has on plant growth and                    
              development is one such question.  This research offers an                     
              opportunity for progress in this area.  Xyloglucans are an                     
              important component of plant cell walls both structurally and                  
              functionally.  They allow the cell wall to maintain a degree of                
              flexibility and are implicated in auxin-stimulated elongation                  
              during growth.  This research is an in-depth study of the                      
              biosynthesis of these important cell wall sugars and provides a                
              better understanding of the Golgi apparatus which produces the                 
              enzymes responsible for their synthesis.
