Title       : Molecular Features of the Colchicine Site on Tublin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9005614

Award Number: 9005614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Bane sbane@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
              One of the characteristic properties of tubulin, a 100 kdal                    
              protein comprising the central core of microtubules, is its                    
              ability to bind colchicine, an alkaloid isolated from the Autumn               
              crocus.  Colchicine binding to tubulin results in                              
              substoichiometric inhibition of tubulin polymerization and                     
              subsequent disruption of microtubule-mediated processes.  The                  
              ubiquity and specificity of colchicine binding activity in higher              
              eukaryotes implicates the colchicine binding site as having a                  
              possible role in the in vivo regulation of microtubule assembly.               
              In order to confirm or deny the validity of this proposition, the              
              interactions between tubulin and ligands binding to the                        
              colchicine site must first be understood.  The location and                    
              sequence of the colchicine site on tubulin will be found using                 
              several novel photoaffinity labeling derivatives of colchicine in              
              which the photolabile groups are situated very close to the                    
              interior of the binding site.  This approach is innovative in                  
              that it is designed to identify peptides in the individual                     
              subdomains of the binding site.  The unique spectroscopic                      
              properties of colchicine bound to tubulin have led the PI to                   
              propose that ligands bound to tubulin are engaged in a                         
              pi-stacking interaction with a tryptophan in the binding site.                 
              Associations of this type are known to occur between                           
              single-stranded DNA binding proteins and nucleic acids but have                
              not yet been observed between a small molecule and a protein.                  
              Dr. Hastie will use the method of optically detected magnetic                  
              resonance (ODMR) to directly examine the effect of ligand binding              
              on tubulin tryptophan(s). By employing heavy atom derivatives of               
              the ligands, she intends to determine which aromatic ring of the               
              ligand is stacking with the tryptophan.  Kinetic and equilibrium               
              parameters of selected ligands binding to tubulin will be                      
              determined in order to test a unified mechanism that explains how              
              ligands which are structurally diverse bind to the protein at a                
              single site.  This information coupled with the photoaffinity                  
              labeling and ODMR results, will be used to construct a low                     
              resolution map of the receptor site.
