Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Equipment for Statistics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1990    
File        : a9005939

Award Number: 9005939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: JANICE L ALEXANDER                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Christensen fletcher@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pramod K. Pathak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is a grant under the Scientific Computing Research                   
              Equipment for the Mathematical Sciences program of the Division                
              of Mathematical Sciences of the National Science Foundation.                   
              This program supports the purchase of special purpose computing                
              equipment dedicated to the conduct of research in the                          
              mathematical sciences.  This equipment is required for several                 
              research projects and would be difficult to justify for one                    
              project alone.  Support from the National Science Foundation is                
              coupled with discounts and contributions from manufacturers and                
              with substantial cost-sharing from the institutions submitting                 
              the proposal.  This program is an example of academic,                         
              corporate, and government cooperation in the support of the basic              
              research in the mathematical sciences.                                         
                   This equipment will be used to support four research                      
              projects in  the Department of Mathematics and Statistics of the               
              University of New Mexico.  The names of the investigators and the              
              titles of their projects follow:  Edward Bedrick, Outlier Tests                
              for Logistic Regression, A Conditional Approach;  Ronald                       
              Christensen, Influence Diagnostics in Linear Models for Spatial                
              Data;  Wolfgang Bein and Pramod Pathak, Integration of Surveys;                
              and William Zimmer, An Essentially Non-parametric Bayes Empirical              
              Bayes Procedure.
