Title       : Inorganic Carbon Uptake and Nitrogen Fixation in the Marine Cyanobacterium
               Synechococcus sp.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1993   
File        : a9005959

Award Number: 9005959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75879              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hart Spiller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fisk University
	      1000 Seventeenth Avenue North
	      Nashville, TN  372083051    615/329-8500

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is on the interrelationship between                  
              photosynthetic carbon assimilation and nitrogen fixation in a                  
              cyanobacterium, Synechococcus.  Dr. Spiller plans to examine the               
              uptake and kinetics of carbon assimilation in the organisms and                
              the effect of carbonic-anhydrase inhibitors on bicarbonate                     
              utilization.  It is also planned to examine the mechanism of                   
              oxygen exchange, using glucose in light and dark, and bicarbonate              
              under photosynthetic conditions.  The use and availability of                  
              glucose as compared to carbon dioxide to support nitrogen                      
              fixation will be examined.  Experiments are also planned in which              
              use is made of energy-transfer inhibitors in order to examine the              
              role played by the electrochemical potential of protons in                     
              dark:light transients of N-fixing Synechococcus cells.                         
                                                                                             
              The cyanobacteria are structurally simple organisms, often                     
              unicellular and often free-living, which have a remarkable                     
              ability to make use of the nitrogen gas in the environment in a                
              manner that higher animals and plants cannot do.  These bacteria,              
              like most plants, are capable of harnessing radiant energy in the              
              form of sunlight and producing organic carbon-containing                       
              compounds by photosynthesis.  Inorganic carbon is taken in and                 
              chemically manipulated to provide appropriate carbon compounds                 
              that can combine with newly fixed nitrogen.  The photosynthetic                
              process involves high rates of oxygen production, and this is a                
              potential problem for the cyanobacteria because the enzymes that               
              fix nitrogen are highly sensitive to oxygen.  Dr. Spiller's                    
              project makes use of a simple cyanobacterium that is well suited               
              for attempting to understand in detail how carbon metabolism and               
              nitrogen metabolism are united in a successful partnership in                  
              this organism.
