Title       : Control of Microtubule Assembly in the Mitotic Appartus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9005543

Award Number: 9005543
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Silver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9215,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The cell's mechanism for regulating microtubule assembly in the                
              cytoskeleton and mitotic apparatus during mitosis remains                      
              undefined.  This laboratory has demonstrated that control of                   
              intracellular calcium is essential for mitotic regulation, and                 
              has isolated and reconstituted the mitotic apparatus calcium pump              
              and a putative mitotic apparatus calcium channel.  In                          
              collaboration with Drs. Shinya Inoue and Osamu Shimomura, Dr.                  
              Silver has succeeded in quantitative imaging of calcium with the               
              photoprotein aequorin and single photon video imaging.  The next               
              goals of this project are to continue the enzymatic and                        
              biochemical characterization of the mitotic apparatus                          
              endomembrane calcium pump and calcium channel, to elucidate the                
              temporal limits imposed upon regulation and coordination of                    
              pathways required for mitosis that are managed through the cell                
              cycle clock, to elucidate the role of phospholipase activity and               
              specific products of phospholipid metabolism in regulating                     
              intracellular calcium during mitosis, and to continue                          
              quantitative two-dimensional imaging and computational analysis                
              of the spatially and temproally regulated transicent calcium                   
              signals that control mitosis using the photoprotein aequorin and               
              single photon digital video light microscopy.                                  
                                                                                             
              Cell division involves the ordered remodeling of microtubule,                  
              microfilament, intermediate filament, and endomembrane arrays                  
              within the cell.  The cellular mechanisms initiating and carrying              
              out cell division (mitosis) are, as yet, not understood, but a                 
              considerable body of evidence suggests that transient elevations               
              of intracellular free calcium are essential in signaling specific              
              mitotic events.  The goal of this research is to understand how                
              and where in the dividing cell changes in calcium levels take                  
              place.  A detailed understanding of the regulation of                          
              intracellular calcium within the mitotic apparatus will provide                
              deeper insight into the mechanisms controlling cell division.
