Title       : The Pliocene "Pinecrest" Bivalve Mollusk Fauna: Taxonomy, Environmental
               Stratigraphy, Geochronology and Biogeography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9005224

Award Number: 9005224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : July 1,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $517                (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Stanley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is a multifaceted study of a fossil fauna comprising                 
              about 200 species of marine bivalve mollusks that occupied                     
              southern Florida prior to the recent ice age and that suffered                 
              heavy extinction during the ice age.  This fauna is spectacularly              
              preserved in shell beds exposed by quarrying at Sarasota.  PI is               
              mapping the shell beds over a large area.  Using information                   
              about habitats of surviving species and the physical nature of                 
              the shell beds, PI has concluded that the beds represent a                     
              complex of barrier island (or spit) and lagoonal environments.                 
              Further work will allow testing of hypotheses as to how the                    
              unusual vertical sequence of shell beds developed.  The fauna is               
              the tropical component of a large marine fauna that occupied the               
              entire East and Gulf coasts of the U.S.  Components of the fauna               
              from northern Florida to Virginia are well studied.  Completing                
              the picture by studying the tropical component will enable me to               
              investigate geographic patterns of extinction and migration                    
              during the ice age.  To this end, PI will complete a species-                  
              level taxonomic study of the south Florida fauna, using general                
              museum collections, his own collections, and type specimens--and               
              employing morphometrics where appropriate.  The precise age                    
              traditionally assigned to the fauna has recently been questioned.              
              PI will attempt to resolve the issue using radiometric dating of               
              fossil corals and biostratigraphy based on mollusks and                        
              microfossils.
