Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Physical Regularizations of the Motion of a Vortex Sheet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9005932

Award Number: 9005932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Baker baker@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Majda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andre Nachbin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides for the continued support of                          
              research on the behavior of fluids in thin shear layers in the                 
              limit of large Reynolds numbers.  The classical treatment of                   
              these phenomena regards the thin layer as an idealized vortex                  
              sheet and only includes the dissipative effects of viscosity                   
              (internal friction) in an ad hoc fashion that never comes to                   
              grips with the true nature of viscous forces.  In contrast the                 
              research in this award centers around analytical and                           
              computational methods for approximating solutions of the actual                
              viscous equations in the limit of vanishing viscosity.  Specific               
              problems for study include the description of how viscous effects              
              influence the tendency for vortex sheets to develop curvature                  
              singularities.                                                                 
                   Many fluid dynamical phenomena in nature are operative in                 
              the idealized limit of zero viscosity or zero surface tension.                 
              For example, the motion of bodies in air at speeds well below the              
              speed of sound can be studied under the approximation that the                 
              air is inviscid.  Of course, this is a fiction since air does                  
              have a small, nonzero viscosity, but the neglect of viscous                    
              effects is justified when calculating a host of aerodynamical                  
              coefficients, since the small effect of viscosity is not nearly                
              as important as a larger effect, such as a pressure drop.                      
              However there are many fluid dynamical phenomena whose very                    
              existence depends upon the presence of a formally small force                  
              like viscosity, and it is just such phenomena that are the                     
              objects of study in this proposal.  In particular, this                        
              research will study how viscous effects influence the roll-up of               
              vortices inside of thin layers of fluids.
