Title       : Enzymatic Repair of DNA Damage in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1992       
File        : a9005762

Award Number: 9005762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Gallagher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In recent years, a marked depletion of stratospheric ozone has                 
              caused an increase in ultraviolet (UV) radiation reaching the                  
              surface of the Earth.  With this increase, concern and interest                
              has been raised as to what specific effects UV radiation has on                
              cellular processes in organisms.  One such effect, the damage of               
              DNA, has been extensively investigated in bacterial and mammalian              
              systems; however, limited information exists on the effects of UV              
              damage to plant DNA and its in vivo repair by cellular                         
              mechanisms.  This proposal describes the initial study of a ring-              
              saturated pyrimidine incising activity found in plant cells                    
              against UV irradiated or oxidized DNA.  This enzymatic activity                
              will be purified from Brassica oleracea (cauliflower) by                       
              conventional techniques including ion-exchange, affinity, and gel              
              filtration chromatography.  The substrate specificity against UV-              
              irradiated or oxidized, radiolabeled polydeoxyribonucleotides                  
              will be characterized by high pressure liquid chromatography                   
              (HPLC).  Using the purified enzyme as a probe, the effects of DNA              
              base sequence on the formation of these lesions and their                      
              subsequent in vivo repair will be quantified.  Since the                       
              chloroplast genome is also susceptible to damage, the presence of              
              the ring-saturated pyrimidine-DNA repair enzyme in chloroplasts                
              will be investigated.  This should determine if there is a means               
              to effectively remove this damaged lesion from chloroplast DNA to              
              maintain the integrity of this genetic material.  The results of               
              these studies should lead to a better understanding of the                     
              biochemical processes that constitute the plant cellular                       
              response to DNA damage.  The aim is to ultimately use the                      
              knowledge obtained from this project to isolate plant strains                  
              that have an increased ability to repair damage caused by                      
              radiation and oxidation and therefore have an increased survival               
              capacity.
