Title       : A Parasitism-Specific Hemolymph Protein in the Fruit Fly Host, Anastrepha
               suspensa: Its Identification, Characterization and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9005514

Award Number: 9005514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pauline O. Lawrence pol@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              When females of the parasitic wasp Biosteres longicaudatus lay their           
              eggs in larvae of the Caribbean fruit fly, Anastrepha suspensa they            
              also introduce viruses into the blood of the host insect.  In addition,        
              a new protein appears in the blood of the parasitized larvae within 2-3        
              days after parasitization but is absent from unparasitized individuals.        
              The numbers of parasite larvae in a host influence the amount of the           
              protein detected and also inhibit further development even before the          
              parasites consume the host's tissues.  Injections of the crude protein         
              into healthy fruit fly larvae inhibit their development to the pupal           
              stage in the same way as does superparasitism (several                         
              parasites/larvae).  Thus, this parasitism-specific protein may be the          
              direct cause of fruit fly development disruption.  In this laboratory,         
              Dr. Lawrence will purify the protein in order to identify its specific         
              effects on the host in the hope that it can be utilized to disrupt             
              fruit fly development and thereby suppression adult populations.  In           
              the work described in this proposal, the PI wishes to determine where          
              and when the protein is secreted in order to extract the largest amount        
              of the protein during the time of its maximum synthesis.  The basic            
              physiological and biochemical studies proposed in this project will            
              help to characterize the protein and indicate how, if at all, it may be        
              exploited as a potential tool in fruit fly developmental disruption and        
              control.  There are some indications that this parasitism-specific             
              protein may be related to the viruses introduced with the wasp egg.            
              Thus, the viruses themselves could potentially be cultured and the             
              protein extracted (but this is not part of the proposed study).                
                                                                                             
              The Caribbean fruit fly is a pest of several tropical and subtropical          
              fruits in Florida and parts of the Caribbean.  It is a close relative          
              of the North American apple or blueberry maggot and the notorious              
              Mediterranean fruit fly (Medfly), a major threat to citrus in                  
              California and Florida.  The Medfly and related fruit flies are                
              attacked by parasitic wasps that are closely related to the one                
              proposed in this study.  Thus these research findings would be most            
              relevant to these fruit fly-parasitic wasp systems.  Further, since            
              this parasite is also used in biological control programs against the          
              Medfly in countries like Greece, the studies proposed here have                
              application potential for fruit fly control.
