Title       : Iron Uptake and Metabolism in the Bradyrhizobium/Soybean Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1994     
File        : a9005421

Award Number: 9005421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lou Guerinot Mary.Lou.Guerinot@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              Iron-containing proteins figure prominently in the nitrogen-                   
              fixing symbioses between bacteria and their respective plant                   
              hosts.  Although iron is abundant in the soil, the acquisition of              
              iron is problematic due to its low solubility at biological pH                 
              under aerobic conditions.  The study of iron acquisition as it                 
              pertains to economically important symbioses is directed at                    
              answering three questions: 1) how do rhizobial cells acquire iron              
              as free-living microorganisms where they must compete for this                 
              nutrient with other soil inhabitants 2) how do rhizobia acquire                
              iron as symbionts and 3) does iron regulate gene expression?                   
              Studies are continuing on the utilization of the siderophores                  
              citrate, ferrichrome and rhodoturulate as iron sources by B.                   
              japonicum as well as on the iron regulation of genes involved in               
              iron uptake.  This research: 1) further characterizes                          
              biochemically the acquisition of iron by both free-living and                  
              symbiotic cells of B. japonicum, 2) identifies and characterizes               
              genes involved in iron acquisition, including those which encode               
              iron-inducible outer membrane proteins, and 3) investigates the                
              control of gene expression by iron.                                            
                                                                                             
              The increasing world demand for protein and the increasing                     
              expense of producing nitrogen fertilizer has resulted in a                     
              widespread interest in biological nitrogen fixation.  Although                 
              the nitrogen-fixing Bradyrhizobium/legume symbioses supply much                
              of the fixed nitrogen for agriculture in the temperate regions of              
              the world, many aspects of the symbioses are still poorly                      
              understood.  The importance of iron in animal/pathogen                         
              interactions is now well established; the role of this metal in                
              the nitrogen-fixing rhizobial/legume symbioses is just beginning               
              to be explored.  The research proposed here provides for a better              
              understanding of the role of iron in regulating the symbiotic                  
              interaction.  Such an understanding elucidates how rhizobia                    
              survive in the soil as well as how they interact with their plant              
              host to establish an effective symbiosis.  This is essential to                
              any efforts to engineer a better symbiosis and for the ultimate                
              extension of the symbiosis to other plant hosts.
