Title       : Molecular Interactions in mRNA Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1993      
File        : a9005602

Award Number: 9005602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. S. Butler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rochester Sch Med
	      30 Administration Building
	      Rochester, NY  14627    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The experiments proposed here ask what role mRNA processing plays              
              in regulating the structure, stability and translation of                      
              messenger RNAs.  Specifically, we intend to identify both the                  
              cellular factors involved in mRNA 3' end cleavage and                          
              polyadenylation and the genes that encode them.  We will then be               
              able to ask physiological and biochemical questions about the                  
              roles of these factors in the regulation of mRNA levels during                 
              cellular growth and at different stages of the cell cycle.  We                 
              will employ a direct biochemical assay to screen a large                       
              collection of conditional lethal mutants for enzymatic defects                 
              in mRNA 3' end formation that affect cell viability or growth.                 
              We will clone and characterize the genes using classical genetic               
              and molecular biological techniques.  We will search for second                
              site revertants in the expectation of identifying other genes                  
              whose products play a role in mRNA processing.  These mutants                  
              will also be used in temperature shift studies to determine the                
              effects of each defect on the stability, nucleocytoplasmic                     
              transport and translation of mRNAs.  The isolated genes will be                
              used to determine the effect of knockout mutations, site directed              
              alterations and controlled expression on cell growth and the                   
              ultimate fate of the abnormally processed mRNAs.  In a parallel                
              biochemical approach, we will begin to purify the factors which                
              catalyze specific cleavage and polyadenylation of yeast mRNAs.                 
                                                                                             
              This is a proposal to investigate a very poorly understood part                
              of the process by which genetic information is decoded and                     
              expressed, viz. the assembly of a finished messenger RNA molecule              
              from its precursor, and the transport of the messenger RNA from                
              the nucleus to the cytoplasm.
