Title       : Frequency Domain Relaxation of Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1991    
File        : a9005741

Award Number: 9005741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Crouch peter.crouch@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Tylavsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              It is well recognized that one of the most                                     
              computationally intensive problems encountered in                              
              the analysis and simulation of electric power systems                          
              if the transient stability problem.  Hence it is this                          
              area in which the high speed parallel and vector                               
              computers being made available today, will find the                            
              most applicability in the near and distant future.  One                        
              current trend in increasing the computational power                            
              of digital computing engines is to use inexpensive                             
              moderate speed processors and medium to large scale                            
              parallelism (10-1000 processors) such as the Sequent                           
              Balance, Encore Multimax, Intel iPSC, BBN Butterfly.                           
              Another trend is to use the more expensive high                                
              speed vector processors and small scale parallelism                            
              (1-10) such as the CRAY and IBM vector processors                              
              with parallel pipelines, while there are other                                 
              computers with a foot in both camps, such as the                               
              Alliant.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Frequency domain based algorithms, rather than                                 
              traditional time domain algorithms, display three                              
              important characteristics which have the potential for                         
              utilizing the specialist architectures in the machines                         
              above.  First, frequency domain techniques often lead                          
              to algorithms which are very naturally parallelizable,                         
              whereas time domain algorithms suffer from                                     
              precedent relationships which are inherent in                                  
              numerical integration schemes and limit the amount                             
              of exploitable parallelism.  Second, frequency domain                          
              techniques applied to power system dynamics                                    
              problems, often result in algorithms which are rich in                         
              highly vectorizable inner product calculations,                                
              contrasting the time domain algorithms, in which                               
              code vectorization is extremely limited.  Third,                               
              frequency domain data compression can be easily                                
              exploited.
