Title       : Research on: Computational Epidemiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1990 
File        : a9005621

Award Number: 9005621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207750             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Habtemariam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              63        Life Science Other Medical              
Program Ref : 9130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Computer models provide a new arena of computer based                          
              scientific experimentation currently referred to as                            
              computational science.  One subcomponent of this new                           
              science which we seek to advance is that of computational                      
              epidemiology.  Based on existing strength in information                       
              management and computer modelling and expert systems as                        
              the vital subcomponents of computational epidemiology.                         
                                                                                             
              Some problem-solving methods are quantitative and complex,                     
              and require computer modelling methods.  Others are                            
              qualitative and fall in the domain of expert systems                           
              research.  The task is to meld expert knowledge with                           
              computer modelling methods to advance epidemiologic                            
              knowledge management.  Two approaches, one based on expert                     
              systems, and a second based on computer modelling will be                      
              utilized.  Since the two methods appear to be different,                       
              they have generally been used separately.  However, if the                     
              two are coupled, a more effective problem-solving and                          
              decision-support model may result.  To test this core                          
              hypothesis, we will proceed to develop prototypes of the                       
              two systems and experiment with optimal coupling                               
              approaches using the bioepidemiologic dynamics                                 
              of trypanosoma as the test bed.                                                
                                                                                             
              An outreach component will be embedded in the research                         
              environment so as to increase the number of minorities                         
              pursuing advanced studies in computational epidemiology.                       
              The research and outreach in tandem will lead to the                           
              development of resources that will form the backbone for                       
              long term research in computational epidemiology.
