Title       : Consolidation of Research Laboratories to Create a Cell Biology/Biochemistry
               Laboratory Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9414636

Award Number: 9414636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1555242            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Sluss byrd s@flc.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Al Mages  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Perino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Lewis College
	      
	      Durango, CO  81301    303/247-7661

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fort Lewis College (FLC) is an undergraduate, state-supported liberal arts
              institution educates  students from the culturally diverse, four-corner's
              region of the Southwest, as well as other parts  of the U.S.  Originally an
              Indian High School in 1892, the college has a tradition and mandates  from the
              State of Colorado to provide education opportunities to all Native Americans. 
              As a part  of the broad liberal arts mission, the biology and chemistry
              departments have developed  nationally recognized undergraduate research
              programs.  The college administration has  supported these research programs 
              by giving priority status in its Academic Master Plan to the  training of
              future scientists in a collaborative environment.  Subsequently, the college
              has made a  commitment to the science program by supporting the renovation of
              outdated research and  research training space that is inadequate to sustain
              research activities.  This renovation project is  a component of a much larger
              planned science building addition that will create additional  teaching and
              research space for all the FLC sciences.  The college, with ARI funds, will
              consolidate interdisciplinary biology and chemistry research  laboratories that
              are currently dispersed throughout the science facility.  Renovations will
              consist  of: upgrading HVAC, electrical, and plumbing systems; improving the
              fire protection system,  providing a laboratory workstation specifically
              designed for the physically challenged, and  installing fixed equipment such as
              fume hoods, a glass washer, and a cold room.  Once  renovations are completed,
              faculty and students will have all the necessary equipment and lab  space in
              one physical location, facilitating ongoing curricular development at FLC that 
              emphasizes a community of faculty and student collaborative research and
              training.  An  atmosphere where research at the interface of biology and
              chemistry will be created, attracting  and training future scientists in
              biotechnology and environmental assessment and  remediation.
