Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Techniques from Geometry and Statistical
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9414631

Award Number: 9414631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandre J. Chorin chorin@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Sethian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9148,9216,9237,9263,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Over the past few years, the investigator and his colleagues  have
              developed numerical techniques with esoteric and even  speculative features. 
              The common theme in these techniques is the  use of mathematical machinery and
              algorithms from one area in a  seemingly different arena.  In particular, the
              investigators have  used methods from statistical physics and geometry to
              attack  seemingly unrelated problems in computational physics.  The  problems
              under investigation in this proposal are both  technologically interesting and
              among the most difficult in  computing.  The work encompasses: (1) applications
              of statistical  mechanics to fluid mechanics and turbulence theory; (2) the 
              analysis of stochastic systems with filamentary subsystems, in  particular
              polymers and quantum vortices; (3) the exploitation of  variable temperature
              and annealing techniques to untangle and  recognize knots and possibly fold
              proteins; (4) the analysis of  kinking in moving filaments and singularities in
              moving surfaces  by interface algorithms based on hyperbolic conservation law 
              theory and differential geometry; and (5) coupling these moving  interface
              algorithms with mean curvature flow analysis to design  algorithms for grid
              generation.       Through this work, a considerable body of state-of-the-art, 
              powerful mathematical and numerical techniques will be transformed  into
              practical tools of importance in manufacturing, energy  processes, and material
              science.  Sophisticated advancing interface  algorithms will be used to compute
              detailed processes in the  manufacture of microelectronic components in
              computer chips.  Research on statistical mechanics and fluid turbulence will be
               used as part of computer simulations of fluid mixing in combustion  processes.
               Finally, surface advancement techniques for grid  generation are aimed at
              automating a key component of  computational fluid mechanics simulations
              present in modeling and  designing flows past aircraft, in engines, and in
              hydrodynamic  devices.
