Title       : Development of An Advanced Analysis Tool for Characterization, Simulation and
               Remedy of Molding Induced Defects in Liquid Composite Molding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9414287

Award Number: 9414287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497289             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ly James Lee leelj@che.eng.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Brodkey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9165,9215,AMPP,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9414287  Lee       Liquid composite molding processes such as resin transfer 
              molding (RTM) and structural reaction injection molding (SRIM) are  one of the
              fastest growing new manufacturing technologies in  aerospace and automotive
              industries.  They have been recognized by  many researchers and engineers as
              the most feasible approach to  mass produce light weight, high strength and low
              cost structural  components.  The major manufacturing technique in today's
              aerospace  industry for light weight components is prepreg/autoclave process.  
              This process is expensive, slow and labor intensive.  It can not  compete well
              in the cost driven business such as the civil aero-  transportation industry. 
              This is why many companies, particularly  in Europe, are developing RTM
              processes.  The major manufacturing  techniques in today's automotive industry
              for light weight  components are thermoplastic injection molding and SMC
              compression  molding.  These processes can only handle low volume short fiber 
              reinforcement, therefore, they can not produce high strength  products which
              are needed for structural applications.  SRIM and  RTM, on the other hand, are
              based on high volume fractions of  continuous fiber reinforcement.  They can
              potentially produce parts  stronger than steel made parts.       The new
              experimental techniques for flow analysis include  measurements of capillary
              forces and fiber wetting for fabric  reinforcements with different fiber
              architecture and the three-  dimensional microscopic flow visualization and
              image analysis.  The  experimental techniques for curing analysis include
              rheological and  kinetic analyses and reactive dilatometry of matrix resins.  
              Computer modelling will be carried out at two levels; a model  simple enough to
              be combined with existing computer codes for quick  and easy introduction to
              the manufacturing sector and a  sophisticated model addressing the full range
              of mold filling to  final product property prediction will be developing using 
              supercomputing capabilit ies.
