Title       : Renovation and Consolidation of Space for the Communications, Telemetry and
               Electro-Optics Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9414969

Award Number: 9414969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Shay   (Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Osborne  (Principal Investigator former)
              Michael K. Giles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Horan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larryl K. Matthews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to renovate and consolidate engineering research 
              laboratories and related facilities in Goddard Hall, a 81 year old facility, on
              the  campus of New Mexico State University.  The modernized space will be used
              to  consolidate the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department s  strong 
              communications, telemetry and electro-optics research program, currently
              dispersed  throughout three different buildings.  Present conditions of
              laboratories, dedicated to  research activities, are poorly configured and
              inappropriate to support the rapid  growth of research and research training
              activities that are occurring in the discipline.   In addition to modernizing
              research space, ARI funds will be used to upgrade  infrastructural utilities
              including: power, communication, security and HVAC  systems.  Improved upgrades
              will provide adequate cooling capacity for computer  equipment throughout the
              year and computer linkages within the research space.   Research  currently not
              feasible will be enabled upon completion of the project.   Benefits will
              include: synergy among research faculty and students, ability to share 
              equipment among users, and improved network capabilities, providing more
              effective  student training on computing hardware. Due to the large population
              of minorities in  the state, it is anticipated that the project will have an
              impact on engaging more  minority students in engineering.  Coupled with the
              coordinated efforts through the  NSF s Alliance for Minority Participation and
              the Research Improvement in Minority  Institutions Programs, the  number of
              underrepresented minorities entering science  based professions will increase.
