Title       : A Job-based Analysis of Labor Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9414398

Award Number: 9414398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85247              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward P. Lazear lazear@gsb.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9414398  Lazear    For almost thirty years now, human capital theory has been
              the  main theoretical model behind most empirical work in labor  economics. 
              But human capital theory is primarily a supply-side  approach that focuses on
              the characteristics and skills of the  individual workers.  It pays far less
              attention to the  environment in which workers work.  The entire notion of a
              "job"  which seems central to the thinking of businesspersons and 
              administrators, is virtually absent from most labor market  analyses.  The
              project addresses this deficiency in human capital  theory.  The work is
              conducted at the theoretical and empirical  level.  Tournament theory will be
              extended to determine how firms  set up their hierarchical structures.  The
              investigator has  already lined up firms that will supply the type of detailed 
              personnel and payroll records needed to provide answers to  questions about the
              positions in which labor is used.  They  include firms from the financial
              services industry, an energy  producer, and a durable goods manufacturer.  The
              empirical part  of the study will be devoted to collecting and examining these 
              data.         This project focuses on questions that rely on the  importance of
              jobs as the unit of analysis.  The general  questions are, "Do jobs matter?"
              and "Do firms behave as if they  have some reasonably well-defined idea of
              slots in mind when they  make decisions?"  Some of the specific questions are: 
              1.   Jobs and Wages:  Do jobs determine wages or do individual's      
              characteristics determine wages?  It has been argued that       once occupation
              and industry is held constant, there is       little male-female wage
              differential.  Is the same true for       all human capital variables like
              education and prior       experience?  2.   Jobs and Turnover:  It is
              well-known that workers have       different turnover rates as a function of
              demographic       characteristics and tenure with the firm.  But jobs may have 
                   different turnover rates, independent of  the incumbents.        How
              important are demographic effects in sorting individuals       into jobs with
              different turnover rates?  3.   Careers:  Is there a real distinction between
              "line" jobs,       which are supposed stepping stones to the higher echelons of
                    the firm, and "staff" jobs, which are technical, sometimes       highly
              compensated, but generally dead-end positions?  How       do background
              variables such as race and sex affect initial       job assignments?  4.  
              Promotion:  What determines promotion decisions?  Are       workers who remain
              in a job for long periods of time the       most productive because long tenure
              is evidence of a good       match between jobs and skills or the least
              productive since       the best workers get promoted out early?
