Title       : Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry System (LC-MS) at
               Lehman College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1994 
File        : a9414002

Award Number: 9414002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167158             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Meurer-Grimes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Manfred Philipp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This ARI (Academic Research Infrastructure) Application  requests a high
              pressure liquid  chromatography-mass spectrometer (HPLC-MS) system for the 
              Chemistry and Biology departments at  Lehman College. This system will
              facilitate the research of  three faculty members, as well as the  research of
              a new faculty member in the Biology Department.  Lehman College qualifies as a
              Minority  Institution.    HPLC-MS is a new and powerful technique for the
              analysis of  natural products. In one step, it allows  researchers to detect,
              separate, and perform a preliminary  structural characterization of substances
              in a  mixture. Since the mixtures under study can have hundreds of  components,
              it allows easy analysis of  hundreds of compounds in one experiment.    The
              high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) component of  the system is the most
              powerful  method known to separate small and large organic molecules.  Natural
              materials have thousands of such  molecules in each cell. In each HPLC run,
              hundreds of peaks  can be seen. However, these peaks  cannot easily be
              identified in a simple HPLC apparatus.    Compound identification in a simple
              HPLC apparatus depends  typically on the availability of a  reference compound
              from other sources and demonstrating that  the reference compound has the same 
              mobility and UV spectrum in several solvent systems as does  the HPLC peak in
              question. Most HPLC  peaks seen in natural mixtures remain unidentified since
              it  is not easy to find, by intuition and chance,  the appropriate reference
              compounds.    The Mass Spectrometer (MS) component of the instrument takes 
              each effluent peak from the HPLC,  fragments it into ions, and determines the
              mass of each  resulting ion. A tentative structural  identification for each
              HPLC effluent compound can usually  be determined from the masses and 
              fragmentation patterns of each HPLC peak. With a tentative  identification in
              hand, determination of a  positive identification by use of reference compounds
              or by  computer searching o f MS fragmentation  pattern libraries is much
              simpler.
