Title       : Democratization, Secessions, and Fiscal Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9414719

Award Number: 9414719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto F. Alesina aalesina@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Enrico Spolaore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Perotti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                9414719  Alesina         The last decade has witnessed an unprecedented
              process of  democratization, not only in Eastern Europe but also in large 
              parts of the developing world.  At the same time, and partly as a  result of
              this institutional change, the borders of nations have  been redrawn to an
              extent which is quite exceptional for modern  peacetime history.  Fiscal issues
              are crucial determinants of  decisions concerning borders of political
              jurisdictions.  In  fact, the definition of borders and the political
              mechanisms  which lead to fiscal decisions greatly influence the final 
              distribution of costs and benefits of taxation and spending.  For  example,
              much of the difficulty in ratifying the Maastricht  agreement lies in the fear
              that richer and/or more fiscally  "responsible" countries and regions will bear
              some of the fiscal  burden of poorer and/or less responsible regions.  This
              research  project studies the interaction between fiscal policy decisions  and
              the definition of boundaries of political jurisdictions.  In  particular, it
              examines how democratization leads to changes in  social choice decisions
              concerning both political boundaries and  fiscal (de)centralization.        
              Models with social planners have suggested various arguments  in favor of
              centralized fiscal decisions in relatively large  political jurisdictions,
              particularly when the redistributive  aspects of fiscal policy are important. 
              This implication appears  inconsistent with the recent tendency toward
              secessionism and the  renewed difficulties of moving toward a political union
              in the  European community.  We emphasize how diversity and heterogeneity 
              among individuals and regions influence, through the voting  process, the
              decision about (de)centralization and the definition  of boundaries. 
              Heterogeneity with voting gives rise to a much  richer and more realistic set
              of results, relative to social  planner models.  The project considers several
              aspects of this  general problem by focusing on different types o f fiscal
              policy,  i.e., public good provision, insurance, redistribution, on  different
              types of institutions, i.e., dictatorial regimes versus  democratic ones,
              different voting rules, and other institutional  differences.
