Title       : Chemical Kinetics and Atmospheic Chemistry: Reducing the Uncertainty of Key
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9414843

Award Number: 9414843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $654967             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Anderson anderson@huarp.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9414843  Anderson  Several key areas of atmospheric chemistry suffer from a lack
              of  data on reaction rate coefficients and reaction mechanisms,  especially in
              the conditions (pressure, temperature, and  composition) of the Earth's
              atmosphere.  These areas include (1)  many of the reactions that limit the rate
              at which natural and  anthropogenic free radicals in the stratosphere destroy
              ozone, (2)  vital reactions that couple the chemical cycles of oxygen, 
              nitrogen, and hydrogen throughout the troposphere and stratosphere,  and (3)
              the mechanisms by which dimethylsulfide is oxidized in the  remote atmosphere
              to form sulfate aerosols.  In addition, many  aspects of a comprehensive theory
              explaining the relative  reactivity of molecules with free radicals are still
              not well  developed.        One objective of this research is to allow
              investigators to  test simultaneous observations of many of the species central
              to  atmospheric chemistry in order to determine whether laboratory  chemistry
              agrees with atmospheric observations.  Tests of this sort  are currently
              hindered more by incomplete kinetic data than any  other cause,particularly at
              the pressures (10 - 200 torr) and  temperatures (185- 250 Kelvin) found in the
              upper troposphere and  lower stratosphere.  The investigators will employ a
              technique  known as high pressure flow kinetics to probe numerous key 
              reactions over the full range of tropospheric and lower  stratospheric
              temperatures, pressures, and compositions.  This  technique, simultaneously
              avoids complicating wall reactions and  extends the range of flow tube kinetics
              to atmospheric pressure.   By avoiding wall reactions, experiments can be
              performed at  temperatures far lower than previously obtainable.       A second
              objective is enhanced knowledge of the oxidation  pathways of dimethyl sulfide
              (DMS).  DMS, a naturally occurring  sulfur compound emitted from the ocean
              surface into the marine  atmosphere, is the most important naturally occurring
              sulfur  species in the atmosphere.   It is believed to be the source of most 
              of the aerosol particles in the marine atmosphere; these particles,  in turn,
              serve as condensation nuclei for marine clouds.  It has  been postulated that
              the availability of these condensation nuclei  affects the albedo of clouds,
              and thus that changes in DMS  production caused by global climate change could
              in turn lead to  further climate forcing, either ameliorating or worsening the 
              initial effect.  The sulfate aerosols also directly scatter a small  portion of
              the incoming solar radiation away from the Earth's  surface.  The investigators
              will focus on three key points in a  proposed DMS oxidation sequence in a
              effort to reconcile  atmospheric observations with laboratory measurements.    
                A key aspect of the work will be the observation of both  reactant and
              product species in the reactions being studied.   Fluorescence and absorption
              measurement of free radicals will be  combined with high resolution Fourier
              transform infrared  spectroscopy, which will allow simultaneous measurement of
              many  species.  The addition of a mass spectrometer will allow the  detection
              of otherwise undetectable species at low concentrations,   particularly in the
              DMS system.
