Title       : Organometallic Cluster Chemistry: Higher Nuclearity Derivatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1996   
File        : a9414217

Award Number: 9414217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374800             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Shapley shapley@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9414217  Shapley  Univ. of Ill. Urbana-Champaign  Dr. John R. Shapley, Univ. of
              Ill. Urbana-Champaign, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
              Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to develop the
              organometallic chemistry of intermediate sized transition metal carbonyl
              cluster compounds which contain six to twelve metal atoms. The specific systems
              to be studied include: (1) compounds which are related to a carbido
              heptarhenium cluster and which contain a methylene moiety; (2) hydrocarbon
              ligand derivatives of a decaruthenium cluster system which adopts a unique
              structure that apparently can 'reconstruct' in order to bind a hydrocarbon
              group; (3) compounds in which a heptarhenium cluster unit mimics the common
              cyclopentadienyl ligand in binding a metal complex fragment but engenders
              enhanced reactivity at the metal vertex; and (4) the process of carbon monoxide
              disproportionation on a hexaruthenium framework, a reaction that is a direct
              molecular analog of the surface Boudouard reaction and one that may be
              important for initiating the Fischer-Tropsch hydrocarbon synthesis process.   
              Metals are used as catalysts in a number of important industrial chemical
              processes including the refining of petroleum. However, the details of how
              metal surfaces are able to carry out and facilitate chemical reactions is not
              yet clearly understood. This project focuses on a series of compounds which
              contain six to twelve metal atoms. These complexes are small enough to permit
              the details of their interactions with other species to be studied in great
              detail, but large enough to model metal surfaces. The species chosen for
              investigation represent particularly suitable models for the sites on roughened
              metal surfaces that are most active in breaking C-C, C-N, and C-O bonds. In
              addition to providing a basic understanding of metal mediated chemical
              reactions, new classes of organometallic cluster compounds, which themselves
              may show catalytic properties  will be prepared.
