Title       : Renovation of the Harding Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9414771

Award Number: 9414771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis W. Stevenson dws@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stevenson       The NSF and the New York Botanical Garden (NYBG) will jointly
              support the  renovation of approximately 131 square research meters for the
              enhancement of  laboratory facilities in systematic and economic botany.  The
              impacted laboratories  have not been renovated since their original
              construction in 1957.  As a result, they  are not configured, or mechanically
              served, for molecular plant systematics, and they  do not meet modern health
              and safety standards.  Faculty and graduate students have  been unable to
              conduct on-site research and training and have had to travel to local 
              affiliated laboratories and, on occasion, to laboratories located out of state.
                      Renovations will include replacement of two antiquated fume hoods, 
              installation of new electrical wiring with ground fault receptacles, upgrading
              of water  delivery  and drainage systems, installation of thermostatic
              controls, replacement of  traps and valves on steam radiators, removal of
              unused steam lines, and refurbishment  of laboratory cabinets, floors, walls,
              ceilings, and lab bench tops.         The renovation of laboratories for use in
              molecular systematics will add new  impetus to the research and research
              training program at  NYBG and will directly  benefit five research scientists,
              three post doctoral students, and fifteen graduate  students in molecular
              biology.  The molecular research program allows researchers to  track the
              evolution of the same gene in species from widely different groups of 
              organisms, which in turn provides new insight on plant evolutionary history. 
              The  Garden is also used by visiting scientists, many of whom travel from Latin
              America  for study and has cooperative programs with three local universities.
