Title       : Inherent Design Limitations for Periodic and Sampled-Data Feedback Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9414822

Award Number: 9414822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157431             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Freudenberg jfr@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9147,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fruedenberg  9414822    The objectives of this proposal are to advance the
              current state  of sampled-data and periodic control systems.  Contributions
              will  be made to theory, applications, and pedagogy.  A theory of  inherent
              design limitations for sampled-data and periodic  feedback systems will be
              developed to describe robustness and  performance tradeoffs due to nonminimum
              phase zeros, unstable  poles, and time delays in the analog plant.  Various 
              methodologies have been proposed for circumventing design  limitations present
              in linear time invariant systems by purposely  introducing sampling or other
              forms of periodic control.  The  theory to be developed will be used to
              critique these  methodologies.  The theory of design limitations takes 
              intersample behavior into account, and shows that some of the  purported
              advantages of sampling for overcoming design  limitations are illusory because
              they only consider behavior at  sampling instants.  The techniques to be used
              in developing the  results are the Bode and Poisson integrals from complex
              variable  theory in conjunction with methods developed in the early 1950's  for
              computing the response of an analog signal in a sampled-data  system to a
              sinusoidal input.  Particular emphasis is placed upon  the fact that the
              discrete frequency response depends on aliased  high frequency components of
              the analog response.  This  dependence is responsible for sensitivity and
              robustness  difficulties due to high frequency model error.  The theoretical 
              portion of the proposed research will be carried out in  collaboration with
              Rick Middleton of the University of Newcastle,  Australia.  Contributions to
              applications will be made in two  areas.  First, analysis techniques will be
              developed for  assessing the quality of a sampled-data control design using 
              frequency response plots instead of simulations.  Second, models  of inherently
              hybrid will be constructed for the purpose of  assessing their bandwidth
              limitations and degree of design  difficulty.  Such  systems are found in
              automotive applications,  where the engine firing event is inherently discrete,
              and in  sensing devices such as CCD cameras and Optical Multichannel  Analyzers
              which are used in plasma processing.  This work  supports ongoing applications
              projects at the University  of Michigan in the areas of automotive emission
              control and  semiconductor manufacturing.  Contributions to pedagogy arise 
              from the used of techniques taught in standard textbooks to  analyze inherent
              limitations and intersample behavior.  The  theory to be developed fills a gap
              in pedagogy that currently  exists between the theory of analog and of
              sampled-data feedback  systems.  ***
