Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Entropy-Controlled Adaptive Finite Element Simulations of
               Compressible Gas Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9414480

Award Number: 9414480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leszek F. Demkowicz leszek@ticam.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The principal idea of the proposed work consists in using a discrete form of the
              entropy balance equation as a rationale for controlling the optimal amount of
              artificial dissipation in Finite Element (FE) compressible gas simulations. 
              The entropy control can be reinterpreted as a nonlinear stability estimate in
              terms of the so-called modified entropy function.   Preliminary results include
              a practical verification of the proposed ideas, using the Taylor-Galerkin
              discretization in time method combined with an artificial viscosity model
              proposed by Hughes and Johnson, all in the context of h-adaptive linear finite
              elements. The obtained numerical results confirm that the entropy control
              indeed may provide a basis for the careful  balance between stability and
              higher-order resolution in FE discretizations.   The proposed  investigations
              include: a study of a local  entropy control (in the results obtained so far,
              only a  global stability was ensured), a study of other time discretization
              methods and artificial dissipation  models, and extensions to higher order
              spatial approxima tions.  The proposed work deals with the supersonic viscous
              and inviscid flows, modeled by compressible Navier-Stokes and Euler equations. 
              Possible applications include modeling of flows around a complete aircraft or
              part of it, and internal  flows related  mostly to combustion problems
              (engines).  The described research should contribute to a  better understanding
              of the fundamental role of the entropy function in global and local stability
              of  compressible gas simulations. Based on the entropy control, an internal
              mechanism for controlling  stability should be built into the existing FE
              codes, resulting in a new, reliable and powerful class  of approximations.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
