Title       : Modernization and Renovation of Space for the Campus-wide Electron Optics
               Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1997   
File        : a9414909

Award Number: 9414909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hamish L. Fraser fraser.3@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This award will provide support for the renovation and modernization of the
              Campuswide Electron Optics Facility (CEOF) at the Ohio State University.  As a
              part of the Center for Materials Research, the CEOF is an open facility
              consisting of equipment used for the characterization of materials at a variety
              of levels.  In an attempt to increase the capabilities for materials
              characterization, new transmission electron microscopes have been purchased,
              and equipment for scanning electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction has been
              added to the facility.  Presently, equipment is located in a central location
              due to the poor condition of the physical infrastructure of the facility. 
              Although the natural surroundings are suitable for the instrumentation, there
              has been no provision made for sound absorption, climate control, and a
              dust-free environment.  In order to study the microstructural characteristics
              of advanced materials, it is imperative that  the detrimental effects that
              inhibit performance  of the equipment be corrected.   NSF funds will be used to
              support the following renovations:  replacement of ceiling and floor coverings,
              infusion of sound absorbing materials in the walls of  laboratories containing
              sensitive equipment, improvement of air conditioning systems within the
              research and research training areas, and the provision of a room designated
              for off-line analysis of data.  The renovations will permit the instrumentation
              to be operated at the highest level of performance, and provide for enhanced
              efficiency of use and research training.  Apart from the Ohio State community,
              the CEOF will be available as part of the Ohio Materials Network, in which
              scientists and students across the State of Ohio have guaranteed access to the
              equipment required to conduct research  in material science.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
