Title       : The Elvey Project: Replacement of Atmospheric Science and Remote Sensing
               Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9414852

Award Number: 9414852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1291703            (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Dobberpuhl   (Principal Investigator current)
              Merritt R. Helfferich  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
              12        Chemistry                               
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 NSF and the University of Alaska, Fairbanks are jointly funding a replacement
              structure, Elvey II,  for the Geophysical Institute.  NSF participation is
              focused on approximately 15% of the construction effort and will support
              facilities specifically for the Atmospheric Sciences and Remote Sensing Groups.
               The existing facilities are extremely limited and fail to meet the technical
              requirements of today's complex research demands.     The Geophysical Institute
              was created in 1946 by Congress to conduct geophysical research concerning the
              Arctic, and it has evolved into one of a few institutions within the U.S. where
              scientific expertise covers the entire spectrum of geophysical disciplines --
              from outer space to the earth's inner core.  It is the only high-latitude
              research and academic center in the country.  Research conducted at the
              Institute is important in this era of growing concern about the health and
              welfare of the planet, and research training is a significant component of the
              Institute's program.   Approximately one half of the funded effort will replace
              seven wet laboratories including facilities for study of Trace Gases, Climate,
              Solar Data, Aerosol, Atmospheric Chemistry and Optics.  The other half of the
              support will provide enhanced user services in the Geo Data Center.  Currently
              these labs and facilities are located in several buildings throughout the
              campus, and  space for the Atmospheric Sciences group is severely limited and
              lacks chemistry laboratories and specialized facilities.  It lacks adequate
              electrical and plumbing services, and a fume exhaust system for storage of
              hazardous chemicals. There is asbestos in the fire retardant systems, and the
              HVAC system is inadequate for heating, cooling and ventilation.    Fifteen
              faculty will be the direct beneficiaries of the replacement facilities, and
              approximately 65 graduate students enrolled in M.S. or Ph.D. programs will work
              in the new space.  One-third of the graduate students are women and minorities.
               The Institute has a number of outreach activities including programs designed
              to interest elementary school students and Alaskan natives in the geosciences. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
