Title       : SGER: Experimental Flooding at Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge, Rio
               Grande, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9414767

Award Number: 9414767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44995              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Maurice Valett   (Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel C. Molles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Campana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford S. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9237,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9414767  Valett   Flow regulation for the purposes of power generation,
              recreation and navigation has resulted in the engineered separation of rivers,
              floodplains and associated alluvial aquifers.  the result has been a marked
              decrease in native riparian vegetation and increased accumulations of organic
              material on the forest floor.  there is considerable evidence that  overland
              flooding and associated scouring of floodplain sediments are necessary
              components for the successful recruitment of native riparian vegetation, but
              less is known about the effects of floods on the ground water of riparian zones
              and the types of interactions and processes that occur in the interstitial
              environment during floods.  This proposal will assess the use of "manipulative
              flooding" as a restoration tool aimed at reestablishing historical conditions
              and processes in the riparian forest, or bosque, along the Rio Grande at the
              Bosque del Apache National Wildlife refuge, New Mexico.  %%%  Controlled
              flooding of 20 has plots of the bosque will provide opportunities to
              investigate groundwater responses and the rates of respiration and nitrogen
              transformation in the temporarily saturated rooting zone and on the forest
              floor.  Additionally, we will investigate the effects of flooding of the carbon
              and nitrogen content of riparian vegetation.  Funds requested in this proposal
              will support metabolic and biogeochemical studies of the initial flooding of
              the riparian zone following 30 years of flow regulation.
