Title       : Development of an In Situ Growth and Analysis Chamber for X-Ray Scattering
               Experiments at the Advanced Photon Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9414013

Award Number: 9414013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Miceli micelip@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haskell Taub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Michael Greenlief  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503708  Zaslavsky    The addition of this processing extension equipment will 
              enable new research in nanostructure fabrication by regrowth  and in the
              transport, optical properties, and device physics  of novel nanostructures. 
              This processing extension will  permit regrowth of modulation-doping,
              contacting and  isolating layers on patterned heterostructures prepared with 
              in-situ etched and clearned regrowth surfaces.  The  processing extension will
              have the following capabilities:  low-damage electron-cyclotron resonance (ECR)
              plasma  reactive ion etching of III-V semiconductors; ECR hydrogen  plasma
              cleaning of etched substrates; surface cleanliness  monitoring by Auger
              spectroscopy; and in-vacuum transfer of  patterned substrates into the MBE
              growth chamber.  The  properties of strained and unstrained uniform quantum
              wires  fabricated by etching through quantum wells and regrowth  with
              modulation-doping layers on the sidewalls will be  studied.  A heavily-doped
              gate electrode layer in the  regrowth sequence will permit carrier density
              modulation in  these wires independent of the confining potentials  determined
              by the original heterostructure.  Analogously, by  pregrowing the appropriate
              barrier potentials, gated 2-  dimensional tunneling structures and
              superlattices in III-V  heterostructures will be fabricated and their transport
              and  optical properties will be investigated down to the quantum  dot limit.   
              %  This equipment will be used by a group of investigators  having
              complimentary expertise ranging from semiconductor  epitaxial growth to
              nanofabrication and from transport and  optical characterization to device
              physics and engineering.  It represents fundamental materials research
              important for  understanding processing of semiconductor materials, and is 
              ultimately relevant for manufacturing.
