Title       : Experimental and Modeling Studies of Impurities at Metal/ Organic Vapor Phase
               Epitaxy-Grown Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1996   
File        : a9414334

Award Number: 9414334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Kuech Kuech@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9414334 Kuech  Research will be carried out to obtain a  fundamental
              understanding of the influence of impurities on the  properties, and atomic
              level structure of metallo-organic vapor  phase epitaxy(MOVPE) grown
              interfaces.   The role of impurities on  the detailed structure and properties
              of interfaces has been  largely unexplored in the MOVPE technique, despite the
              importance  of this area to the development of nanostructure and 
              heterostructure devices, due to the lack of combined experimental  studies and
              the related modeling of the observed interactions.   Through a tightly coupled
              experimental and modeling effort, the  interplay between the interface or
              surface structure and impurity  incorporation and behavior will be identified
              in this research  project.  We will use a comprehensive approach which includes
               changes in the chemical nature of the impurity containing precursor  as well
              as the surface structure.  These experimental studies will  be complemented and
              supported by modeling efforts of the chemistry  and structure of the developing
              growth front.  Several  complementary modeling techniques will be used
              including realistic  continuum descriptions of fluid flow, heat and mass
              transfer  combined with detailed gas phase and surface chemical kinetic 
              mechanisms and phenomenological models of impurity modified MOVPE  growth.  %%%
              The primary goal of this program is to develop a  fundamental understanding of
              the epitaxial growth, processing, and  properties of compound semiconductor
              materials so that they can be  fully exploited in the realization of a variety
              of advanced  electronic and photonic devices.   The findings of these studies 
              will lead to a better understanding of the basic interface and  growth
              processes relevant to a range of growth and processing  techniques for
              electronic/photonic materials.  An important feature  of the program is the
              training of graduate and undergraduate  students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area of  materials and processing  research.  This
              research will contribute  to improving the general perform ance of advanced
              devices and  integrated circuits used in computing, information processing, and
               tele communica tions.  ***
