Title       : Dissertation Research: The Effects of Diet and Activity on ORANG Fecundity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9414388

Award Number: 9414388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Ellison pellison@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The reproduction of any species can be best understood by placing it within
              its ecological context.  This research project is designed to test the
              hypothesis that reproduction, specifically female ovarian function, is effected
              by environmental conditions.  The study will investigate whether food intake
              and activity levels affect ovarian hormonal levels (and hence the biological
              capacity to bear offspring).    Orangutans are and ideal species to examine the
              effects of energy expenditure on fecundity for a variety of reasons.  1) Orangs
              have the longest average inter birth interval of any primate - 8 years, with a
              great deal of variability surrounding it;  2) this implies a long period after
              lactation, called the waiting time to conception, in which females are not yet
              fecund for a variety of reasons including local ecological conditions and
              maternal condition;  3) the slow movement of orangutans facilitates collection
              of detailed data on nutritional intake and energetic expenditure;  4) they
              inhabit an area of large fluctuations in fruit availability, so that if ovarian
              function responds to fluctuating fruiting patterns, this is a habitat where
              such a relationship is likely to be expressed.  The research in West
              Kalimantan, Indonesia will focus on females who have finished lactating for one
              offspring and have not yet conceived again.  The data will consist of relative
              hormonal indices reflecting ovarian function during each cycle that will be
              compared to data gathered simultaneously on estimates of nutritional intake,
              energetic expenditure, energy balance and food availability, testing the
              responsiveness of ovarian function to these variables.  To accomplish this,
              techniques of measuring urinary hormones will be used to evaluate ovarian
              function.    Additionally, monitoring cyclical fluctuations in hormonal
              patterns will make it possible to address whether aspects of orangutan
              socio-sexual behavior, such as the surprisingly regular occurrence of forced
              copulations, are influenced by ovulatory status.  Knowing when ovulation occurs
              will provide a powerful tool to investigate the role of female choice and its
              impact on sexual selection in orangs.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
