Title       : Transfer of Value in Simultaneous Discriminations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9414589

Award Number: 9414589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Zentall zentall@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                       Zentall, Thomas                   NSF Grant Proposal 
              IBN 9414589                        Nontechnical Summary                        
                              When two stimuli are presented at the same time and  responses
              to one are rewarded (S+) and those to the other are not  (S-), such a task is
              called a simultaneous discrimination.  The  PI has recently found (Zentall &
              Sherburne, 1994) that when  animals learn such a task, the S- actually acquires
              some value  from being presented with the S+ (relative to the appropriate 
              controls).  The purpose of the proposed research is primarily to  determine the
              learning mechanisms by which such transfer of value  takes place.  First, it is
              possible that the S- becomes a signal  for the presence of the S+.  Second, it
              may be that the sight of  the S- (followed by responding to the S+) followed by
              reward,  results in a direct Pavlovian association between the S- and  reward. 
              Finally, it may be that presenting two stimuli at the  same time results in an
              association between them (through the so-  called " principle of contiguity"). 
                     A second purpose of the proposed research is to examine the  involvement
              of this value-transfer effect in other learning  phenomena.  For example, there
              is evidence that overtraining on a  discrimination can speed up the reversal of
              that discrimination  (i.e., the overtraining reversal effect).  The PI proposes
              to  show that overtraining allows additional value to transfer from  the S+ to
              the S-.  In addition, value transfer may be involved in  transitive inference
              effects that have been reported in animals.  If animals have been trained on
              four simultaneous  discriminations, symbolized as A+B-, B+C-, C+D-, D+E-, they 
              appear to order those stimuli from best to worst (i.e.,  A>B>C>D>E) as
              evidenced, in particular, by the strong preference  that they show for B over D
              on test trials.         Although the principle of value transfer appears in 
              simultaneous discrimination learning in animals, there appear  to  be important
              parallel effects in certain human social  perceptions.  For example, there is
              evidence that the  presentation of an attractive female together with an
              automobile  enhances the perceived value of the automobile.  Similarly, one's 
              self regard may be enhanced by living in a city in which the  professional
              sports team is successful.  Thus this research might  shed light on puzzling
              associative phenomena that occur in  people.
