Title       : Renovation of Physiology Research Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1995        
File        : a9414912

Award Number: 9414912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1515000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter F. Boron   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Yale University is the recipient of funds from the Academic Research
              Infrastructure Program to support a comprehensive renovation of research space
              for the Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology.  The department,
              located on the first floor of the Sterling Hall of Medicine, was constructed in
              1924.  Research laboratories are in poor condition, and do not support the
              demands of an intensive and evolving research program in integrative biology. 
              Members of the department perform research that is thematically integrated
              around the physiology of cell membranes.  At the molecular level, research
              focuses on molecular mechanisms of membrane proteins that function as ion
              channels, transporters, and signal transducers.  Investigations at the cellular
              level integrate data on individual membrane proteins to elucidate the
              mechanisms of control of cell functions such as muscle contraction, regulation
              of cell pH and volume and establishment of cell polarity in neurons and
              epithelia.  At the tissue and organ level, researchers concentrate on complex
              neural networks and transport of fluid and electrolytes across the epithelia.  
              Renovations will include changing laboratories from a series of small, oddly
              shaped rooms in to seven larger, flexible laboratory modules.  Two modules will
              be designated as core facilities, one for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
              and one for Imaging.  Several smaller laboratory support spaces will be
              renovated to accommodate cold rooms, a computer room, biological and
              radioactive waste holding rooms, and a telecommunications utility room.  The
              work will involve the removal of non-structural walls; installation of
              partitions; installation of modular casework; repair of floors, and
              installation of improved lighting.  In addition,  more receptacles will be
              installed as well as improved environmental air quality, temperature control,
              and fire protection systems.  The project will enhance the functionality of
              laboratory spaces, as well as provide two vital core facilities, used by seven
              faculty members, and a number of post doctoral fellows, graduate and
              undergraduate students.  Advantages will accrue through enhanced efficiencies
              allowed by greater open space in the design and flexibility of laboratories,
              and the introduction of state-of-the-art communications links. Together with
              the faculty, the modernized research facilities will carry the department into
              the 21st century, permitting research and training programs to expand and
              increase in productivity.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
