Title       : U.S.-E.C. Cooperative Research: Collaborative Research on Analysis and
               Implementation of Concurrent Constraint Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9414105

Award Number: 9414105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Saumya K. Debray debray@cs.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0512206   System Interaction                      
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5914,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This three-year award will support U.S.-E.C. cooperative research in concurrent
              programming, logic  programming, compilation, and implementation.  It involves
              cooperation between Saumya Debray of the  University of Arizona on the U.S.
              side, and on the European side, Manuel Hermenegildo of the  Polytechnic
              University of Madrid, Spain; Moreno Falaschi of the University of Padua, Italy;
              and  Giorgio Levi of the University of Pisa, Italy.  They propose collaboration
              on three main topics:  task  granularity analysis for parallel and distributed
              implementations of logic programs, development of  portable parallel
              implementations of such languages, and compile-time analysis of concurrent 
              constraint languages.  The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration
              experience and capability in  the target system, &-PROLOG, the underlying
              parallel implementation.  The Spanish investigator  contributes a prototype
              implementation, using the Caslog complexity analysis system, for task 
              granularity analysis.  The Spanish side has also been investigating
              compile-time analysis techniques  for Prolog programs with delay primitives. 
              The Italian researchers offer extensive experience with  the topics of
              semantics and of static analyses of concurrent logic and constraint programming
               languages to the U.S. researcher's use of the &-Prolog system as an
              implementation and compiler for  parallel logic programming languages.  The
              results of the research will contribute to building  efficient parallel
              implementations of high-level, declarative programming languages, in
              particular,  logic and constraint programming languages.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
