Title       : Renovation of Dana Science Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1995     
File        : a9414898

Award Number: 9414898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315917             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Standish wstandis@skidmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidmore College
	      815 North Broadway
	      Saratoga Springs, NY  12866    518/580-5000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              12        Chemistry                               
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Skidmore College, located in Saratoga Springs, NY, is the recipient of ARI
              funds for the renovation and replacement of research and research training
              space in the Dana Science Center.  Erected in 1968, the Dana Science Center is
              home to the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Geology.  Since the
              construction of the facility, enrollment has increased by fifty percent, and
              majors in both geology and physics have been established to complement the
              majors in biology and chemistry.  This tremendous growth has been accompanied
              by a succession of minor ad hoc remodeling to the Science Center to provide
              necessary, but inefficient research space.  This renovation project will allow
              the departments to reconfigure their research areas to provide for improved
              safety, flexibility, and efficiency in meeting the research needs and desires
              of students and faculty, thereby significantly enhancing both collaborative and
              student research efforts.   The renovation of the Science Center is one part of
              a two-phase effort by Skidmore to improve its science facilities.  In addition
              to the modernization of existing laboratory space, the College is committed to 
              providing more dedicated  research and teaching space by constructing an annex
              to the building.  Renovations will include: rearrangement of bench areas and
              replacement of insufficient storage facilities, installation of new fume hoods,
              separation of research space from instructional space, upgrade and replacement
              of HVAC and plumbing systems respectively.  Research activity in the
              departments served by Dana will be enhanced by the reorganization and
              modernization of laboratory space that will serve an increase number of student
              researchers.  Improved synergy will result from the removal of walls that serve
              as barriers to effective communication.  Future growth in research activities
              will be accommodated without compromising safety or reducing access to
              facilities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
