Title       : Workshop: Faculty Workshop on "Teaching of Electric Drive," to be held at the
               University of Minnesota in Minneapolis August 4-6, l994.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1994    
File        : a9414044

Award Number: 9414044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Vittal                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9712               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned Mohan mohan@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mahmoud Riaz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1038,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9414044  Mohan  A 3-day Faculty Workshop is proposed on the topic of "Teaching
              of  Electric Drives for speed and position control in key areas such  as
              robotics, energy conservation and electric transportation is  widely
              recognized.         The purpose of this workshop will be to provide a forum to
              the  interested faculty to explore options in teaching of Electric  Drives. 
              Following is a list of possible topics for this  workshop:         What should
              be the prerequisites in terms of Electric       Machine Theory, Power
              Electronics and Control Theory?       Can the students be given the required
              information in       this course without having to rely on prerequisites?      
                Are there any good sources of lecture notes?         What should be the role
              of simulations, if any? What       are to the good simulation packages for this
              purpose?         It is generally agreed that a hardware laboratory is a must   
                 How much of that should be in terms of classroom       demonstrations and
              how much as lab experiments for the       students to carryout? Should it be
              integrated with the       lecture course or as a separate lab course?          
                 It is challenging and expensive to develop an Electric       Drives
              Laboratory.  Should it be developed based on off-the        shelf drives
              available commercially or should it be       developed in-house using power
              electronic components, DSPs,        and so on controlled by a PC?             
              What is the best way to teach field-oriented, vector control       of induction
              motor drives, especially in an undergraduate       course?    To allow ample
              time for a free-flowing discussion on each topic,  the attendance will be
              limited to 40 full-time university faculty  on a first-come basis.    Detailed
              notes will be prepared and distributed on the topic of  Field-Oriented,
              Vector-Controlled Induction Motor Drives.  A  paper copy of the overhead
              transparencies used during the  workshop will also be distributed to each
              participant.  A copy of  all this material alo ng with the Summary of the
              Workshop Results  will be sent to NSF.   ***
