Title       : U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research on Joining of Silicon Nitride
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9414107

Award Number: 9414107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas M. Glaeser aglaeser@sapphire.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 5914,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9504905  Rogers  This award supports Eric Flint, a graduate student of 
              Professor Craig A. Rogers in the Center for Intelligent  Material Systems and
              Structures, Virginia Polytechnic  Institute and State University, to spend five
              months  carrying out research at the German Aerospace Research  Establishment
              (DLR) in Braunschweig, Germany.  His host for  this period of
              dissertation-related research is Jorg  Melcher, Deputy Head of the Division of
              Adaptive Structural  Systems of the Institute of Structural Mechanics of DLR. 
              This Institute is possibly the strongest in Europe in the  area of adaptive
              structural vibration control.  Research at  CIMMS is focused on characterizing
              the electrical and  mechanical behavior of "smart" actuators as part of complex
               structures.  Mr. Flint is working on intelligent design of  such smart system
              technology.  Research in the German  institute has concentrated on building
              structurally-  integrated actuators and designing control algorithms to 
              isolate vibration and control aeroelastic effects..  Mr.  Flint's dissertation
              research visit will provide an active  link between the U.S. and German
              research groups, giving  CIMMS access to the large test structures and other
              types of  stack actuators available at DLR.    The control of undesirable
              vibration and other behavior in  truss-like structures by passive design
              improvement is  reaching its technical limit.   Active control offers a way  to
              further improve the performance range of structures.  Adding a method of
              putting force into the structure creates  force paths which can be used to
              control and eliminate  excess vibration.  A promising approach is multi-layered
               stack actuators, which consist of thin layers of active  materials that are
              mechanically in serial and electrically  in parallel.  This area of
              control-structure interaction is  of widespread interest in the U.S. because of
               its potential  to significantly improve the efficiency and performance of a 
              wide variety of structural systems, from airplanes to   communication antennae,
              as well as suppressing vibration in  heavy machinery, bridges and certain types
              of buildings.  ***
