Title       : Large Scale Magnetotail Dynamics and Auroral Precipitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9414760

Award Number: 9414760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maha Ashour-Abdalla mabdalla@igpp.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlines a study of the formation of auroral arcs  caused by the
              large scale dynamics of ions and electrons in the  magnetotail.  The first step
              is to construct ion distribution  functions moments (density, temperature,
              pressure, etc.) in a  three-dimensional large scale magnetospheric model.  This
              will be  done using the technique of large scale kinetics, whereby thousands 
              of ion trajectories are launched from a variety of sources into a  magnetic and
              electric field model of the magnetosphere.  The 3D  auroral precipitation
              profile (with local time dependence) will be  determined and compared with
              observations.  The second step will be  to perform a similar large scale
              kinetic study using electrons,  after which the ion and electron results will
              be compared and in  regions where there are charge imbalances, parallel
              electric fields  will be imposed.  The precipitated electron flux will then be 
              calculated and theoretical auroral images will be produced.  The  third step is
              to introduce time dependence into the large scale  kinetic model.  This will be
              done by using different field model  "snapshots" which represent different
              states (i.e., growth phase,  recovery, etc.) of the magnetosphere and
              calculating the ion and  electron precipitation profiles. Once a general
              understanding using  these snapshots has been achieved, an attempt will be made
              to model  the growth phase by temporally evolving the quiet time field model 
              to a more disturbed time.  The last step is to bring all of these  results
              together to delineate the formation of auroral arcs.  The  physical mechanisms
              in the magnetotail that result in the large  longitudinal extent of auroral
              arcs will be identified and the  results will be compared to observations.
