Title       : Renovation of Neurobiology Laboratories for Research and Training in Arkansas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1995   
File        : a9414911

Award Number: 9414911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $701266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry D. Lindley lindleybarryd@exchange.uams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip L. Rayford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence E. Cornett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edgar Garcia-Rill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley Ann Gilmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lindley  The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences shares with its sister
              campus, the  University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, a major responsibility for
              life sciences and  university-based biotechnology research and development
              performed for the state of  Arkansas.  Built in 1957, the Shorey Building, a
              nine story structure, recently housed  all the basic science departments and
              most of the research laboratories and support  facilities.  The  research space
              is sub-standard for many aspects of modern cellular  and molecular
              neurobiology, in spite of the fact that they represent essentially the  only
              significant university-based capacity in the state for neurobiology research.  
              Certain core facilities requisite to modern cellular molecular neurobiology,
              such as  adequate darkrooms, tissue culture capabilities and space to house
              large equipment,  are not available.  Inadequate infrastructure is a hindrance
              for the application of  contemporary cellular and molecular biology and
              biophysics to neurobiological  problems.  The laboratories are a critical
              success factor for continued development of  Arkansas efforts in biotechnology.
               They also provide research training opportunities  for graduate, undergraduate
              and high school students.  ARI funds will be used to support various
              renovations including:  asbestos abatement,  upgrading HVAC and electrical
              power systems,  installing new benches and lab  islands, modernizing cell and
              tissue culture and darkroom facilities, and providing a  central autoclave and
              glassware washing facility.  Provisions for computer network  access and data
              analysis space will also be included.  Once completed, the basic  biological
              research conducted in the renovated facilities will build on and be 
              synergistic with the research program launched by the NSF EPSCoR Arkansas 
              Neurobiology Center.  Modernized facilities will enhance the research programs
              of  investigators who contribute to biotechnology linkages and improved
              scientific training  for undergraduates in partn ership with Arkansas
              institutions, including the historically  black colleges, Philander Smith
              College and the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff.
