Title       : Collaborative Research on Binding Agreements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1995   
File        : a9414142

Award Number: 9414142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1994   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajiv Vohra Rajiv_Vohra@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9414142  Vohra    This project studies the nature of binding agreements in 
              strategic situations.  A model is considered in which binding  agreements can,
              in principle, be written among any group of  agents.  The project rigorously
              analyzes the agreements that  occur in an equilibrium of free and unrestricted
              negotiation.  At  the most fundamental level, the investigators address the
              issue  of how to conceptualize the series of negotiations that  ultimately lead
              to the signing of an agreement.  This will make  an important contribution to
              bargaining theory because the  literature on bargaining over actions of games
              is nonexistent.   The principal focus of the research is on the question of 
              efficiency in binding agreements.  This project challenges the  consensus among
              economists that if binding agreements can be  written in the absence of
              informational asymmetries, then the  gains from cooperation will be fully
              exploited.  The  investigators will generalize examples from their previous
              work  of binding agreements in the presence of external effects that do  not
              correspond to an efficient or cooperative outcome.  These  results arise only
              when there are three or more agents.  The  emergence of inefficiency is closely
              related to the assignment of  property rights.    This line of basic research
              is relevant to the Human Dimensions  of Global Change because it will provide
              new insights and better  tools for analyzing negotiations needed to reach
              binding  environmental agreements.  For example, the famous Coase Theorem  was
              used to show that competitive markets will produce efficient  agreements in the
              presence of pollution.  The investigators'  research shows that there is a
              breakdown of efficiency when the  right to pollute is the assigned status quo.
