Title       : Continuous Czochralski Growth of Silicon Single Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1997   
File        : a9414606

Award Number: 9414606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242572             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vishwanath Prasad vprasad@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jurek Koziol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1049,9146,9163,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9414606  Prasad       High yield, high performance microelectronic devices
              require  large diameter silicon (Si) wafers with a high degree of 
              crystallographic perfection, uniform and low axial and radial  resistivity
              gradients, low oxygen impurity and highly uniform  electrical and mechanical
              properties.  Many of the inhomogenities  in crystals grown by the Czochralski
              (CZ) method (which is used to  manufacture almost all Si crystals for
              microelectronics  applications) can be attributed to the non-steady nature of
              the  growth kinetics due primarily to the continuous change in melt  height
              from start to finish.  As the CZ process is scaled up to  grow large diameter
              crystals, the forces which produce flow  instabilities and oscillations become
              much stronger.  To overcome  many of the shortcomings of the conventional CZ
              process, a  polysilicon pellets-feed continuous Czochralski (CCZ) growth 
              process will be investigated.  By reducing the melt height and  keeping it
              fixed, this novel process can suppress many kinds of  unsteady kinetics and
              inhomogenities.  A comprehensive program of  modeling, simulation, design and
              experiments will be performed to  develop a commercially viable CCZ process. 
              To simulate three-  dimensional (3D) transport processes in an irregular domain
              with  free and/or moving boundaries and interfaces, a high resolution  computer
              model based on multizone adaptive grid generation and  curvilinear finite
              volume discretization will be developed.  It  will then be possible to examine
              accurately the effects of melt  flow recirculation and oscillations, heat
              transfer from the melt  and crystal, crystal/melt interface shape and its
              dynamics,  impurity transport, and pellets melting in a range of parameters 
              suitable for industrial processes.  Non-invasive visualization of  temperature
              (using liquid crystals) and flow fields, digital image  processing and heat
              transfer experiments in an apparatus simulating  the CZ system to obtain basic
              information on the physics of the  process will  be investigated.  Computer
              reconstruction of 3D images  from two-dimensional horizontal and vertical
              pictures will be  attempted.  The results from numerical computations and
              laboratory  experiments will help in designing the CCZ growth experiments which
               will be conduced in a commercial puller at an industrial research  facility to
              determine the optimal process conditions.       This project builds on prior
              research demonstrating the  feasibility of continuous Czochralski growth of
              silicon single  crystals using small pellets instead of melting a large block
              of  silicon.  Anticipated high probability of success is further  demonstrated
              by the industrial partner's commitment to allocate a  researcher to this
              project.  Successful completion of this project  will break down the current
              technological barrier limiting the size  of silicon single crystal that can be
              manufactured and lays the  foundation for converting the current batch process
              to truly  continuous process with the potential to increase the yield as well 
              as quality.  Successful commercialization of this technology will  enable the
              U.S. to maintain its competitive edge in this important  electronics market.
