Title       : Physics of Normal Metal-Superconductor Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9414160

Award Number: 9414160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Xiao xiao@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9414160  Xiao    The program will investigate electronic transport in mesoscopic
               structures composed of a normal metal (N) and a supercpnductor (S),  two
              states with sharply contrasted electronic states.  The  objective is to develop
              scientific understanding of the new phase-  coherent electronic transport
              expected to occur in such N-S  structures, and to test, for the first time,
              recently developed  theories which explain quantum transport in such
              structures.  The  PI will carry innovative design, fabrication, and transport 
              measurements of three N-S structures:  microjunctions, composite  wires, and
              multiply connected structures.  Important issues such as  interplay between the
              two types of phase coherence in N and S, and  its effects on the quantum
              transport will be invested.  The  research will either lead to novel quantum
              transport mechanism or  will modify that in mono-component structures.    % % %
                 Mesoscopic structures are obtained when the size of metallic  samples is
              reduced to submicron range.  In such systems, the  particle wave duality of the
              electrons plays an important role in  the transport of electrical current, and
              a new less understood  electronic mechanism emerges.  This research will
              investigate the  electronic transport in mesoscopic structures composed of a
              normal  metal and a superconductor, which are two states with sharply 
              contrasted electronic structures.  The PI will investigate the new  quantum
              electronic transport and provide test for new theories.   The research includes
              innovative design and fabrication of  microstructures, composites wire, and
              multiply connected normal-  superconductor structures, and transport
              measurements.  Research in  this area will benefit the continuing process of
              device  miniaturization and integration.  ***
