Title       : Engineering School Facilities Renovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9414805

Award Number: 9414805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1104916            (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Cook george.e.cook@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David V. Kerns  (Principal Investigator former)
              Donald L. Kinser  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              18        Materials NEC                           
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Vanderbilt University has a long tradition of excellence in its environmental
              and materials engineering programs, and by upgrading the facilities dedicated
              to these programs, the School of Engineering will strengthen its ability to
              educated engineers who will be able to compete in the next century. 
              Engineering laboratories are currently dispersed in four separate buildings,
              and the opportunity for consolidation and enhancement of space is available. 
              Support from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will assist
              Vanderbilt in providing modernized space for research programs in environmental
              engineering and advanced materials science.   Environmental engineering
              activities are housed in a 1952 structure that was last renovated in 1962.  The
              facility is antiquated with respect to plumbing; electrical, HVAC and fire
              safety systems required for operations.  During the period since 1962, the
              focus of the program has evolved from traditional sanitary engineering to
              examination of priority toxic, carcinogenic and radioactive wastes.  Existing
              laboratories were not originally designed to handle such materials, thus
              research and research training are being conducted in unsuitable facilities. 
              In addition to two separate buildings, most materials engineering programs
              occupy a structure that was built for metallurgical engineering in 1974.  Since
              that time, research is increasingly diverse and includes diamond films,
              radiation effects in glasses, ion beam diagnostics, ion implantation in
              glasses, sensor development, microstructures and containerless processing. 
              Facilities devoted to advanced materials processing have numerous problems
              including worn  casework, deficient plumbing, inadequate HVAC and no clean room
              processing capability.   The renovations will create a safe and conducive
              atmosphere that will facilitate environmental and materials engineering
              research that cannot be presently undertaken. Relocation of research activities
              in physical proximity to the physics, chemistry and geology programs with which
              significant collaborations with the materials program already exists should
              further enhance productivity, and encourage interdisciplinary research.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
