Title       : New Analyses of Free Oscillation Splitting with Coupling: Applications to Source
               and Structure Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0000920

Award Number: 0000920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Freeman Gilbert fgilbert@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T. Guy Masters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Gabrielle Laske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gilbert, Freeman
EAR-0000920

The study of the splitting and coupling of free
              oscillations can potentially
provide some unique information about the Earth
              -- in particular about how
density varies laterally relative to shear velocity
              and bulk sound speed.  Mode
splitting has been studied for many years but it
              is clear that the time is ripe
to revisit this field. In particular, the rapid
              expansion of the global seismic
network and the occurrence of many large (and
              deep) earthquakes in the past few
years means that mode splitting analyses are
              capable of much higher precision
than in the past. Some studies have already
              argued that 3D density can be
recovered (and that density variations are
              negatively correlated with shear
velocity in the lower mantle). This result is
              controversial and the
investigators present some
experiments that indicate
              that claims of density recovery with the current mode
data set are premature.
              However, they believe that, with expanded data sets and
new analysis
              techniques, the precision needed to recover the 3D density
structure
of the
              Earth and its 3D anelastic structure is now within reach. The
investigators
              propose
to use a relatively new technique (the matrix AR method) to do
              this
analysis. They
have demonstrated that the method works and it has the
              significant advantage
that it requires no information about the source. In
              addition to studying the
long-wavelength (elastic, anisotropic, and anelastic)
              structure of the Earth,
their analysis can also be used to study the
              low-frequency excitation of
earthquakes and identify those events which are
              anomalous (slow earthquakes).



