Title       : Precision Fabrication of Nanostructures by Optimal Mixed H2/H Control of
               Microcontact Next Generation Lithography Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0000541

Award Number: 0000541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Kailath tk@isl.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Schaper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0000541
Kailath

A number of different so-called NGL (next generation
              lithography) techniques are currently begin explored for continuation of the
              so-far incredibly successful optical lithography techniques, which can take the
              PI's to devices with 70 nm critical dimensions, one of the more interesting
              classes of NGL techniques, called microcontact or soft lithography, has
              demonstrated exceptional patterning fidelity in even the fabrication of 10 nm
              feature sizes and working integrated devices.  Microcontact lithography methods
              involve a 1:1 conformal mask or template, brought into direct contact with the
              surface of the substrate with several different approaches for completing the
              printing process subsequent to contact, including physical, chemical, and
              photonic means.  Recently, a novel microcontact NCL strategy utilizing
              permeable membrane materials (PMM) has been developed in the PI's Stanford
              semiconductor manufacturing group.  In this approach, pattern transfer is
              achieved by molecular transport of reactive species through a permeable porous
              template to form a spatially selective etch-resistant mask on the substrate
              surface.

At the dimensions envisaged for microcontact NGL techniques,
              extremely precise positioning and alignment of mask and substrate will be
              needed during the entire printing trajectory including extension, hold, and
              retraction.  The PI's propose to develop an optimal multivariable control
              system for this purpose, with their recently developed PMM system as a specific
              test vehicle.  Preliminary explorations have led them to focus on a dual servo
              6-axis piezeo-driven nanopositioning flexure stage along with real-time
              mask-substrate gap detection and laser interferometry for positioning and
              alignment. Overall, the fine-stage system will employ six piezoactuators and
              nineteen high resolution positioning detectors.  Although the control laws will
              be developed and demonstrated on their PMM technology and a related near-field
              direct write patterning system, the strategy will be generally applicable to
              other microcontact NCL techniques that employ flexure positioning
              methods.

Some details on their proposed approach follow.  First, a
              state-space model of the flexure stage will be identified using recent advances
              in the so-called subspace methods developed by Cho and Kailath at Stanford.  In
              the planned approach, frequency domain data will be generated and a linear time
              invariant model will be computed.  Subspace identification techniques offer a
              non-iterative method to generate multivariable state-space models.  For their
              application which has considerable redundancy in the sensor set, the subspace
              approach to model identification is useful since, by employing results from
              displacement structure theory, fast algorithms can be obtained.  They also plan
              to investigate the use of the subspace identification output to determine a
              minimal set of detectors and actuators to control the unit.

Using the
              identified model, they will design an optimal mixed H2/H controller.  The H2/H
              control objective is applicable to this project because of the need to optimize
              the positioning speed for an increase in throughput while guarding against
              worst-case crashes of the mask to the substrate surface.  Both stochastic and
              bandlimited disturbances due to vibrations, as well as internal effects such as
              nonlinear beam bending moments, hysteresis, and variable initial conditions and
              topography effects, enter the plant and must be compensated along the desired
              positioning trajectory.

In brief, this proposal envisages the extension and
              application of recent control design theories to design a very high performance
              nanopositioning control system.  A specific new so-called PMM technology will
              be the testbed for the development.  However the techniques are relevant to
              several microcontact technologies; they should also be useful for specific
              applications such as fabrication on curved surfaces, and for manufacturing MEMS
              (microelectro- mechanical systems), microsynthetic and microfluidic
              systems.
***

