Title       : US-Egypt Workshop: Information Technology Research Trends in Network Based
               Environment, Cairo, Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2000  
File        : a0000713

Award Number: 0000713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reda A. Ammar reda@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : X376      STATE-SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0000713
Ammar
Description:  This award is for support of a US-Egypt Workshop
              on Information Technology to
be held in Cairo, Egypt, March 12-14, 2000.  The
              Egyptian co-organizer is Dr. Ayman El-Dessouki, President of the Electronics
              Research Institute in Cairo.  The purpose of the workshop is to address some of
              the main topics that affect the changes taking place in the area of information
              technology (IT), which in turn are affecting life in most countries, including
              the United States and Egypt. The focus in this workshop will be on five areas:
              1. Software development. 2. Evolution and trends in e-business. 3.
              Tele-computing for education and medicine. 4. Internet and information
              networking. and 5. Mobile/satellite communications.   The workshop participants
              will contribute to the proceedings, which will highlight areas of research
              where collaboration would be mutually beneficial.

Scope:  This award will
              support a US-Egypt workshop in an area that is taking on increasing importance
              in most developing countries.  It has assumed a central place in the
              developmental efforts in Egypt.  The area is also in the middle of phenomenal
              expansion in the United States. There are associated issues such as: the global
              market for the information sector, the pervasive impact on the society in all
              sectors of activity, the effect on balance of trade for mature economies and
              for developing countries, and the effect on employment patterns.  The US
              organizer is a well-known computer scientist with impressive credentials who is
              also quite familiar with the working scientific community in this field in
              Egypt.  The Egyptian organizer is the president of the main governmental
              research organization dealing with this area.  Participants are selected on the
              US side and on the Egyptian side to represent academia, governmental
              laboratories and private sector researchers. This proposal meets the INT
              objective of supporting US-foreign scientific collaboration in areas of mutual
              benefit.  Funding for this project is provided by the Division of International
              Programs through the US-Egypt Joint Fund program, and by the Division of
              Electrical and Communications Systems, the Division of Computer-Communication
              Research, the Division of Experimental and Integrative Activities, and the
              Division of Information and Intelligent Systems.
