Title       : Michigan Rural Systemic Initiative (MiRSI) Comprehensive Regional Plan for
               Systemic Reform in Mathematics, Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0000352

Award Number: 0000352
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5366659            (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia B. Douglass   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley V. Delidow  (Principal Investigator former)
              Aaron A. Payment  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold A. Parish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Markle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cheboygan Ostego Presque
	      6065 Learning Lane
	      Indian River, MI  49749    616/239-9394

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Michigan Rural Systemic Initiative


Abstract

The Michigan Rural Systemic
              Initiative (MIRSI) to Improve Science, Mathematics and Technical Education
              seeks to organize a consortium of seventeen school districts and two Native
              American academies in isolated rural school districts in northern Michigan.
              

The Michigan RSI is working collaboratively with universities, community
              colleges, Tribal Colleges and other agencies to promote local capacity for
              systemic reform.  The initiative will promote standards-base MST by enhancing
              teacher knowledge of content and technology processes to increase student
              achievement.  Regional coordinators located in the school districts will make
              available technical assistance, professional development activities and a
              web-based technology venue to increase access to information and innovations in
              mathematics, science, and technology education. Web-based technologies will
              allow rural educators, students, parents, and stakeholders to participate in
              learning communities for investigations, communications, collaborations, and
              publications.  The RSI will assist districts in the re-alignment and leveraging
              of resources and to institute the policy changes necessary for true systemic
              change.

The goals of the proposal are to: 

(1) improve support for the
              development of a reform agenda for rural schools by forming new regional and
              statewide collaborations among the rural districts, Michigan State University,
              North Central Regional Education Laboratory, and other institutions or
              agencies; 

(2) to increase community and business involvement in the schools
              to support the rural agenda in mathematics, science and technology; 

(3)
              enhance the understanding of the rural communities and cultures by gathering
              base-line data from self-studies that examine the contextual variables within
              the communities and that support the reform agenda; 

(4) to generate a
              comprehensive and sustainable implementation plan for systemic reform in
              mathematics, science, and technology education that transcends levels, and
              addresses a local and regional vision, seeks a commitment to policy, fiscal and
              instructional reform, a comparison of programmatic strengths and weaknesses, a
              secure level of resources to promote change and an expedited reform through
              state and local policy changes.  This proposal aligns with the Michigan School
              Improvement Plan.   

