Title       : Collaborative Research: Extratropical Transition of Atlantic Cyclones: An
               Examination of the Factors Influencing Transition and Post-Transition Intensity
               Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a0000528

Award Number: 0000528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Melinda S. Peng                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69295              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher S. Velden chrisv@ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is being done in collaboration with Dr. Jenni Evans of Penn State
              University.  

Extratropical transition of tropical cyclones is a poorly
              understood process, yet the resulting systems can have a tremendous impact on
              the weather in the northeastern U.S. and Canada, producing intense flooding
              rains, wind storms and wave damage.  As a tropical storm transitions into an
              extratropical storm, its structure changes from a nearly axisymmetric cyclone
              with maximum winds near the surface to a highly asymmetric cyclone with
              strongest winds aloft.  The transitions often involve interactions with surface
              fronts or upper level troughs or may result from mergers with pre-existing
              extratropical storms.  

The principal investigators will investigate the
              transition process by examining a number of observed cases of transitions to
              document the life cycle and structural changes and by conducting model
              simulations with a state-of-the-art mesoscale model.  As part of this effort,
              they will test a variety of conceptual models of the transition process.  A
              major new resource they will exploit is the availability of AMSU satellite
              data.  These data will be used to derive thermal profiles and wind fields that
              will be incorporated into the model simulations.  

It is hoped that a better
              understanding of the transition process will improve forecasts.



