Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Long-Term Reconstruction of Oak Mast in the
               Southern Appalachian Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a0000281

Award Number: 0000281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5261               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Orvis orvis@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Oak trees (Quercus spp.) in the southern Appalachians of the southeastern U.S.
              produce fruit in the form of acorns in most years.  During some years, however,
              the production of acorns (also known as mast) is especially heavy for all oak
              trees in an area.  These extreme mast events represent a significant resource
              expenditure for the trees, and they have profound impacts on wildlife and
              wildlife dynamics.  The development of detailed longitudinal records of masting
              in the southern Appalachians is making available information that permits
              scientific examination of the dynamics of longer-term masting cycles and
              whether any changes have occurred in response to climate change or other
              factors.  This doctoral dissertation research project will employ new methods
              for dendrochronological mast reconstruction to explore spatial aspects of
              masting in oaks in the southern Appalachians.  One hundred-year mast histories
              will be developed for several locations in the southern Appalachians, and these
              reconstructions will be used to examine temporal trends in mast production, to
              explore links between climate and mast events, and investigate the spatial
              dynamics of mast events.  The project will generate a set of long-duration oak
              chronologies that are spatially distributed throughout the southern
              Appalachians.  Multiple chronologies will enable a spatial analysis of the
              effect of climate on tree growth by comparing individual stand records with
              twenty U.S. Historical Climate Network (USHCN) meteorological stations
              throughout the region.  This project will contribute broadly to the development
              of dendrochronological techniques.  The long-term mast reconstructions
              developed through this project will allow foresters, ecologists, and
              biogeographers to better understand mast ecology by looking back in time.  The
              project also will add insights into the role of scale in the dynamics of
              natural systems.  The analysis of masting at different scales will enhance
              understandings of the roles of driving mechanisms in mast dynamics.  The mast
              records also can be used by wildlife managers to examine the role of mast in
              past wildlife population fluctuations and by ecologists to examine how extreme
              mast events contribute to oak-establishment pulses.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

