Title       : Workshop on Cognitive Studies of Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a0000573

Award Number: 0000573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Gorman meg3c@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
SES 00-00573 - Michael E. Gorman (University of Virginia)
"Workshop on
              Cognitive Studies of Science & Technology"

A small but growing community of
              scholars is conducting detailed cognitive studies of discoverers and inventors.
              The purpose of this award is to bring a core group of these practitioners
              together -- along with students and younger scholars who are showing interest
              in this area - to survey the "state of the art" and to begin to sketch an
              agenda for future research.

The scholars who will participate in this
              Workshop identify themselves with a wide variety of disciplines, and
              individually belong to a wide range of formal societies; these include the
              Society for Social Studies of Science, the Cognitive Science Society, the
              History of Science Society, the Society for History of Technology, and the
              Philosophy of Science Association. No one belongs to all of these groups, and
              none attends all of the relevant society meetings. As a result, only a small
              portion of those interested in fine-grained cognitive studies of science and
              technology will meet and interact any one of these meetings. In addition, this
              disciplinary diversity, although intellectually exciting, places an especially
              heavy burden on students and young scholars.  The Workshop is designed to prove
              especially beneficial to this precise group.

No previous Conference or
              Workshop has addressed "Cognitive Studies of Science and Techmology" in
              precisely the manner that this Workshop will.  For example,  a 1990 NSF-funded
              workshop at the University of Minnesota on cognitive models of science focused
              almost entirely on theoretical explanations of scientific cognition. The
              Workshop supported by this award will build on the success of this early
              Workshop but will focus more on scientific discovery than hypothesis testing
              and will include the invention of new technologies as a major focus. The
              Workshop will emphasize the need to apply existing findings to detailed case
              studies of actual cognition. While the earlier Workshop focused on implications
              for philosophy, one goal of this Workshop is to contribute to developing a
              multidisciplinary agenda, consistent with the NSF's emphasis on crosscutting
              programs.

