Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disturbance Interactions in a Rocky Mountain
               Subalpine Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a0000231

Award Number: 0000231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Veblen Thomas.Veblen@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent research has highlighted the importance of natural disturbances in the
              development of many forest ecosystems.  Colorado forests are characterized by
              large-scale disturbances with historical return intervals often shorter than
              the life span of dominant tree species.  Disturbances therefore are an
              important factor in the development of these forests.  Fire and high winds are
              very important forms of disturbance that repeatedly have affected the structure
              and function of Colorado forests.  In 1997 a major windstorm blew down over
              10,000 hectares of forest in and around the Mount Zirkel Wilderness in
              northwestern Colorado, providing a rare research opportunity.  The objectives
              of this study are to investigate the effect of four main factors on
              susceptibility for forest stands to wind disturbance:  (1) a stand's fire
              history; (2) a stand's species composition; (3) a stand's wind disturbance
              history and; (4) a stand's topographic characteristics.  This study will
              combine traditional dendrochronological techniques with analyses employing a
              geographic information system (GIS) to study the interactions between fire and
              wind disturbance regimes in this Colorado subalpine forest.  Data will be
              collected in the field and entered into the GIS for descriptive analysis. 
              These data will be analyzed using multivariate regression and other
              multivariate statistics to relate stand susceptibility to wind damage to these
              four categories of environmental factors.  This study will quantify the roles
              of fire and large-scale blowdowns in subalpine forests and lend insight into
              how interactions among different disturbances determine forest structure,
              composition, and health.  These insights will allow management of forests to be
              within the limits that result from natural disturbances.  The effects of
              large-scale blowdowns on forest ecosystems may be especially important to
              understand since global climate change may increase the frequency and intensity
              of catastrophic winds.  This research therefore will guide management decisions
              of these forests by not only yielding important spatial information about
              disturbances in subalpine forests but also by addressing the largely unanswered
              question of how a site's previous disturbance history affects its response to
              future disturbances.  Geographic information systems provide new opportunities
              for the spatial analysis of ecosystem processes. This research will combine
              GIS-based analyses with well-established dendrochronological procedures that
              have been used for temporal analysis of forest dynamics.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

