Title       : International Research Fellow Award: Novel Investigation of Individual Domain
               Switching in Ferroelectric Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a0000481

Award Number: 0000481
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65056              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan D. Huey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : B,Huey
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,1253,5946,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0000481
Huey
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Bryan D. Huey with support for
              twelve months to work with Drs. G. Andrew D. Briggs and Oleg V. Kolosov at
              Oxford University.  This project is co-funded by NSF's Directorate for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences' Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. 
              The project is entitled "Novel Investigation of Individual Domain Switching in
              Ferroelectric Thin Films."
The first of three objectives is (as the title
              indicates) the development of a novel technique for the study of individual
              ferroelectric domain switching, with the only known simultaneous resolution at
              nanometer and nanosecond scales.  Second, the switching response of individual
              domains will be characterized from milliseconds to nanoseconds, as a function
              of position.  Third, the minimum separation between individually addressed
              domains will be determined to ensure orientation stability as a function of
              switching speed.  This research will be the only known direct study of
              individual domain switching at technologically relevant time scales.
Andrew
              Briggs has extensive background in ultrasonic and scanning probe measurements
              and theory.  Oleg Kolosov jointly invented Ultrasonic Force Microscopy (UFM)
              and therefore has considerable experience with UFM development and application.
               He previously performed pioneering research into ferroelectric domain
              manipulation.

