Title       : Effects of Overseas Remittances on Small Vietnamese Rice Farming Households
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0000479

Award Number: 0000479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Murray A. Webster, Jr.                  
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8374               (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. McMichael   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Graw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project studies effects of remittances by distant faily members on
              household and community structures in Vietnam.  Recipient and non-recipient
              households are compared in terms of family hierarchies and community political
              power relations.  In addition, results are compared to a second country, the
              Philippines, with a different historical background.

     Three kinds of
              analyses will be conducted.  The first stage is to analyze existing data on
              income, education, and changes in agriculture to test some ideas on effects of
              remittances.  The second is factor analysis of those data to uncover patterns
              involving remittances, household economic patterns, demographic factors, and
              the local economies.  The third set of analyses will come from semi-structured
              interviews conducted in recipient and non-recipient households, to explore
              effects of the income on daily life patterns such as power relations within the
              family.

     This research builds on other work by the PI's on remittances,
              and will explore both established and novel patterns.  It is the first such
              study conducted within Vietnam, a country in which traditional agriculture is
              rapidly modernizing and also being supplanted by industrial production. 
              Comparisons with the Philippines will permit controlling for other factors that
              otherwise might lead to conclusions from spurious correlations within a single
              country.  The value of this work is to improve theoretical understanding of
              rural change and economic development.
