Title       : SGER: Sequence Stratigraphic Architecture of a Middle Orodovician Carbon Isotope
               Excursion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a0000741

Award Number: 0000741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Philpotts                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30469              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Ludvigson gregory-ludvigson@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Witzke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis A. Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott J. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Sequence Stratigraphic Architecture of a Middle Ordovician Carbon Isotope
              Excursion

Gregory Ludvigson

EAR- 0000741

A late Middle Ordovician (453
              million year-old) shift in the stable carbon isotopic ratios (13C/12C) of
              sedimentary carbonate rock strata in the mid-continent United States has now
              been identified in time-equivalent rocks in Pennsylvania and Estonia.  Recent
              research results suggest that expression of this geochemical event was global
              in extent, and recorded a short-term decrease in the concentration of
              atmospheric CO2.  This event is related to an increase in the rate of burial of
              marine organic matter that resulted from short-term paleoceanographic changes. 
              Published depositional interpretations of the rock strata in which the carbon
              isotope shift was originally discovered in Iowa suggest that this time interval
              was characterized by non-deposition in more offshore settings over much of the
              eastern United States.  However, this idea has never actually been tested
              regionally with carbon isotope profiles of rock stratigraphic sections.  New
              studies of time-equivalent nearshore green calcareous shales in northwest Iowa
              show that the carbon isotope shift is also present in these rock strata, and
              suggest that this geochemical event might have applications for tracing this
              particular interval of geologic time across geographic boundaries separating
              major sedimentary rock types.
The aims of this project are to: 1) develop
              stratigraphic profiles of the 13C/12C ratios of the mineral calcite (CaCO3) in
              the Decorah Formation and overlying/underlying rock strata from six drillcores
              along a transect perpendicular to the ancient Ordovician shoreline, extending
              from southeast Minnesota through eastern Iowa into central Illinois; 2) develop
              matching stratigraphic profiles measuring the amount of organic carbon
              contained in these rocks; and 3) develop profiles of the 13C/12C ratios of
              organic matter in a selected subset of those drillcores.  The larger scientific
              goals of the project are to test the idea that the carbon isotope excursion
              interval was characterized by non-deposition in much of the eastern United
              States, and to further test ideas on the causes of the excursion
              event.


The aims of this project are to: 1) develop stratigraphic profiles
              of the 13C/12C ratios of the mineral calcite (CaCO3) in the Decorah Formation
              and overlying/underlying rock strata from six drillcores along a transect
              perpendicular to the ancient Ordovician shoreline, extending from southeast
              Minnesota through eastern Iowa into central Illinois; 2) develop matching
              stratigraphic profiles measuring the amount of organic carbon contained in
              these rocks; and 3) develop profiles of the 13C/12C ratios of organic matter in
              a selected subset of those drillcores.  The larger scientific goals of the
              project are to test the idea that the carbon isotope excursion interval was
              characterized by non-deposition in much of the eastern United States, and to
              further test ideas on the causes of the excursion event.


