Title       : Promoting Applications of R&D to Improve State-level Decision-making for
               Systemic Reform, Teacher Improvement and Uses of Advanced Technologies.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a0000509

Award Number: 0000509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur D. Sheekey arthurs@ccsso.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John MacDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Council Chief St Sch Off
	      One Massachusetts Ave., NW
	      Washington, DC  20001143    202/408-5505

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The State Leadership Center (SLC) is proposing a collaborative venture with the
              National Science Foundation (NSF) in an effort to foster the use of research
              and to support state policies and programs aiming to advance systemic
              educational reform and improvement.  Working with a team of state educational
              technology directors and a team of highly-qualified researchers, the SLC will
              prepare five commissioned papers on various aspects on what is known about
              preparing teachers to use modern telecommunications technologies for achieving
              standards-based educational reform.  The authors of these papers will have the
              opportunity to discuss their findings in panel discussions during the State
              Educational Technology Leadership Conference in Washington, DC in January. 
              Following the conference, the papers will be published along with an overview
              and distributed widely to state educational policymakers and program
              administrators.   

The SLC presently works will all states involved in the
              processes of changing and upgrading performance standards for teachers.  Recent
              reports from states indicate that virtually all states are attempting to
              broaden and deepen the disciplinary and pedagogical knowledge of teachers,
              improving their ability to deliver more challenging and difficult courses of
              instruction, particularly, courses in science, mathematics, and technology that
              are available to all students.  Recent reviews of the states' five-year plans
              [developed in response to the Goals 2000 and Technology Literacy Challenge Fund
              requirements] attest to the fact that states recognize the integration of
              technology as a critical element for achieving higher performance standards. 
              However, state officials need better and research-based information on what is
              being learned about effective statewide practices and investment strategies. 
              State policymakers want to know what legislative mandates, regulatory
              requirements and administrative directives are most likely to stimulate
              institutional reform and renewal.  As advanced telecommunications
              infrastructures emerge and as virtually all schools and classrooms are "wired,"
              state officials increasingly are directing their attention to human resource
              issues.       

By concentrating on policies and programs relating to
              teachers, the SLC is responding to one of the most pressing concerns of states:
              ensuring the quality of the next generation of classroom teachers.  This
              initiative will help state officials to learn and share information on how a
              state, region  or school system can develop collaborative and constructive
              relationships with institutions of higher education or other partners to ensure
              that teachers will operate effectively in new and different learning
              environments.  The researchers involved in this project are expected to
              analyze, review and report on the information needs of state education
              policymakers and administrators, thereby, helping the SLC in providing states
              with technical assistance. The researchers are also expected to provide NSF and
              other agencies supporting education-related with recommendations for expanding
              the application of research for advancing and sustaining statewide systemic
              educational reforms.    

The proposed research papers will be reviewed and
              discussed during the national conference of state officials in January 1999 and
              subsequent in a forum arranged by  NSF and SLC.  The purposes of the two
              meetings are: to help states in aligning new teacher technology standards with
              new content and performance standards for students; to help NSF and the SLC in
              determining the information needs of state education officials and the means to
              assure that states benefit from the body of research developed by NSF and other
              agencies supporting education-related R&D. 
 

