Title       : Dissertation: Investigations at an Olmec Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a0000354

Award Number: 0000354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Hirth Kgh2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Kenneth Hirth, Mr. Carl Wendt will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at el
              Bajio, a small Early Formative Olmec settlement which is located in the San
              Lorenzo region of Veracruz, Mexico and dates to ca. 1,500-900 BC.  The Olmec
              are well known both to researchers and non-archaeologists because of the
              monumental art they produced. Basalt boulders many tons in weight were
              transported to large sites and then carved into stylized heads. Because the
              Olmec constitute the earliest complex society in Middle America and provide the
              base from which later Mayan cultures arose, they can shed light on the
              processes which led to the rise of New World civilizations and thus have been
              the focus of considerable archaeological attention. However, as Mr. Wendt
              notes, while major excavation has been conducted at large central Olmec sites,
              very little is known about the broader social and regional context in which
              they were situated and only a very limited understanding of Olmec social,
              political and economic organization has been attained. Mr. Wendt's research
              will help to remedy this situation. 

El Bajio is bisected by an actively
              eroding stream which cuts across the center of the site. While water cuts away
              several meters each year and is rapidly leading to El Bajio's destruction, it
              has also offered a unique opportunity because it is possible to trace features
              of the settlement in the wall of the river bank and to gain insight into the
              spatial organization of the village most of which is buried under several
              meters of sediment. Mr. Wendt will first clean this cut wall and produce a
              horizontal map. This will provide a guide for future excavation. He will also
              conduct a remote survey using both auger holes and magnetometer readings to
              search for buried features. On this basis he will select several houses for
              extensive horizontal excavation. The data thus collected will allow him to
              reconstruct the economic and social organization of the village and determine
              the extent to which it was organized along hierarchical lines. He will
              determine the degree of status differentiation based on variation among
              household contents. He will also compare cultural materials excavated at el
              Bajio to counterparts from a larger regional center and examine the extent to
              which it was integrated into a larger regional network. These "bottom up" data
              will complement those from "top down" excavations at the more important
              centers.

This project is important for several reasons. It will provide data
              of interest to many regional archaeologists. It will shed new light on the rise
              of Middle American civilizations and  contribute to training a promising young
              archaeologist.

