Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Community Boundaries, Environmental
               Gradients, and Disturbance in a Serpentine Soil Ecosystem: The Darlingtonia
               Fens of Southern Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a0000270

Award Number: 0000270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9967               (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith S. Hadley hadley@geog.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1305,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Carnivorous plant fens are rare and diverse plant communities found only on the
              eastern seaboard of the United States and in the serpentine soil ecosystems of
              northern California and southern Oregon.  An important ecological aspect of
              these communities is their boundaries, which exhibit high species abundance,
              diversity, primary productivity, and high variability in the spatial
              characteristics of the fens.  Size and shape of these communities can change
              dramatically from one year to the next in response to an array of environmental
              factors, especially fire and nutrient availability.  The specific qualities of
              these dynamic and complex boundary ecotones are poorly understood, however. 
              This doctoral dissertation research project seeks to determine the nature of
              these vegetation boundaries in the Darlingtonia fens of southern Oregon and to
              explain their dynamics in terms of succession.  The focus of the project will
              be on testing the hypothesis that, over time and in the absence of fire, the
              Darlingtonia fen communities become smaller and less diverse due to an increase
              in availability of nutrients.  Specific research objectives are (1) to
              determine the presence of biogeochemical gradients across the boundaries of the
              communities, (2) to identify the effects of disturbance and soil properties on
              boundary composition and structure, and (3) to examine the historical and
              short-term effects of fire on western fen communities.  Three Darlingtonia
              serpentine soil ecosystems with different burn histories will be used as test
              sites.  The doctoral candidate conducting this study will analyze the
              historical role of fire and fire suppression on the ecotones found in these
              communities; describe the community composition and structure of ecotone
              vegetation; analyze physical and chemical characteristics of the soil and water
              (such as pH, N mineralization, %P, %K, Mg:Ca ratio, and heavy metal
              concentration); and analyze short- and long-term community responses of a
              serpentine soil ecosystem ecotones to fire, which is a common disturbance.  The
              outcomes of this project have both theoretical and management implications. 
              This project will evaluate a successional model for western Darlingtonia fens
              and will provide a conceptual basis for future studies in these and other
              uniquely adapted ecosystems.  The role of fen ecotones, their dynamics, and
              their impacts on diversity need to be identified to ensure effective present
              and future management.  The research also will provide an ecological basis for
              developing management strategies by the U.S. Forest Service and The Nature
              Conservancy by describing community structure and ecosystem dynamics as they
              relate to succession and disturbance.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

