Title       : CSCL '99 Doctoral Consortium and Teacher Participation Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a0000319

Award Number: 0000319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27098              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Schlager Mark.schlager@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry H. Hsi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              TAPPED IN: A Testbed for New Models of On-line Teacher Professional
              Development

investigate the resources, capabilities, and technological
              support that TPD efforts will need to hold professionally valuable on-line
              activities within next-generation virtual environment platforms; (b) develop,
              implement, and evaluate innovative TPD implementation models that integrate
              face-to-face and asynchronous interaction with richly collaborative synchronous
              on-line activities; and (c) identify social, motivational, and technological
              factors that contribute to (or obstruct) the effectiveness, sustainability, and
              scalability of a new concept of on-line TPD community.  The project will
              investigate four categories of issues-Implementation Process, TPD Benefits and
              Outcomes, Community Building, and Technology Use and Satisfaction-using a
              combination of quantitative and qualitative methods.  SECTION A - PROJECT
              SUMMARY

Research on educational applications of Internet technology and
              research on teacher professional development (TPD) each can substantially
              benefit from the experience and expertise of the other.  TPD programs need
              mechanisms for extending their reach that computer networks can provide. 
              Education technology research suggests that virtual communities for TPD and
              socialization can help teachers learn new skills and adopt new approaches that
              will facilitate their transition to reform-based classroom practices.  The
              common ground on which the two disciplines can come together is the opportunity
              to jointly develop effective, scalable on-line TPD models based on the social
              computing affordances of a new generation of Internet technologies.

Many
              K-12 research and teacher enhancement projects are exploring the intersection
              of TPD and technology by providing email, listservs, and Websites to
              distributed groups of teachers in the context of some pedagogical intervention.
               However, we believe that most current offerings only peripherally reflect
              established notions of successful working communities.  They provide few of the
              tools, communication channels, and contextual supports needed to sustain the
              kinds of cognitive, collaborative, and social interactions that are
              characteristic of successful collaborative work or communities of practice, and
              therefore provide limited insights into how to achieve sustainable and scalable
              on-line TPD communities.  

Education technology researchers need to better
              understand the practices and social structures of teacher professional
              development communities in order to develop appropriate communication channels
              and collaborative tools to support those practices and structures.  For
              example, real-time collaboration and social interaction are central
              characteristics of successful professional development that serve as key
              mechanisms for facilitating learning of new teaching strategies and promoting
              success in adapting to new practices.  However, with the exception of the
              occasional satellite video link-up, chat, or CUSeeMe session, on-line teacher
              support projects have not begun to tap (much less systematically investigate)
              the potential benefits of real-time collaboration through the Internet, leaving
              an incomplete research foundation on which to base the development of on-line
              TPD communities.  As a consequence, efforts by school districts, TPD providers,
              and state and regional projects to establish and sustain on-line TPD
              communities too often result in a disappointing mismatch between capabilities
              that are expedient to implement and the expressed needs and requirements of TPD
              activities.  

The goal of the proposed 3-year project is to establish an
              on-line TPD research testbed to (a) 
The research will help SME&T education
              reform researchers and practitioners better understand and implement
              next-generation Internet technologies and help inform local and state
              policy-makers of the cost efficiencies and benefits of investing in on-line
              professional development.  Participation in such communities will accelerate
              teacher adoption of SME&T education reform efforts by providing wider and more
              equitable access to high-quality TPD opportunities.  Our findings will also
              help NSF achieve its goal of infusing urban, rural, and state systemic
              initiatives with the fruits of NSF research on content and pedagogy by
              providing a familiar and supportive venue for introducing new ideas and
              technologies into a context of ongoing TPD activity.

