Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biogeomorphic Effects of Ligustrum Sinense
               (Chinese Privet) Invasion on the Oconee River Floodplain in North Georgia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2000      
File        : a0000293

Award Number: 0000293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen C. Parker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Invasive species are an important component of human-induced global change. 
              Invasive plants can alter both the structure and composition of native plant
              communities and the disturbance regimes of invaded ecosystems.  Although some
              of the ecological effects of nonindigenous plants invading riparian zones have
              been studied, feedbacks between fluvial disturbance regimes in riparian zones
              and nonindigenous plants invading these habitats are poorly understood.  This
              doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the effects of invasive
              Ligustrum sinense (Chinese privet) on floodplain forest structure and
              composition as well as on rates of floodplain sedimentation in the Oconee River
              watershed of the Georgia Piedmont.  The study will include both a
              landscape-scale analysis of L. sinense spread and subsequent geomorphic changes
              and a local-scale investigation of altered forest composition and structure,
              fluvial landforms, and changes in sedimentation rates associated with invasive
              L. sinense.  The landscape-scale analysis will use aerial photograph
              interpretation to determine the timing of L. sinense invasion and its rate of
              spread.  Attention also will be given to any changes in stream channel
              morphology associated with L. sinense invasion.  The local-scale analyses will
              use sampling transects in two heavily invaded areas and an area with sparse
              density of L sinense to collect vegetation data, soil samples, and
              depth-to-water-table measurements as well as needed data to calculate average
              annual rates of sediment accretion.  Comparisons will be made of vegetation and
              environmental data among sites to identify fluvial landforms and conditions
              associated with successful L. sinense invasion and to determine whether L.
              sinense invasion has been associated with changes in the composition and
              structure of floodplain forests and changes in rates of floodplain
              sedimentation.  This project will improve general understandings of possible
              feedback relationships between flood regimes and vegetation changes caused by
              invasive plants; and it will provide insights into the fate of Piedmont
              floodplain forests invaded by L. sinense in the coming decades.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

