Title       : Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LS-LAMP) Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0000272

Award Number: 0000272
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Ford   (Principal Investigator current)
              Diola Bagayoko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Brd of Regents
	      150 Third Street, Suite 129
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708011302    504/342-4253

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-0000272
Ford

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
              (LS-AMP) is a comprehensive statewide-coordinated program aimed at
              substantially increasing the number and quality of minority students earning
              baccalaureate degrees in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology
              (SMET) areas supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and
              subsequently to increase the number of minority students enrolling and
              succeeding graduate school.  A mediator-aim, for the attainment of the above
              goal, consists of enhancing and institutionalizing, systemic mentoring, student
              research participation, and a reform-imbued instructional infrastructure at
              LS-LAMP institutions, in collaboration with other systemic programs in the
              state, national laboratories, and professional organizations.

LS-LAMP began
              in 1995 with a five-year objective of doubling, by the end of 2000, the number
              of minority SMET students receiving BS degrees from partner institutions (from
              500 to 1,000) and of sending 20% of these graduates to enroll and succeed in
              SMET graduate school programs in Louisiana and elsewhere.  Indicators of the
              attainment of the objectives of Phase I are presented farther below.  By the
              end of the five-year period of Phase II, LS-LAMP proposes not only to maintain
              the gains of Phase I but also to increase the number of high-quality SMET BS
              degree production to 1600 per year while institutionalizing its entire
              operation.  No fewer than 40% of these graduates will successfully pursue SMET
              graduates degrees.  The basic strategies of LS-LAMP are a comprehensive
              collaboration, the statewide replication and expansion of exemplary, systematic
              mentoring and outreach programs, including the Timbuktu Academy and others, and
              institutionalization.  A notable feature of LS-LAMP Phase II resides in the
              coordinated approach to complete institutionalization of our activities that
              are focused on increasing minority participation in SMET.

Southern
              University and A&M College serves as the lead institution for LS-LAMP program
              with the active input and advice of an array of collaborating public and
              private sector entities including the LS-LAMP Governing Board, chaired by the
              Commissioner of Higher Education, Dr. E. Joseph Savoie.  Currently, there are
              eleven (11) Louisiana higher educational institutions and one research
              organization participating in LS-LAMP.  They are Dillard University (DU),
              Grambling State University (GSU), Southern University and A&M College (SUBR),
              Southern University at New Orleans (SUNO), Southern University at Shreveport
              (SU-S), Tulane University (TU), the University of New Orleans (UNO), the
              University of Southwestern Louisiana (USL), and the Louisiana Universities
              Marine Consortium (LUMCON).  The grantee and fiduciary agent for Ls-LAMP is the
              Louisiana Board of Regents.  The Board of Regents, in consultation with the
              lead institution, issue contracts to LS-LAMP partner institutions as per the
              cooperative agreement between the Regents and the National Science Foundation
              (NSF).

