Title       : Dissertation: Mayan Traditions at Piedras Negras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a0000179

Award Number: 0000179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeshi Inomata   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Takeshi Inomata, Mr. Mark Child will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to reconstruct
              prehistoric Mayan ritual practice and examine the potential continuity between
              ancient and post contact periods. While early Spanish manuscripts provide
              extensive descriptions of multiple aspects of Mayan life, it is uncertain to
              what extent these are biased by European preconceptions. According to Spanish
              accounts the Mayan worldview included the hot/cold dichotomy and, supposedly,
              Mayans believed that good health resulted from an appropriate balance of the
              two. Illness, they believed was the result of a preponderance of "cold" and to
              remedy this people entered ritual sweat baths to increase the amount of "hot"
              in their body. As Dr. Child notes, this concept is surprisingly close to the
              European "four humors" belief and there is reason to doubt its prehistoric
              Mayan existence. Through archaeological excavation at the site of Piedras
              Negras in Guatemala Mr. Child will attempt to reconstruct sweat bath
              ritual.

While several examples of sweat baths are known from other Middle
              American sites, Piedras Negras is unique in the number it contains. Eight have
              been identified and excavation to date indicates that their sequential
              construction spans the occupation of this major site. However adjoining rooms
              appear to have been built over a relatively short period of time. Based on his
              prior work at the site, Mr. Child believes it is possible to reconstruct how
              sweat baths were used since they contain a wealth of artifacts including
              carefully crafted obsidian (volcanic glass blades) and pumice stones.
              "Hot/cold" is only one of many dicotomys attributed to the prehistoric Maya and
              through careful mapping, excavation and plotting of excavated remains it should
              be possible to determine where activities and gendered use of the sweatbaths
              were divided along such lines.

This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide data of interest to many Middle Americanist
              archaeologists. It will shed light on the long-term continuity of tradition
              over time and help determine whether specific concepts are primarily historical
              in nature or reflect more basic aspects of the human mind. This award will also
              assist in training a promising young scientist.

