Title       : U.S.-Hungary Theoretical Physics Research: Perturbative Quantum Chromodynamics
               (pQCD) Background in Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0000211

Award Number: 0000211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28440              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Fai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5916,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT 0000211
Fai

This U.S.-Hungary research project between George Fai of
              Kent State University and partners Peter Levai of the Institute for Particle
              and Nuclear Physics and Gabor Papp of Eotvos University, Budapest, will examine
              perturbative quantum chromodynamics (pQCD).  The objective is to expand our
              understanding of large transverse-momentum particle production data from
              hadronic and nuclear collisions in a wide energy range. This project examines
              particle production in nuclear collisions at the Relativistic Heavy Ion
              Collider (RHIC) with the intent of ascertaining the presence of nontrivial
              collective phenomena such as the quark-gluon plasma (QGP). 

Researcher
              efforts will feature theoretical description of observables in such
              relativistic heavy-ion collisions. The U.S.-Hungary team will attempt to
              identify a kinematical window, where the measured photon, lepton and hadron
              data reveal either QGP formation or the appearance of some other exotic state
              of strongly interacting matter.  Plans include the development of a
              phenomenological model based on pQCD to describe the experimental data and to
              determine whether genuine collective effects, e.g. QGP formation, are necessary
              to reproduce the data.  If successful, genuine collective effects revealed by
              the data will further our understanding of strong-interaction physics.  Such
              new knowledge is critical for the progress of high-energy nuclear physics and
              should contribute to astrophysics and cosmology as well.

This project in
              nuclear and particle physics fulfills the program objective of advancing
              scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central
              Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas
              of strong mutual interest and competence.


