Title       : Washington Baltimore Hampton Roads Alliance for Minority Participation
               (WBHR-AMP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0000273

Award Number: 0000273
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Toy Caldwell-Colbert toycc@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don M. Coleman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The expanded Washington Baltimore Hampton Roads Alliance for Minority
              Participation (WBHR-AMP) includes Howard University as the lead institution
              with Hampton University, Morgan State University, the University of the
              District of Columbia, Bowie State University, Norfolk State university and
              Virginia Sate University as partners.  For Phase II, the administration has
              been completely restructured to ensure the involvement at the highest academic
              levels at all of the partner institutions.  In addition, we intend to implement
              strategies that will emphasize retention, recruitment and tutoring throughout
              the undergraduate SEM programs rather than just at the initial year.

	The
              goals and objectives established for the expanded WBHR-AMP in Phase II
              are:

To work closely with staff of existing programs such as EXCEL, HBCU
              initiatives, TRAGG, ONR, McNair Scholarship Program and institution-wide
              counseling and tutorial programs for freshmen/sophomore students in SEM areas
              to ensure that students are receiving good introductory course work and
              individualized counseling to successfully complete majors in SMET fields;

To
              provide junior/senior level students at all of the participating institutions
              an opportunity to integrate research into their SEM curriculum by providing
              academic credit for their underrate research and ensure that they have an
              opportunity to work in a research environment through a semester/summer
              exchange during the academic semester at a level one research university, in
              industry and/or at national or governmental laboratories;

To facilitate the
              transfer of SMET students from community colleges that have articulation
              agreements with institutions within the WBHR Alliance for summer/transfer
              enrichment programs, and ensure their successful completion of B.S. degrees in
              an SMET field;

To provide mentoring workshops to SEM faculty and introduce
              all members to new pedagogy for teaching and mentoring students in SEM field by
              working closely with existing program sand implementing new initiatives;
              and

To prepare prospective SEM graduates for graduate training in SEM fields
              by providing assistance and tutorials for Graduate Record Examinations, senior
              comprehensive examinations and seminars in research methodologies and
              instrumentation.

	The expected impact on SEM students is to graduate
              approximately 1600 B.S. level students per year in the next five years;
              actively recruit and retain at least 200 community college transfer students in
              undergraduate degree programs in SEM fields; and enroll approximately 300 SEM
              students per year in doctoral degree programs in SEM fields.

