Title       : JANE GOODALL PROJECT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0000581

Award Number: 0000581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1432286            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mike Day mday@smm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Pusey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Freda H. Nicholson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerald H. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Museum of MN
	      120 West Kellogg Boulevard
	      Saint Paul, MN  551021208    651/221-4720

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0000581
DAY

The Science Museum of Minnesota is producing a 40-minute large
              format film on the life work of Dr. Jane Goodall.  Much of the film will be
              shot at Goodall's principal research site, Gombe National Park in Tanzania and
              will focus primarily on the chimpanzees she has studied.   While reviewing the
              four decades of Dr. Goodall's research with the chimpanzees, the film also will
              explore the work of Elizabeth Vinson, a young researcher who is continuing Dr.
              Goodall's research.  Vinson is the first person at Gombe to quantify measures
              of individual chip difference in tool using skill and techniques and to examine
              how social dynamics affect the development of this behavior in young chimps. 
              Featuring Vinson's work contributes to the film in a number of ways.  It
              connects Goodall's milestone observation of non-human animal use of tools to a
              real, contemporary and substantive field project.  It also will enable the
              filmmakers to tell the story of a new generation of researcher.  The film and
              the accompanying educational materials will convey substantive science and
              stress the importance of long-term scientific field studies.  

An array of
              educational materials and programs will be created to support and build on the
              learning experience from the film.  These include:

Freestanding kiosk
              exhibits for display at museums that lease the film.  These small exhibits will
              highlight real artifacts and specimens, including chimp tools and field notes
              from Dr. Goodall's work.  Technology at the kiosks will feature video sequences
              of chimp behavior and enable visitors to access the project's online
              activities.

A "Discovering Chimps" website will enable users to meet the
              chimps, take a Gombe virtual tour, learn about Gombe researchers and to find
              related resources - both on and offline.

An educator leadership institute
              will be a help prior to the release of the film to train educators from twenty
              museums how to make the most effective use of the film and outreach
              material.

Women-in-Science classes for children and parents will be designed
              and offered by both the Science Museum of Minnesota and Discovery Place in
              Charlotte, NC.  The design of these classes will be available to other museums
              that lease the film.



