Title       : University System of Maryland Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
               (Phase II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0000295

Award Number: 0000295
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5573600            (Estimated)
Investigator: Freeman Hrabowski Hrabowski@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9133,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Launched in November 1995, the University System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes
              Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) is a comprehensive program that is
              designed to extend and increase the impact of current initiatives to increase
              substantially the quantity and quality of minority and other students receiving
              baccalaureate degrees in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology
              (SMET).  The proposed USM LSAMP, Phase II will continue and expand activities
              begun in Phase I.  It also is expected to increase the number of minority and
              other SMET students earning doctoral degrees and entering SMET careers,
              especially faculty positions.  The following SM institutions to participate as
              full partners in the proposed USM LSAMP, Phase II:  1) The University of
              Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC), 2) University of Maryland, College Park
              (UMCP); and 3) The University of Maryland, Eastern Shore (UMES), a historically
              black institution. Dr. Freeman Hrabowski, III, President of UMBC, will continue
              as the principal investigator of the proposed USM LSAMP, Phase II.  He has
              received national recognition for his leadership in developing innovative
              programs to expand education opportunities for minority SMET students.  Dr.
              Hrabowski received the National Science Foundation's 1994 Education Achievement
              Award for his outstanding commitment and dedication in the education for
              minorities in the fields of science and mathematics, and his latest book,
              Beating the Odds, focuses on the fundamentals that help Black males achieve
              academic excellence.

Also participating in the proposed USM LSAMP, Phase II
              will be the 18 public community colleges in Maryland.  The following community
              colleges are located in close proximity to the participating USM institutions
              and serve as the primary feeders of minority and other SMET transfer students: 
              1) Anne Arundel Community College; 2) Baltimore City Community College; 3)
              Community College of Baltimore County at Catonsville; 4)Chesapeake Community
              College; 5)Howard Community College; 6) Montgomery Community College; 7) Prince
              Georges Community College; and 8)Wor Wic Community College.  During Phase II,
              efforts to increase the number of minority and other SMET students transferring
              to USM LSAMP universities from the remaining 10 community colleges will be
              expanded.

In support of NSF's goal, the primary goal of the proposed USM
              LSAMP, Phase II is the following.

To produce approximately 574 minority SMET
              baccalaureate recipients by the end of the 2000-2001 academic year;
              approximately 648 minority SMET baccalaureate recipients by the end of the
              2001-2002 school year; approximately 722 minority SMET baccalaureate recipients
              by the end of the 2002-2003 academic year; approximately 796 minority SMET
              baccalaureate recipients by the end of the 2003-2004 academic year; and
              approximately 887 minority SMET baccalaureate recipients by the end of the
              2004-2005 academic year

The secondary goals of the proposed USM LSAMP II are
              the following.

To increase the number of minority students entering SMET
              graduate programs.
To increase the number of minority students entering SMET
              careers, especially faculty positions.

Based in evaluations of current and
              previous programs aimed at increasing minority participation in science,
              mathematics, engineering, and technology at the participating USM universities,
              the proposed USM LSAMP, Phase II's design includes the following
              characteristics:.

Strong commitment by institutional leaders to the
              program's success and to its complete institutionalization beginning on January
              6, 2006;
Removal of financial barriers for minority students;
A Summer Bridge
              Component;
An Academic Year Component;
Focus on improving knowledge and
              skills;
Focus on motivation and support;
Focus on monitoring and
              advising;
Focus on academic and social interaction;
Focus on "filter" SMET
              course curricula revision; and
Involvement of feeder community colleges.

