Title       : Putting Human Exploitation of Marine Resources in Temporal and Environmental
               Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a0000895

Award Number: 0000895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126651             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Koch pkoch@earthsci.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane P. Gifford-Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Putting Human Exploitation of Marine Resources in Temporal and Environmental
              Context
By
Paul L. Koch
Diane Gifford-Gonzalez


	Widespread evidence
              exists for intensified resource use by humans in coastal California over the
              past several thousand years.  This includes a shift from inland foraging in the
              early Holocene to use of marine shellfish, fish, mammals in the middle
              Holocene.  Around 1000 B.P., human foraging changed again, shifting away from
              reliance on coastal resources to those of the interior.  Around the same time,
              the northern fur seal, formerly common in central and northern California,
              disappeared from central California archaeological sites, never to reappear in
              aboriginal sites.
	These changes in settlement and subsistence have been
              interpreted by some as the result of resource depression caused by growing
              human populations.  In contrast, researchers working in the Santa Barbara
              region, where there is a well developed record of Holocene variations in
              rainfall, ocean temperature, and upwelling intensity, contend that the late
              Holocene shift was climatically driven.  This argument is part of a broader
              debate that links changes in human ecology in the southwestern U.S. to the
              Medieval Climatic Anomaly.  This argument has recently been extended to explain
              human and marine mammal shifts in central California, but little paleoclimatic
              data at high-temporal resolution exist for this region, or for the region
              farther north, where northern fur seals were harvested into historic
              times.
	The timing of the earlier shift to intensified use of coastal
              resources in the middle Holocene (6000 B.P.) is intriguing as well.  Elsewhere
              on the globe, evidence is mounting for a shift in ocean circulation and global
              climate at this time, perhaps relating to the onset of modern El Nino/La Nina
              climatic cycles.  At present, well-constrained paleoenvironmental data from the
              central and northern California coast are lacking. Thus it is impossible to
              determine if changes in human settlement and resource use are the result of
              climatic forcing.
	In our multidisciplinary project, we will use direct 14C
              AMS dates of archaeological materials to construct a finely-textured temporal
              framework for the study of cultural, paleoecologic, and paleoclimatic changes
              on the central and northern California coast.  We have several goals.  Chemical
              and isotopic variations in mollusk shells will be a key source of information
              on past ocean conditions.  Likewise, isotopic variations in marine mammals can
              reveal migration patterns and trophic dynamics, and how they changed with
              inferred changes in climate.  As a consequence, we will focus our dating
              efforts on these materials.
	We anticipate the following results: 1)
              construction of a time series of mollusk shells from both central and northern
              California that will form the basis of future paleoclimatic research, 2) an
              assessment of whether or not stratigraphic relations at a number of California
              archaeological sites are reliable, or if they have been perturbed by animals
              burrowing and churning, and 3) precise information on the timing of changes in
              the marine mammal fauna and human communities in both regions.  Detailed
              isotopic and faunal analyses will be conducted once we've established a robust
              chronologic framework.


