Title       : Optical Crossbar-based Interconnection Networks for Highly Scalable Parllel
               Computing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0000518

Award Number: 0000518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed Louri louri@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0000518
PI: Ahmed Louri, University of
              Arizona

Optical interconnection technology has the potential to provide
              efficient and adequate solutions to the fundamental communication problems
              facing high-performance scalable parallel systems. For several years, progress
              in inserting optical interconnection technology into computer systems was
              hindered by the relatively high cost of optoelectronic components and devices
              as compared to electronic devices. However, more recently, there have been
              significant developments in optical and optoelectronic devices, and packaging
              technologies, which make optical interconnection technology a viable and
              cost-effective option for building high bandwidth, low latency, and scalable
              interconnection networks.

This research investigates into the application of
              the recent advances in optical interconnection technology to the communication
              problems facing scalable parallel computing systems. The ultimate goal is the
              development and design of high bandwidth, low latency, and high connectivity
              optical interconnection networks that will not only enable parallel computing
              systems to be size scalable but also generation scalable. These networks will
              allow the system to increase in size as well as the ability to use successive,
              faster generations of processors in a cost-effective manner, and with minimal
              redesign.

The approach consists of combining the unique advantages of
              optical systems with architectural innovations into an integrated solution. On
              the architectural side, the proposed research develops crossbar-connected
              networks that can scale to a large number of processors yet still have close to
              constant network diameter, very low node degree, high bisection bandwidth, and
              a reasonable cost. On the technology side, implementation methods that will
              utilize the large bandwidth of wavelength division multiplexing, the inherent
              benefits of low-power, high-speed, and compact size of free-space optics, and
              the flexibility of optical fiber and waveguides will be investigated in order
              to greatly reduce network and remote memory access latencies. Each optical
              interconnection technology (free-space, waveguide, fiber) will be used where it
              is most appropriate.

