Title       : SGER: Guidelines for Computer-Aided-Design of Dynamically Reliable MEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1999  
File        : a0000342

Award Number: 0000342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert B. Grafton                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58055              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Senturia sds@mtl.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4710      DESIGN AUTOMATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, there has been an explosive growth of new process technologies,
              new device concepts, and new markets for integrated sensors and actuators, also
              referred to as micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). This growth has led to
              new challenges for computer-aided-design (CAD) of MEMS, with the ultimate goals
              being accurate, easy-to-use behavioral models that capture all the essential
              behavior, and permit predictable design modifications and optimization. This
              research investigates the lack of design guidelines for reliability with regard
              to dynamic (shock) loading. Such loading can occur either by choice (for
              example, MEMS launched on satellites), or by accidental drops onto hard
              surfaces. There is evidence that the small moveable parts of MEMS devices, such
              as suspended proof masses in accelerometers, experience fracture from dynamic
              loading levels which the devices are expected to withstand based on
              quasi-static loading models. It is hypothesized that the inertia of a packaged
              MEMS, when subject to even modest acceleration, provides a reservoir of kinetic
              energy which can then be transferred to the mechanical elements as acoustic
              waves, and cause fracture due to stress wave loading. This project examines the
              validity of this hypothesis by using numerical analyses to establish expected
              behavior. For confirmation, experimental studies of subjecting Si
              microstructures to stress-wave loading are being made. Modeling procedures to
              anticipate such failures, and by proper design, prevent them are being
              developed.


