Title       : Time Varying Risk, Peso Problem and Asset Pricing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0000615

Award Number: 0000615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137210             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geert Bekaert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The author uses a variety of approaches to examine how an environment in which
              risk premiums vary through time and/or small sample problems (peso problems)
              exist can be used to explain many asset pricing anomalies. Three separate
              projects focussing on financial markets are planned.
The first two projects
              primarily focus on the apparent predictability of (international) asset
              returns.  In one project, joint with Robert Hodrick, the PI will investigate
              whether or not statistical inference problems can account for the
              predictability in exchange rate and bond markets.  To work on the "Expectations
              Hypothesis," they will develop a novel methodology to estimate a statistical
              model imposing the non-linear Expectations Hypothesis null. This method can be
              used to examine alternative, potentially better behaved tests of the
              hypothesis, and eventually lead to improved statistical inference in other
              applications as well.
In a second project, joint with Steve Grenadier, the
              author provides a stochastic valuation model for bond and stock returns that
              integrates three different pricing traditions (term structure factor models,
              present value models, and consumption based asset pricing) in a tractable
              framework. An application of the general model examines the effect of changes
              in dividend growth uncertainty on equity prices, and investigates whether
              time-variation in this uncertainty can generate the asymmetric return
              volatility patterns that are observed in the data.
The third proposed project
              groups a number of studies focussing on regime-switching models, which
              constitute natural models to examine peso problems. Two studies focus on
              interest rate dynamics, including one study attempting to detect whether regime
              switches in interest rates are caused by regimes in (expected) inflation or by
              regimes in real rates. Another project focuses on the joint behavior of
              interest rates and exchange rates in the European Monetary System (EMS).  The
              EMS constitutes a natural laboratory for the study of peso problems because of
              its many speculative crises and accompanying large interest rate and exchange
              rate movements. The author also applies regime switching models to equity
              markets to examine two puzzles in portfolio choice: the under-investment of
              investors in equity markets, and the under-investment in international assets
              -- the home bias. The PI postulates that these may be explained by a fear of
              market crashes, which is particularly acute when investors exhibit
              disappointment aversion. Finally, the author uses a novel structural break
              methodology in studying the market integration process in emerging markets.

