Title       : Precipitation Evolution in Tropical Cyclones After Landfall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0000673

Award Number: 0000673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312597             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Molinari molinari@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lance F. Bosart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Under the U.S. Weather Research Program, several aspects of hurricane prediction
              have been identified as high priority areas of research.  Better understanding
              and prediction of rainfall from hurricanes after they make landfall is one of
              these high priority areas.  The major goal of this research is to understand
              the mechanisms that control the amount and distribution of rainfall in
              hurricanes after landfall.  Specifically, the Principal Investigators will
              examine the total rain volume, the areal coverage of heavy rainfall, the
              symmetry of rainfall with respect to the track, and the type of rainfall
              (convective versus nonconvective).  The presence or absence of trough
              interactions with the hurricane and extratropical transition of the hurricane
              are significant factors in the evolution of precipitation after landfall and
              these interactions will be included in the study.

Two major methodological
              approaches will be employed: a climatological study of total rainfall in a
              large number of hurricanes in order to establish the range of possible
              behavior; and case studies of extreme events.  Rainfall estimates will be made
              using existing raingauge data for the climatological study and operational
              Doppler radar data (WSR-88D) for the case studies.  National Lightning
              Detection Data will be used to provide additional information about the nature
              of the precipitation.

Successful completion of this research will lead to
              better understanding of precipitation processes within tropical cyclones, which
              eventually will result in better forecasts of post landfall flooding.

