Title       : Parameterized Computation and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0000206

Award Number: 0000206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167849             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianer Chen chen@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The definitions of P and NP are based on polynomial time computations.  It has
              been a long-time concern whether one should call a problem with computational
              complexity Q (n100) 'tractable".  A commonly accepted explanation is that in
              practice most problems in P in fact can be solved in time O(n3) or better. 
              However, recent research has shown that some very important practical problems
              seem to require algorithms whose complexity is bounded only by very high degree
              polynomials.  

On the other hand, there are many NP-hard problems, described
              in a parameterized version, for which it is desired to construct the precise
              solutions deterministically, while a wide range of applications is only
              interested in solving these problems with a small or moderate value for the
              parameters.  The point is how to take advantage of this fact and develop most
              efficient algorithms for these intractable problems in practice.

The
              research studies the refinement of the classification of tractability and
              intractability, based on the recently developed theory of parameterized
              complexity, with the aim of identifying "impractical" polynomial time
              algorithms and "efficient" exponential time algorithms for practical problems. 
              The following specific issues in algorithm theory are
              investigated:

developing efficient parameterized algorithms for intractable
              problems.  This includes two steps:  identifying fixed-parameter tractable
              problems, and development of most efficient parameterized algorithms for the
              problems.

identifying "hard" polynomial time solvable problems, based on the
              framework of the W[1]-hardness.  Problems from other practice will also be
              studied based on this framework.

investigating the relationship between
              parameterized complexity and approximability.  Parameterized complexity
              suggests new techniques for proving non-approximability for certain
              optimization problems that may otherwise be not easy or even impossible based
              on classical complexity theory.


