Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Small-Scale, Subsistence Fishing as a Potential
               Threat to Biodiversity in an African Great Lake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a0000265

Award Number: 0000265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9997               (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Carney carney@geog.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The East African Great Lakes are home to some of the most diverse animal
              communities on the Earth, and they hold immense importance as sources of
              protein and employment in one of the world's poorest regions.  Lake Malawi is
              home to more species of fish than any other lake in the world.  Of the more
              than 500 species in the lake, 95 percent are found nowhere else.  The Malawian
              cichlids are one of the best examples known of a vertebrate species flock, a
              closely related grouping of species which radiated over a very short
              evolutionary time period.  One of the world's least-developed nations, Malawi,
              controls more than half the shoreline of Lake Malawi.  Fishing is an important
              source of food, providing about 75 three-quarters of the animal protein
              consumed in Malawi, with almost a quarter million people involved in fishing or
              related processing and trading activities.  Threats to the fish community in
              Lake Malawi include sedimentation due to land degradation, the introduction of
              exotic species, and overfishing.  Plans for conservation of biodiversity in
              Lake Malawi must take into account the needs of the surrounding human
              communities.  This doctoral dissertation research project will examine efforts
              at participatory management within the artisanal fishing sector, which uses
              small-scale equipment, which uses some or all of the catch for subsistence, and
              which trades through local market-distribution networks.  The project will
              emphasize the collection of sociological and fisheries data.  Interviews and
              discussions during group meetings with members of various stakeholder groups in
              fishing communities around the lake will provide information about the roles of
              fishing in the local village economy, change in fish stocks and fishing
              methods, and traditional methods of fisheries regulation.  The project also
              will include an assessment of community perceptions of the status of the
              fishery and of the capacity for community management of aquatic resources. 
              Fishing grounds used by each village will be mapped for each gear type or
              fishing method.  A detailed analysis of catch composition will be conducted in
              order to describe which species are being caught where, when, and by which
              gear.  A focused comparison of fish habitats and distributions will be
              undertaken both at a publicly accessible beach and at a nearby privately owned
              beach where fishing effort is much lower.  This project will provide valuable
              new insights into the geography of catch composition and other aspects of
              fishing activity, thereby providing an analysis of the relationship between the
              use of fish resources and biodiversity.  This will enhance both fundamental
              understandings and provide valuable new insights for those seeking to develop
              sustainable fisheries-management strategies.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

