Title       : The Elegant Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a0000610

Award Number: 0000610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $838163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. McGhee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula S. Apsell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0000610
MCGHEE

WGBH is producing a three-hour television series about the
              scientific quest for a unified set of laws governing the universe.  The
              programs, to be broadcast as part of the on-going NOVA series, will place
              special emphasis on the new development in physics known as string theory. 
              Inspired by Columbia University physicist Brian Greene's best-selling book of
              the same name, "The Elegant Universe" will explore the ways in which our
              understanding of matter and forces, space and time have shifted over the years,
              most recently with the emergence of string theory in the 1980s and its
              resurgence in the last five years.  Greene will play a prominent role in the
              series, both on camera and as a consultant helping the producers shape the
              programs.

The series, planned for broadcast in the fall of 2002, will
              communicate critical scientific concepts through filmed experiments, carefully
              crafted explanations, and the latest in computer animation.  Interviews with
              scientists and historians, re-creations of key breakthroughs in the history of
              science, and sequences featuring physicists working on today's most pressing
              problems will allow viewers to share in the excitement of scientific discovery.
               

Outreach material will be developed for the public and for teachers.  NOVA
              Online will produce a rich companion Web site to allow viewers whose interest
              is piqued by the series to enhance their learning in a number of ways,
              including interactive animations of famous experiments and essays that go
              deeper into subjects than the programs could.


