Title       : Hydrologic Change in Mountainous Tropical Watersheds: The Roles of Roads and
               Deforested Land Surfaces in Altering Watershed Function and Accelerating Soil
               Erosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0000546

Award Number: 0000546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239743             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Giambelluca thomas@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan D. Ziegler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ross A. Sutherland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1317,1325,5927,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0000546
Giambelluca


The expansion of rural road networks and the
              intensification of cultivation on steeply sloped lands contributes
              significantly to hydrologic change and sedimentation in major river systems of
              mainland southeast Asia.  Domestic and international conservation projects
              conducted in highland watersheds of this region have historically focused on
              the agricultural practices of ethnic minority (hill tribe) groups.  While
              improper cultivation techniques on steep slopes are certainly responsible for
              serious downstream effects in some areas, expansion of the rural road network
              may be equally or more important.  To advance scientific understanding of the
              impacts of roads on regional hydrology, they must be studied at the watershed
              scale, within the context of other hydrologically important land-cover changes.
               This is true for all regions of the world, temperate or frigid.

The
              objective of the proposed study is to investigate the roles of, and the
              interaction between, roads and nonroad land surfaces in altering watershed
              functions and accelerating soil erosion in areas undergoing tropical
              deforestation.  We propose to (1) validate the Distributed
              Hydrology-Soil-Vegetation Model (DHSVM) with field data collected during a
              prior NSF-supported project investigating road impacts in the 93.7-ha. Pang
              Khum Experiment Watershed (PKEW) in northern Thailand, (2) continue field
              measurement of soil-vegetation-atmosphere-transfer (SVAT) processes and
              road-related hydrologic/erosion variables in PKEW, (3) investigate the
              frequency of runoff generation on roads by subsurface flow processes (i.e.,
              interception of subsurface flow by the road prism), and (4) identify indices
              that will allow us to extend our methodologies to larger catchments.   To study
              the hydrologic and sediment fluxes measured in PKEW, we will couple sediment
              detachment and routing equations with equations describing surface flow in
              DHSVM.  The adapted model will help us to determine the sources of overland
              flow and transported sediment, and to study where these fluxes are
              redistributed with PKEW, or transported from the basin.  We will finally use
              the model to quantify watershed impacts resulting from the emergence of roads
              and the expansion of agriculture on steeply sloping lands within PKEW over the
              last 50 years.

The project unites two groups of researchers who have been
              studying road-related impacts:  one group has been working in the tropics; the
              other in the U.S. Pacific northwest.   Although set in Thailand, this research
              will directly contribute to the study of road-related impacts in all
              mountainous areas of the United States undergoing land conversion.

