Title       : The Human Blueprint
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0000611

Award Number: 0000611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $552785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula S. Apsell paula apsell@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0000611
APSELL

WGBH is producing a two-hour NOVA special that will examine
              the scientific undertaking to decipher all three billion letters of the human
              genetic code.  The program will take viewers inside the labs where this effort
              is going on and will examine the difficult decisions that are arising from our
              growing understanding of the human genome.  The central narrative thread in
              "The Human Blueprint" is the extraordinary race now going on between two teams
              striving to be the first to read, or "sequence," the human genome.  On one side
              is the official Human Genome Project, funded by the federal government and
              coordinated by the National Human Genome Research Institute; on the other side
              is private industry, in the form of a well-financed company run by a biologist
              with a long track record of finding quicker, cheaper ways to plumb the secrets
              of the genetic code.  To support the extended use of the series, "The Human
              Blueprint"  will be featured in the NOVA teachers guide and will be the subject
              of an enhanced Web sit at NOVA Online.

The Executive Producer for the
              programs will be Paula Apsell, Executive Producer for NOVA, and the series will
              be produced by Elizabeth Arledge who has produced science programming for WGBH,
              WNET and CBS News.  Dr. Joseph Levine will serve as science consultant to "The
              Human Blueprint" and will work with the producer to plan program research,
              suggest sequence possibilities, review program treatments and critique the film
              at early stages.  Dr. Levine has a Ph.D. in Biology from Harvard University and
              served as the science editor for the WGBH series "The Secret of Life." 
              Advisors to the series include:  

W. French Anderson, Professor of
              Biochemistry and Pediatrics and the Director of Gene Therapy Laboratories at
              the University of Southern California School of Medicine

David Baltimore,
              President of the California Institute of Technology and Chairman of the NIH
              AIDS Vaccine Research Committee 

Paul Berg, Director of the Beckman Center
              for Molecular and Genetic Research at Stanford University

Robin Blatt,
              Founder of the Genetic Resource at the Massachusetts Health Research
              Institute

David Blumenthal, Director of the Institute for Health Policy and
              Professor of Medicine and Health Care Policy at Harvard Medical School and
              Massachusetts General Hospital

Robert Cook-Deegan, Director of the National
              Cancer Policy Board, Institute of Medicine and the Commission on Life Sciences
              of the National Academy of Sciences

Ronald G. Crystal, Director of the Gene
              Therapy Core facility at Cornell University Medical College

Georgia M.
              Dunston, Professor of Microbiology and Acting Director of the National Human
              Genome Center at Howard University

Philip R. Reilly, Executive Director of
              the Shriver Center for Mental Retardation

Lydia Villa-Komaroff, Vice
              President of Research and Professor of Neurology at Northwestern University


