Title       : Rigidity and Flexibility of Social Systems-Further Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0000649

Award Number: 0000649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28659              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Harrington joe.harrington@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              How do hierarchical systems, such as governments and corporations, respond to
              change? Is there a tendency for such systems to become unresponsive to their
              envi-ronment? What are the factors determining the rigidity of such systems? To
              address these questions, this project represents a social system as a set of
              ordered levels. At each level is a population of agents and associated with an
              agent is a behavioral rule. In each period, agents observe the realization of a
              stochastic environment and choose an ac-tion according to their rule. Two
              dynamics determine the rules deployed by agents in the system. First, a
              selection (or promotion) dynamic determines which agents advance to higher
              levels in the hierarchy and thus affects the population mix of rules at high
              levels. Second, a social learning dynamic determines the rules that agents
              adopt when they enter the system. New agents seek to imitate high-ranking (that
              is, successful) agents by trying to infer the rule they used from their
              historical record. These two dynamics describe a feedback system defined on the
              space of behavioral rules: the history of high-ranking agents determines the
              rules adopted by new agents, selection then operates on this cohort to generate
              a new set of high-ranking agents who influences the next generation of new
              agents. Analysis conducted under NSF grant 9708910 characterized the set of
              dynamically stable outcomes and explored their dependence on features of the
              internal structure (for example, the number of levels in the hierarchy) and the
              external structure (for example, the volatility of the environment). 
              Initially, the space of behavioral rules over which evolution took place
              included rules that differed in their responsiveness to the environment. In the
              current project, the space is redefined to allow rules to differ in what they
              are responsive to. One rule - the individual learning rule - has an agent
              choose that action which is best based upon their own (noisy) signal of the
              environment. A second rule - the social learning rule - has an agent choose
              that action that most agents chose in the previous period. Organizational
              inertia might then emerge when most agents use a social learning rule.

A
              second modification of previous work is to endogenize what it means to "perform
              well." In the context of a corporation, agents do not advance based on some
              fixed and exogenous notion of performance (such as profit) but rather on the
              subjective evaluation of higher-ranking agents. If, depending on their traits,
              different agents interpret performance in different ways then performance is
              itself endogenous as the traits of higher-level agents are the product of past
              selection. This research embodies this feature of the selection process to
              provide a richer description of dynamics within a hierarchical society.

