Title       : Quantitative Modeling of Channelized Flow Within a Karst Stream
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0000725

Award Number: 0000725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen E. Wohl ellenw@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0000725
Wohl

Physical and chemical erosion processes are rarely considered
              in tandem.  Physical erosion processes have received rigorous, quantitative
              treatment in surface channels where on-going research has begun to integrate
              studies of reach-scale processes with landscape evolution and morphology. 
              Chemical erosion processes have received considerable attention in karst
              terrains, but have yet to be fully integrated into studies of surface channels.
               Combining studies of physical and chemical erosion is desirable and is most
              needed in terrains where both may be of equal importance.  The latter include
              fluviokarst where streamflow processes and landscape evolution are intimately
              linked to fluvial and karst processes.  Using techniques initially developed
              for surface channels, open channel flow will be examined in an internally
              drained fluviokarst basin, Buckeye Creek, in southern West Virginia.  Closed
              conduit flow will be examined using a quantitative model developed expressly
              for this project.  Quantitative modeling of surface and subsurface flood flows
              will provide direct insight into the mechanisms by which fluviokarst streams
              erode while simultaneously transporting insoluble sediment derived from
              resistant strata in the headwaters of the basin.  The latter processes must
              diverge from those in typical surface streams due to intermittent closed
              conduit flow in the cave(s) and backflooding upstream of cave entrances and
              passage constrictions.  Although backflooding has the effect of increasing head
              and possibly flow velocities within constrictions, flow velocities and shear
              stress must decline upstream, with the result being a relative decrease in
              physical erosion and sediment transport above some threshold.  The manner by
              which constrictions and their affected reaches are coupled is of direct
              relevance to mixed alluvial-bedrock streams.  In both cases, the manner by
              which reaches with relatively high and low stream powers form continuous
              profiles despite dramatic differences in transport processes and capabilities
              is unknown and will be studied by quantifying flow properties in each type of
              stream segement.  Simultaneously, the relative roles of chemical and physical
              erosion in shaping reach-scale and basin-scale stream morphologies and profiles
              will be addressed by numerical estimation of the ability of the surface and
              cave streams to abrade, pluck, and quarry, by direct measurement of sediment
              transport rates, and by directs measurement of solute transport in the cave
              stream.

