Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Modeling the Impacts of Fire and Post-Fire
               Succession on Long-Term Streamflow Dynamics in Southern California Chaparral
               Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a0000233

Award Number: 0000233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen S. Hope   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9196,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Relatively little scientific attention has been given to the hydrologic impact
              of vegetation removal and regrowth following fires in Mediterranean-type
              shrublands, such as California chaparral.  The few studies that have addressed
              this problem have been carried out over short periods of time in small
              experimental watersheds that were completely, or nearly completely, burned. 
              Fires in large chaparral watersheds rarely burn the entire watershed,however,
              and it is not known how variations in fire size and location affect streamflow
              volumes and their seasonal variations.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project therefore will use a physically based, spatially explicit computer
              model to simulate streamflow in two large chaparral watersheds in southern
              California.  Multiple model runs with randomly generated fires that vary in
              size and location will be used to investigate the impacts of fire and
              vegetation regrowth on long-term streamflow dynamics in these watersheds. 
              Satellite data collected over the past fifteen years will be analyzed to
              determine vegetation regrowth characteristics for the hydrologic model.  This
              project will contribute toward reliable modeling of streamflow, which is
              necessary for the sound management of watersheds and for water resources
              planning, water quality prediction, flood mitigation, and ecosystem
              preservation.  Fires produce the most dramatic and repeated transformation of
              landscape conditions in chaparral watersheds and watersheds in other
              Mediterranean-type ecosystems.  Approximately six percent of the Earth's
              terrestrial surface is covered by shrublands similar to chaparral vegetation. 
              The results of this project therefore will have hydrologic relevance beyond
              watersheds in southern California and will be significant for research and
              watershed management in similar ecosystems.  The study also will shed light on
              the hydrologic response of watersheds to changes in fire regimes that may
              accompany hypothesized global warming.  Because this project employs novel
              procedures to obtain model inputs from remotely sensed data, the hydrologic
              modeling approach and findings will have relevance to users of other physically
              based, spatially distributed models.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

