Title       : RUI: Energies of Mineral and Rock Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a0000523

Award Number: 0000523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy L. Hovis hovisguy@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hovis
EAR-0000523

The Solution Calorimetry Laboratory at Lafayette College
              engages in the investigation of the thermodynamic properties and behavior of
              geologically significant materials. During the grant period the energetics of
              glasses/liquids will be investigated in simple systems in order to relate
              established immiscibility to enthalpies of mixing and to develop
              configurational entropy models that will test the validity of Adams-Gibbs
              models developed from viscosity data. Zeolites will be the first amorphized
              silicates to be investigated calorimetrically, the primary objects of the study
              being to understand fundamental nature of these materials, their differences
              from thermally amorphized analogs, and the behavior of "water" in amorphous
              materials. An ongoing study of felsic water-bearing magmatic systems will be
              brought to conclusion, yielding information on the thermal budgets of hydrous
              magmas and quantifying the energetics of speciation in the context of
              spectroscopic data. Mixing energies will be measured for K-Rb and other
              feldspar systems in the hope of developing generalized mixing models.
              Measurement of enthalpies associated with alkali-water-vacancy coupled
              substitution will be concluded for the analcime - pollucite and analcime -
              Rb-leucite systems. The critical temperature of high-Si nepheline - kalsilite
              will be determined in an effort to connect K-Na mixing properties to phase
              behavior. A quantitative study of energies associated with microstructures in
              halide minerals will be initiated. A number of these projects will involve
              collaborative efforts with scientists in the United States, the United Kingdom,
              France, and Germany. Several projects, including one on the thermal expansion
              of nepheline - kalsilite minerals, have been developed specifically for
              undergraduate participation. These projects will teach students about the
              methods, philosophy, and importance of scientific research.

