Title       : Parallel Algebraic Recursive Multilevel Solvers: Advances in Scalable and Robust
               High Performance Linear System Solution Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0000443

Award Number: 0000443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469838             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yousef Saad saad@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Masha Sosonkina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Parallel iterative methods are leading candidates for solving large-scale
              engineering and scientific problems, which usually appear as sparse linear
              systems. However, their robustness and overall efficiency remain mixed and
              problem-specific. These characteristics are closely tied to the preconditioners
              used as inputs to these methods. Preconditioners for general sparse linear
              systems remain by far the biggest stumbling block to obtaining good performance
              for iterative solution methods on high-performance computers in engineering and
              scientific applications. Accordingly, the main thrust of this project is to
              develop a class of preconditioning techniques based on the researchers'
              Algebraic Recursive Multilevel Solver (ARMS) framework. The researchers will
              develop the new methods and test them on realistic problems arising from the
              researchers' collaborations.

The project will develop a class of parallel
              multi-level ILU-type preconditioning techniques using  ARMS methods. Recursive
              multi-level ILU methods allow the unification of many standard iterative
              solvers into a single generic code. Their multi-level nature allows them to
              bridge the gap between the excellent problem-specifc performance of multigrid
              methods and the general-purpose nature of preconditioned Krylov solvers. The
              project will examine performance and scalability for classes of existing and
              new procedures thus obtained, including Schwartz procedures, Schur complement
              methods, direct solvers, and multilevel techniques. It will also conduct
              extensive realistic tests. In summary, this work promises advances in three
              important components of developing parallel solution methods: effective and
              scalable algorithms, use of effective computer science tools and data
              structures, and testing and validation.

