Title       : SGER: Surface Deposition and Vertical Transport of Ozone During the Polar
               Sunrise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a0000173

Award Number: 0000173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91394              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose D. Fuentes jf6s@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Fuentes
The Principal Investigator will conduct research in the Arctic
              atmospheric boundary layer to gain a better understanding on the processes
              leading to ozone depletion.  The project will be part ol'the Polar Sunrise
              Experiment-2000 (PSE2000) with three main objectives: To investigate and
              quatitfy the ozone depletion due to surface (snowpack) bases processes. To
              define the vertical transport of ozone from the stable marine boundary layer to
              the underlying snowpack. To specify the ocean to atmosphere exchange of lieat,
              water vapor and after ozone depletion episodes.

               
During
              February - May 2000, a series of surface- and airborne-based measurements will
              be undertaken at two experimental sites, at Alert and Williams Island. The
              Principal Investigator will attempt for the first time to determine in situ
              ozone fluxes to the snowpack using the eddy covariance and will test the
              hypothesis that accumulation of ozone reactive materials on and or inside the
              snowpack contribute to boundary layer ozone destruction during the Polar
              sunrise. He surmises that processes occurring within the snowpack may explain
              important missing details in ozone depletion mechanisms.  To verify if the
              snowpack constitutes a sink for ozone, detailed measurements will be made in
              the interstitial air within the snowpack.  Gas-phase measurements at five
              depths, from the surface to 100-150 cm, will be achieved through air sampling
              with chamber systems, coupled with highly sensitive ozone analyzers.  During
              spring Arctic ozone depletion episodes, the atmospheric column extending from
              the surface to about 300 meters (m) can be devoid of ozone.  Above the
              300-meter level, the height of the capping inversion of the mixed layer, ozone
              mixing ratios can exceed 40 ppbv.  This ozone reservoir can serve as a source
              of surface ozone via downward transport by turbulent eddies.  Because the
              Arctic troposphere is dark for several months, the atmospheric boundary layer
              is stable and stratified, thus preventing atmospheric vertical mixing. 
              Therefore, photochnmically reactive chemical species may accumulate in the
              boundary layer and become available to partake in reactions when sunlight
              resumes.  He will investigate the role of ocean to atmosphere exchange of
              energy and momentum on the chemical composition of the boundary layer by
              defining the individual components of the energy balance for the camp surface. 
              The data set will be used in the development and validation of numerical
              modeling systems to understand the atmosphere-ocean energy exchange capacity at
              the ice-camp site, thereby characterizing the availability of activation energy
              for local chemical reactions.




