Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Non-Governmental Organizations, Communities, and
               Environmental Protection in the American West
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a0000278

Award Number: 0000278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Peluso npeluso@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sally K. Fairfax  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For decades, many environmental groups in the United States have focused on
              their efforts on what they perceived as the need to protect the public lands in
              the West from the people who live and work in the West.  In recent years,
              however, an emerging set of environmental organizations in the western U.S. has
              challenged this perspective.  These new non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
              support ideas of community conservation and participatory development long
              favored by international environmental organizations.  These organizations
              attempt to build political alliances between rural businesses and environmental
              interests by framing the protection of nature as a legitimate economic concern
              and by decoupling the opposition between environmental protection and
              productive activity.  The complex and dynamic relationship between environment
              and economy is particularly salient as the "Old West" of extractive industry
              increasingly is confronted by a "New West" that emphasizes tourism.  In the
              wake of the western "jobs versus environment" debate of the early 1990s, these
              regional NGOs increasingly are reshaping western understandings of nature and
              work and the relationship between the two.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project will explore how the categories of work and nature are negotiated and
              employed in the everyday practices of the staff of these new NGOs and the
              residents of the rural communities where their projects are located.  This
              project will conduct detailed case studies of the actions of three western
              regional NGOs, the Sonoran Institute, the Sierra Business Council, and
              Shorebank Pacific.  The research will focus on the origins of these new NGOs,
              the degree to which these organizations have adopted and adapted international
              models of conservation and development, and the impacts of the ideas and
              actions of these new NGOs on livelihoods and local identities in rural
              communities.  Data and information will be gathered through eighteen months of
              multi-site ethnographic analyses.  Research methods to be employed include
              participant observation; surveys and interviews with NGO leaders and staff as
              well as with local residents; and analyses of reports, internal organizational
              documents, newspaper articles, and election results.  This project will help
              shed light on the specific practices and histories through which institutions
              and communities in the American West have perpetuated and transformed
              discourses of conservation and development.  The project also will analyze the
              specific social and cultural practices through which understandings of
              environment, economy, and locality are constituted in the increasingly common
              "community-based conservation" projects appearing throughout the U.S.  As a
              Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
              support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

