Title       : Measuring Trace Element Partition Coefficients Between Minerals and Basaltic
               Melts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a0000924

Award Number: 0000924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94058              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig C. Lundstrom lundstro@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lundstrom
EAR-0000924

Igneous petrology has experienced an exponential
              increase in the number of observational geochemical data over the past 20
              years, leading to fundamental changes in our view of the physics of magmatic
              processes. Interpreting these data requires a better understanding of how trace
              elements distribute themselves between mantle minerals and melts. This project
              will provide relevant trace element partitioning data for a wide range of
              elements (rare earth elements, high field strength elements, and large ion
              lithophile elements) between clinopyroxene or plagioclase and potential mantle
              melts. Specifically it will provide constraint on the partition coefficients
              between clinopyroxene and melt relevant to the upper portions of a
              mantle-melting column by focussing on depleted clinopyroxene compositions in
              equilibrium with depleted basaltic melts. Particular attention will be paid to
              the effects of variations in both melt and crystal composition. In addition,
              the project will constrain the partition coefficients for a variety of trace
              elements between plagioclase and melt. Melts examined in this case will range
              from basaltic to andesitic. The experiments will be performed in either a
              piston cylinder apparatus or a 1-atmosphere furnace using both natural and
              synthetic starting materials. Experiments will be analyzed by electron and ion
              microprobe. Results will be parameterized with the goal of predicting trace
              element partitioning behavior as a function of depth in mantle melting column.
              These experiments will provide needed partition coefficient data for
              interpreting trace element and uranium-series disequilibria data from a variety
              of tectonic regimes on the planet. The resulting data will be incorporated into
              geochemical models of two-phase flow in order to gain further constraint on the
              physics of magmatic processes in the mantle. 








