Title       : SGER: The Aftermath of Hurricane Floyd: Assessment of the Geomorphic
               Effectiveness of the 1999 Flood on the Tar River, North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a0000557

Award Number: 0000557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30394              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Lecce lecces@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Gares  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick P. Pease  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Rigsby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9196,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Because of the infrequent occurrence and the difficulty of recognizing
              individual events in the stratigraphic record, few studies have examined the
              impacts of individual, large flood events on floodplain sedimentation. 
              Although a considerable amount of research has demonstrated that a strong
              relationship exists between moderate flow events and sediment transport and
              channel morphology, the role of large floods in landscape modification remains
              uncertain.

The extraordinary floods of September 1999 in eastern North
              Carolina resulted from hurricanes Dennis and Floyd provide an unusual
              opportunity to examine the geomorphic effectiveness of a low frequency, high
              magnitude flood.  The proposed study examines the magnitude and spatial
              variability of floodplain sedimentation along the Tar River, North Carolina by
              (1) measuring and mapping spatial patterns of sedimentation, floodplain scour,
              and particle size, (2) linking these patterns to floodplain characteristics,
              (3) comparing the field data with sediment loads measured by the U.S.
              Geological Survey, and (4) quantifying the storage and location of several
              sediment-associated contaminants in the flood deposits.  Field data will be
              collected from about 100-150 sample sites along five transects across the Tar
              River.  Particle size analysis, chemical analysis, and spatial analysis will be
              applied to analyze these data.

The significance of the project is to provide
              a useful data set that can rarely be collected.  The data and the associated
              research will help improve our understanding of basic sediment transport and
              deposition dynamics during rare floods and will allow comparisons with the
              dynamics of rare floods on more controlled river systems.  The research will
              also provide additional evidence necessary to understand the importance of
              large, catastrophic events in the sedimentary record.

