Title       : Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0000341

Award Number: 0000341
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elnora D. Daniel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marian L. Wilson-Comer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chicago State University
	      95th Street at King Drive
	      Chicago, IL  60628    312/995-2000

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes the formation of the Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for
              Minority Participation (Illinois LS-AMP) and presents a comprehensive plan for
              improving the quality of undergraduate education for underrepresented minority
              students in science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET).

The
              Alliance will focus on increasing the number of minority students from Illinois
              LS-AMP who choose to major in a SMET discipline, persist in the science
              pipeline and are prepared to attend graduate school or to teach in SMET
              disciplines.  Illinois LS-AMP activities will enhance the growth of the SMET
              community at and among Alliance institutions and promote linkages and
              partnerships in undergraduate SMET education throughout Illinois.  In order to
              accomplish these objectives, the Alliance will utilize strategies that include:
               1) pre-college and community college bridge programs to ease the transition
              and better prepared freshman and transfer students; 2) faculty and peer
              mentoring to help retain students in SMET disciplines; 3) supplemental
              instruction (study groups, tutorials, workshops, study skills training) to
              strengthen students ability and resolve to succeed in gatekeeper and higher
              level courses; 4) academic year and summer undergraduate research to prepare
              and develop students for transitioning to graduate school; 5) curriculum
              revision; and 6) industry internships.

The Illinois LS-AMP universities from
              a diverse group of public and private institutions in urban and rural settings:
               Chicago State University (CSU), lead institution, University of Illinois at
              Chicago (UIC), Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU), DePaul University
              (DPU), Illinois State University (ISU), Southern Illinois University at
              Edwardsville (SIUE), Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), and Governors
              State University (GSU).  The participation of the City Colleges of Chicago
              completes the Alliance.

The presidents of Illinois LS-AMP baccalaureate
              institutions and the Chancellor of the Chicago Community College (CCC) System
              will comprise a Governing Board committed to the institutionalization of
              successful AMP activities, establishing policy and obtaining additional
              financial and resources support from the Illinois legislature, Illinois Board
              of Higher Education (IBHE), foundations, and industrial and business
              communities.

The Illinois LS-AMP has a strong assessment component, with
              external evaluation and internal feedback.  External suggestions and assistance
              will be furnished by a Program Advisory Committee (PAC), the composition of
              which provides a connection with the Illinois business community, the public
              high schools, graduate schools, state and national policy makers and national
              research institutions.


