Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Turbulence Modelling and Validation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9015984

Award Number: 9015984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Budugur Lakshminarayana   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1443,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The award will support collaborative research between Dr. B.                   
              Lakshminarayana, Department of Aerospace Engineering,                          
              Pennsylvania State University, and Professor Francis Leboeuf,                  
              Fluid Mechanics and Acoustics Laboratory, Ecole Centrale de                    
              Lyon, France.  The objective of this project is to develop                     
              and validate models for turbulence.                                            
                                                                                             
              The flow phenomena in turbines is extremely complex.  It is                    
              three dimensional, turbulent and unsteady, with substantial                    
              influence of rotation, curvature and heat transfer effects.                    
              Attempts to predict this flow have not been successful due to                  
              inadequate turbulence models.  The inability of the Navier-                    
              Stokes codes to capture the physical phenomena in turbines                     
              and pumps has hampered improvements in design and analytical                   
              procedures for the development of high performance turbo-                      
              machinery.  The aim of this cooperative research effort is to                  
              develop turbulence models that incorporate the effects of                      
              rotation, curvature, compressibility, three dimensionality                     
              and heat transfer.  The turbulence transport equation (based                   
              on density averaging) and velocity-density covariance transport                
              equations will be modelled to derive algebraic stress                          
              transport and Algebraic heat flux equations respectively.                      
              These equations, coupled with the turbulent kinetic energy                     
              and the dissipation equations, and mean momentum equations,                    
              should provide accurate prediction of flow and heat transfer                   
              field in turbines and pumps.  A validation experiment is also                  
              proposed to check the accuracy of modelling, including                         
              evaluation of various terms contributing to the turbulent                      
              stress and energy, and turbulent heat flux transport equations.                
              This research will benefit from the extensive and complementary                
              expertise of the US and French investigators in turbulence                     
              modeling of turbomachinery.
