Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on the Synthesis of Ordered Composites on a
               Nanometer Sized Scale by Manipulation of Layered Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1993 
File        : a9015164

Award Number: 9015164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19330              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham Clearfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1762,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a visit by Dr. Abraham Clearfield of                       
              Texas A&M University to CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia,                           
              to work with Dr. Terry Turney.  The researchers propose to                     
              combine the expertise in materials synthesis of the two                        
              institutions to synthesize novel inorganic nanocomposite                       
              materials with two related synthetic procedures.  In the                       
              first, clays and other layered compounds are pillared by a                     
              variety of polycations and thermally treated to decompose the                  
              pillar into a layer of oxide sandwiched between the host                       
              layers.  Compounds to be pillared include clays, tetravalent                   
              phosphates, layered hydrous oxides, layered titanates,                         
              silicic acids, layered spinels of the type K and layered                       
              double hydroxides.  The latter class of compounds is pillared                  
              by polyanions.  These pillared compounds will then be treated                  
              thermally to decompose the pillar into sheets of oxide                         
              sandwiched between layers of the host, thus creating ceramic                   
              nanocomposites.  In the second synthetic procedure, two or                     
              more layered compounds will be exfoliated into their individual                
              layers, mixed and reconstituted into a single phase.  The                      
              exfoliates will be prepared by either attaching pendent                        
              hydrophilic organic groups to the layers or intercalating a                    
              polyether amine between the layers.  A wide variety of di-,                    
              tri- and tetravalent metal compounds may be manipulated in                     
              this fashion.  Reconstitution of the exfoliates will be                        
              effected by thermal removal of the organic, by acid treatment                  
              to remove intercalated amines, or by gentle alkaline hydrolysis                
              of the phosphonates.  The final annealed solids will be                        
              interlayered phosphates, hydroxides or oxides, and will                        
              constitute new types of such solids with novel catalytic,                      
              magnetic and electrical properties.
