Title       : Dissertation Research: Perception of Temporal Structure in Complex Sounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9015132

Award Number: 9015132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4052               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Allan  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of Susan E. Allan's doctoral-dissertation research is to              
              study the characteristics of sound signals that are important in               
              communication.  Such temporal properties as waveform periodicity,              
              pulse repetition rate, and amplitude modulation are known to be                
              important in acoustic communication of anurans (frogs and toads).              
              Anurans are ideal animals to work with when studying acoustic                  
              communication.  They communicate with small, well-defined                      
              repertoires used to attract mates, defend territories, and                     
              recognize species.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Extensive work has been done on the sensitivity of the female                  
              green treefrog to temporal properties of the male's calls, but                 
              little experimental work has been done on the detection and                    
              behavioral responses of the male green treefrog to these same                  
              signals.  Because males and females of some species are known to               
              differ in behavioral and neurophysiological responses to a given               
              signal, it is important to examine the significance of particular              
              acoustic properties for males and females independently.  Ms.                  
              Allan's research will focus on the sensitivity of the male green               
              treefrog to the rate of amplitude modulation in the species'                   
              calls.  This question will be investigated using three different               
              experimental methods:  laboratory evoked calling, field playback               
              experiments, and a psychophysical method, reflex modification.                 
              Thus, the project will relate both behavioral and psychophysical               
              results with the behavior of the animal in its natural                         
              environment.
