Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Decision, Risk, and Management Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9015506

Award Number: 9015506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5335               (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Fiet  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award for doctoral dissertation research in decision, risk, and           
              management science will suppoprt research costs for work on the                
              dissertation, "Finding Risk Capital for Entrepreneurs:  An Examination         
              of the Effects of Complexity-Reducing Information on Investor                  
              Patterns."  The purpose of this study is to compare how venture capital        
              firms and private, individual investors, manage risks associated with          
              providing capital to new ventures.   It addresses the question of why          
              these two types of venture capitalists exist simultaneously in                 
              ventures.  It suggests that the basis for their simultaneous existence         
              is likely to be that they each have comparative advantages in risk             
              management.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This study draws upon previous work showing that venture capital firms         
              and individual investors rely upon separate networks for information           
              regarding how to control risk.  Mail questionnaires, face-to-face              
              interviews, and telephone interviews will be used to gather information        
              on the two prominent segments of the venture capital market.                   
              Covariance structure modeling will be used to examine and test the             
              relationships between the perception of risk type and the                      
              implementation of controls to manage risk.  A practical implementation         
              of this study is that it can be helpful in assisting entrepreneurs             
              locate risk capital, by helping them know how their projects' riskiness        
              is viewed by potential investors.
