Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Public Education aboutChemicals in Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9015102

Award Number: 9015102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23288              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert D. Thier thier@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7356,
Abstract    :
              This award will support cooperative research between Dr.                       
              Herbert Thier of the University of California at Berkeley and                  
              Dr. David James of Deakin University, Australia.  The outcome                  
              of this cooperation will be more effective materials for                       
              educating teachers, students, and the general public about                     
              chemicals and the societal issues related to the use of                        
              chemical in both countries. The project is in three phases:                    
              first, investigation of how one measures what students learn                   
              in a societal issue oriented science course that is different                  
              from the outcomes of a traditional science course in the two                   
              countries; second, analyses and comparisons of the impacts of                  
              implementation of U.S. and Australian societal issue oriented                  
              science courses; and, third, a cooperative conference at                       
              which the accomplishments will be summarized and plans                         
              developed for continuing the collaborative effort.                             
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration between the                     
              Australian and U.S. science education communities. Dr. James                   
              has expertise in applied chemistry and the implementation of                   
              societal issue oriented science materials to the public. The                   
              Royal Australian Chemical Society (RACI), with 8000 members                    
              throughout Australia, will act as the Australian coordinating                  
              body for the further development and implemention of the U.S.                  
              and Australian materials in both countries. Dr. Their, under                   
              NSF funding, has developed a unique set of U.S. materials,                     
              the Chemical Education for Public Understanding Program,                       
              (CEPUP), which has been extensively field-tested and evaluated                 
              in the United States. The cooperation is important fundamental                 
              work in developing and evaluating societal issue oriented                      
              science courses in a cross-cultural setting, and has the                       
              potential to network school and community educators in                         
              courses such as biotechnology and global warning in the U.S.                   
              and Australia.
