Title       : Enhancing the Computer Science Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9015212

Award Number: 9015212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin J. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spelman College
	      350 Spelman Lane S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303144346    404/681-3643

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2840,2886,9145,
Abstract    :
                   The first and primary goal of the Department of Mathematics and           
              Computer Science at Spelman College is the production of quality female        
              scientists and engineers.  Hence, all of their efforts must advance this       
              goal.                                                                          
                   In order to accomplish this goal they must build a strong research        
              component for their academic programs in computer science and applied          
              mathematics.  Although Spelman is primarily a teaching institution, they       
              recognize the close tie between teaching and research, and the benefits        
              of research at undergraduate institutions for faculty and for students.        
              They propose to increase the percentage of their student involved in           
              research or realistic practical experiences to at least seventy percent        
              of the upper division students (i.e., juniors and seniors) over the            
              next five years.  This requires that they develop a faculty of adequate        
              size for the student population with strong research and teaching              
              capabilities.                                                                  
                   They propose to improve faculty teaching and research capability by       
              providing assistance to faculty in completing the doctorate degree in          
              Computer Science.  Two faculty members are in process toward the Ph.D          
              degree and will be given released time and/or financial assistance for         
              full-time study.  An additional faculty member will be recruited.              
              Cooperative arrangements will be made with other institutions who are          
              engaged in related research in order to increase the collaboration of          
              faculty in research.                                                           
                   Second, they will develop a computer science program which meets          
              the Association of Computing Machinery (ACM) guidelines for                    
              accreditation.  The target date for accreditation is the academic year         
              1994-95.                                                                       
                   Third, they will increase the percentage of students in computer          
              science with an interest in scientific applications through systematic         
              exposure of these students to scientific careers and involvement in            
              appropriate science related activities.  The new electives will provide        
              exposure to some of the more "glamourous" and exciting aspects of              
              computer science, e.g., robotics, computer vision, and computer                
              graphics.  Cooperative arrangements with graduate institutions will be         
              established which will involve students in research and dual degree            
              programs and will include B.S/M.S programs in computer science.                
              Cooperative arrangements with industry and government laboratories will        
              provide on-the job exposure to scientific careers through co-op and            
              summer internship programs.                                                    
                   Fourth, they intend to separate the mathematics and computer              
              science programs by creating a new Department of Computer Science to           
              house the newly accredited program.  This transition will occur when the       
              number of full-time computer science faculty holding the doctorate             
              degree has reached a minimum of three.  This separation will produce a         
              faculty whose sole or primary interest is the improvement of research          
              and instruction in computer science.
