Title       : U.S. France Cooperative Research: Vertical Profiles of Krypton-85 as an
               Indicator of Stratosphere-to-Troposphere Exchange Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1991     
File        : a9015995

Award Number: 9015995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Kritz mkritz@asrc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0510101   Climate Models                          
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1524,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in                              
              atmospheric chemistry between Dr. Mark Kritz, State                            
              University of New York at Albany, and Dr. Joseph Sanak,                        
              Centre des Faibles Radioactivites, Gif-sur-Yvette,                             
              France.  The objective of this project is to incorporate                       
              Krypton-85 measurements, made by the French research                           
              team, into a US program in which vertical profiles of                          
              radon, ozone, CO, water vapor and aerosols will be                             
              collected over northern California.  The observations                          
              will be used to document and study episodes of rapid                           
              long-range transport of Asian surface-level air, and                           
              will aid in the verification of global circulation and                         
              chemical transport models.                                                     
                                                                                             
              A series of upper tropospheric radon measurements made                         
              aboard a C-41 aircraft used in this research revealed                          
              systematic, rapid transport of Asian boundary layer air                        
              to the upper troposphere near California.  These                               
              transports could also be a significant factor in the                           
              global distribution and budgets of chemically active                           
              species and aerosols.  The profiles to be acquired in                          
              this program will span the altitude range 1-11 km and                          
              will be used to document and study trans-Pacific                               
              transports in the mid and upper troposphere.  Because of                       
              its long (10.76 year) half-life, dominance of northern                         
              hemisphere sources and low stratospheric abundances, the                       
              Krypton-85 measurements will be a valuable adjunct to                          
              the research program.  In addition, the Kr-85 observations                     
              themselves will represent a significant increase in the                        
              number of free tropospheric observations of this                               
              radionucleide, and will add to our knowledge of its                            
              atmospheric distribution and behavior. Since its inception                     
              the French laboratory has been among the pioneers in the                       
              use of natural radionucleides to study the oceans and                          
              atmosphere.  This project will benefit from the                                
              significant expertise on this topic to be provided by                          
              Dr. Sanak and his research team.
