Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Quantum Mechanics of Ordered and Disordered
               Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9015895

Award Number: 9015895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Hislop   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1216,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in mathematical                 
              physics  between Dr. Peter Hislop, University of Kentucky and                  
              Dr. Jean-Michel Combes, University of Toulon and Var, La                       
              Garde, France.  The objective of the proposed research is to                   
              investigate quantum mechanics of ordered and disordered media.                 
                                                                                             
              The quantum behavior of a charged particle moving in a                         
              periodic array of atoms is determined by the bands of allowed                  
              energy.  Any particle with energy in these bands will                          
              propagate to infinity in the crystal.  Physically, this is an                  
              idealized situation which corresponds to matter with infinite                  
              conductivity.  These transport properties of matter, for                       
              example the conductivity, change dramatically when the                         
              material is immeresed in electric and magnetic fields or when                  
              the perfect order of the crystal is broken by impurities.                      
              Changes of this type may cause states of the system to be                      
              well-localized in energy and space.  A key ingredient in the                   
              formation of these localized states is quantum tunneling                       
              through potential barriers.  A particle propagating with                       
              energy E will encounter regions of space where the potential                   
              is larger than E.  Classically, the particle is forbidden to                   
              traverse these regions, but quantum mechnically, the wave                      
              function will penetrate them.  However, the net effect of many                 
              barriers may be to well-localize the particle.  In this                        
              project, the investigators will concentrate on the spectral                    
              structure of these systems with an emphasis on the role                        
              played by quantum tunnelling.  They will study the resonance                   
              states and the scattering theory of crystals in electric                       
              fields.  They will also study models of disordered media in                    
              which diffusive behavior is suppressed by potential barriers.                  
              The project will benefit from the significant and complementary                
              expertise of the two investigators in the areas of quantum                     
              resonances and scattering theory.
