Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Determined Inverse Boundary Value Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1990      
File        : a9015621

Award Number: 9015621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ziqi Sun sun@twsuvm.uc.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A fundamental question raised by A. Calderon in 1980 asks                 
              whether or not one can determine the conductivity of a body from               
              knowledge of steady state direct current measurements at the                   
              boundary.  This problem has attracted much attention in the past               
              few years and forms the basis for work to be done on this                      
              project.                                                                       
                   The mathematical model of conductivity is a nonlinear                     
              elliptic differential operator, defined in a domain in a space of              
              any dimension, with prescribed boundary values.  The boundary                  
              values are viewed as the induced voltage potential; the solution               
              as the resulting potential inside the domain.  This is a standard              
              partial differential equation.  The real problem occurs when one               
              does not have the boundary potential but instead is given the                  
              current flux density across the boundary.  This is a quantity                  
              which can actually be measured in the physical world.                          
                   Significant progress has been made in this area in the case               
              of domains of dimension three or greater, especially when there                
              is considerable smoothness to the boundary.  In dimension two,                 
              the inverse problem is more difficult.  Good results are only                  
              available for conductivity which is close to constant.  The most               
              recent work in two dimensions will be continued in this project.               
              Mathematically, the problem consists of showing that the flux                  
              density and conductivity are in a one-one relationship.  What is               
              now known is that a local univalency implies global.  Actually,                
              this only holds in a dense set of problems.  The work to be done               
              is to establish the local-global result in general and to                      
              determine methods for testing the local condition.
