Title       : US-Germany Joint Seminar on Powder-free Processing for Advanced Ceramics;
               November 19-23, 1990; Schloss Ringberg, Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1991      
File        : a9015936

Award Number: 9015936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa C. Klein licklein@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the travel costs of twelve U.S. scientists                 
              to participate in a U.S.-German seminar on advanced ceramics to                
              be held near Munich, Germany, in November, 1990.  German                       
              sources are financing all costs of the meeting and the                         
              subsistence of the 30 to 40 experts expected to attend.  The                   
              meeting is co-organized by Professor Lisa C. Klein of Rutgers                  
              University and Drs. Richard Brook and Ralf Riedel of the Max                   
              Planck Institute for Metals Research in Stuttgart.  They are                   
              well known and widely-respected in this field.  The purposes of                
              the workshop are to discuss the state-of-the-art in powder free                
              processing for advanced ceramics, to identify important                        
              research directions for the future and to promote opportunities                
              for productive international cooperation.  Specific themes                     
              shaping the discussions are 1) the sol-gel route for the                       
              preparation of monolithic oxide ceramics and glasses; 2) polymer               
              pyrolysis for the preparation of monolithic non-oxide ceramics;                
              and 3) the direct metal oxidation (dimox) process and biological               
              methods for the formation of ceramics.                                         
                                                                                             
              Great efforts have been made in recent years to reach the                      
              levels of structural reliability which would allow ceramics to                 
              be used with confidence in a wide range of applications.  Much                 
              of the work has been concerned with improving powder-based                     
              methods that would reduce the occurrence of microscopic faults                 
              and flaws within the materials.  Although there has been great                 
              progress in powder processing science in recent years, the risk                
              of flaws with powder systems remains considerable.  This                       
              meeting has the timely and worthwhile objective of examining                   
              alternative processing methods that would allow the fabrication                
              of ceramics without the use of powders.  The U.S. and European                 
              participants are leaders in this field and represent both                      
              established and younger scientists.  The topics selected as                    
              foci will ensure significant interactions in forefront areas.
