Title       : REU: Acousto-Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9015609

Award Number: 9015609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrianus Korpel adrian-korpel@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Seven projects are proposed in the area                                        
              of acousto-optics.  Three of these are                                         
              extensions of work started under the                                           
              previous NSF grant.  In the area of weak                                       
              acousto-optic interaction, three projects                                      
              deal with the visualization of three                                           
              dimensional sound fields by scattered                                          
              light.  Two of these are concerned with                                        
              high frequency, wide band Schlieren                                            
              imaging, of relevance to acousto-optic                                         
              signal processing.  The third one deals                                        
              with the wave analysis of a recently                                           
              developed convenient method of Bragg                                           
              diffraction imaging, of relevance to                                           
              diagnostics and general visualization.  The                                    
              four remaining projects address the, as                                        
              yet largely unsolved, problem of the                                           
              calculation of strongly interacting three-                                     
              dimensional light and sound fields of                                          
              arbitrary shape.  One of these projects                                        
              attacks the problem by Monte Carlo                                             
              computer simulation of the quantum                                             
              mechanical scattering process, which we                                        
              have shown to give good results in two                                         
              dimensions for known cases.  The second                                        
              one uses a novel "carrierless" beam                                            
              propagation algorithm, that has shown                                          
              considerable promise.  For the third                                           
              approach we will try successive Born                                           
              approximations using angular plane wave                                        
              spectra, and the last approach will be an                                      
              extension of the Feynman diagram                                               
              technique to three dimensions.  The                                            
              common aim of all projects is to enhance                                       
              the knowledge base of acousto-optics by                                        
              developing physically intuitive concepts,                                      
              formalisms and algorithms, of relevance to                                     
              engineering practice.  Both theoretical                                        
              and experimental components are present,                                       
              and extensive collaboration with other                                         
              researchers in this area, both domestic                                        
              and foreign, is being developed.
