Title       : Iridium Complexes on the Border between Organometallic and Coordination
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1992     
File        : a9015897

Award Number: 9015897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim D. Atwood jatwood@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic                   
              Program will support continued work on iridium compounds by Dr.                
              Jim D. Atwood of the State University of New York at Buffalo.                  
              The compounds are of general formula RIr(CO)L2, where R =                      
              alkyl, alkoxy, hydroxo, or chloro, and L = phosphine or                        
              substituted phosphine.  These species will be used to probe                    
              three areas: to model catalytic reactions in aqueous solution,                 
              to study reactivity of complexes containing mixtures of hard                   
              and soft ligands, and to study the reactivity of complexes with                
              gaseous sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide.  The first two                       
              projects are relevant to optimizing catalytic reactions and the                
              third project may have implications for reducing air pollutants.               
                                                                                             
              For the first project, sulfonated phosphines will be used in                   
              order to solubilize the species in aqueous solution.  In the                   
              second project, carbonate and sulfate ligands will be contained                
              in the compounds, along with carbonyl and the alkoxy and                       
              phosphine groups.  Preliminary evidence on related complexes                   
              suggests that substitution reactions of compounds containing                   
              both hard and soft ligands are rapid, and this phenomenon will                 
              be specifically investigated.  In the third project, the                       
              substitution of sulfate ligands by sulfur dioxide and nitrous                  
              oxide will be investigated.  If such reaction occurs, the gases                
              will be effectively absorbed by a solid.
