Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Workshop: The Chemistry of Reactive Intermediates;
               13-17 July 1991; Queensland, Australia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1991       
File        : a9015266

Award Number: 9015266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28446              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Platz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1940,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a "U.S.-Australian Cooperative                         
              Workshop: The Chemistry of Reactive Intermediates" to be held                  
              13-17 July, 1991 at the University of Queensland, Queensland,                  
              Australia, and to be organized by Dr. Matthew Platz of Ohio                    
              State University and Dr. Curt Wentrup of the University of                     
              Queensland.  Great excitement currently exists in the field                    
              of reactive intermediates, those molecules essential to                        
              almost all chemical reactions.  They are seen as having                        
              potential for the discovery of new types of molecules, new                     
              structures, new materials,improved understanding of chemical                   
              reactivity, and the discovery of new chemical reactions.                       
              Progress in reactive intermediates is also seen as important                   
              for the chemical industry, as well as for areas as diverse as                  
              biochemistry, medicine, pharmaceuticals, new materials,                        
              petroleum chemistry, atmospheric pollution control, and radio                  
              astronomy. The 1980s was a decade for dramatic scientific                      
              advance in reactive intermediates, which can be attributed to                  
              both improvements in synthetic methodology and the introduc-                   
              tion of sophisticated new technology.                                          
                                                                                             
              Consequently, the time appears particularly ripe for a U.S.-                   
              Australian workshop, condusive to intensive discussion of                      
              these developments and applications, and participated in by                    
              scientists with complementary interests, but with different                    
              skills and expertise. No existing alternatives, such as The                    
              Gordan Conferences, present the opportunity for discussion in                  
              small groups needed to advance this field. In particular,                      
              this workshop will provide a rare opportunity for contact                      
              between expert U.S. and Australian scientists with strong                      
              interests in this area. The workshop will allow approximately                  
              twenty-five U.S. and Australian researchers to review recent                   
              research developments and discuss critical issues in this                      
              area. About six third country nationals (from Japan and                        
              Germany) will also participate. One goal of the workshop will                  
              be to define joint U.S.-Australian interdiscipliary experiments                
              to advance knowledge of the structure and reaction mechanisms                  
              of these molecules. A book of abstracts and the proceedings                    
              of the workshop will be published, as well as collaborative                    
              research papers.
