Title       : Collaborative Research: Mammalian Diversity in Bolivia - The Yungas and Valles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1996   
File        : a9015454

Award Number: 9015454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82097              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sydney Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. T.L. Yates and Mr. J.A. Cook of the University of New                 
              Mexico and Dr. S. Anderson of the American Museum of Natural                   
              History  will continue their survey work on mammalian diversity                
              in Bolivia, by conducting five elevational transects through the               
              Andes Mountains in the Yungas and Valles region between 500 and                
              3000 M and obtain representative specimens, genetic material, and              
              parasites from all ecological zones.  The study is also designed               
              to involve Bolivian students and professionals, thus, providing                
              training in conservation and biodiversity, and to continue to                  
              collaborate with and expedite the studies of other workers doing               
              research on South American mammals.                                            
                   Few South American countries are as biologically unknown as               
              Bolivia.  This is particularly true of the largely unexplored,                 
              biologically diverse regions to be examined in this study.  Much               
              of this area has been opened to large scale development and                    
              deforestation.  Information provided by this study will provide a              
              critical baseline for evaluating the future impact of this                     
              development on the biodiversity of the region and will provide an              
              important database for broad scale comparative research.  It will              
              also provide important training for Bolivian biologists wishing                
              to continue this type of work in Bolivia.
