Title       : Theorem Proving in Paraconsistent Logics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9015251

Award Number: 9015251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142514             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Henschen henschen@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There is currently no way for knowledge based reasoning systems                
              to handle inconsistent information, although inconsistent                      
              information arises in many important application such as medical               
              diagnosis and other expert systems.  Most often during the                     
              construction of a knowledge based system, if the knowledge                     
              engineer is presented with information, which may come from a                  
              number of sources, that is inconsistent, the knowledge engineer                
              simply chooses, sometimes incorrectly, to discard certain                      
              piecesof information that have been identified as the cause of                 
              the inconsistency.  The consequence of such a practice may be                  
              disastrous since first of all the engineer may be throwing away                
              important information and secondly, in may instances, the                      
              existence of inconsistent knowledge may itself convey important                
              information.  However, since most reasoning systems are based                  
              onclassical two valued logic, they have no way to correctly                    
              handle inconsistent information.  A class of logics call                       
              annotated logics has been proposed by several researchers as an                
              alternative model or reasoning that allows for inconsistencies.                
              These logicshave been shown to provide nice, theoretical                       
              foundations to a variety of formalism in computer science.  This               
              work will study the use of annotated logics as a practical                     
              computational model.  It will implement annotated logic systems                
              that can serve as an environment in which knowledge based                      
              containing inconsistencies can be built and in which inferences                
              can be computed.  This work should provide a nice bridge across                
              the gap that currently exists between the theory and the                       
              practical utility of annotate logics, and provide a reasoning                  
              basis for many important practical applications.
