Title       : Research Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9015692

Award Number: 9015692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $631174             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Proakis proakis@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia A. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Finkelstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chrysostomos L. Nikias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,2887,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Institutional Infrastructure award to Northeastern University is          
              for the development of a networked environment of powerful                     
              workstations and servers linking the College of Computer Science and           
              the Digital Signal Processing group in the College of Engineering.             
              The infrastructure supports research in a number of areas, many of             
              them collaborative.  CDMA for mobile communications involves several           
              activities including the design of pseudorandom sequences for                  
              minimizing communication interference, the design of efficient CPM             
              signals with trellis coding, and determining the fundamental limits on         
              the capacity of multiple user mobile channels.  Research on neural             
              nets involves both architectures for neural nets and learning                  
              algorithms.  Communication network research involves studying                  
              protocols for communications in high speed LANs and MANs, bridging             
              LANs, and packet radio networks.  Research on more mathematical                
              topics includes computational algebra and algebraic models for                 
              compiler correctness.  Digital signal processing research involves             
              studies of hearing, high order spectra, image processing, adaptive             
              signal processing methods, and joint source coding theory.                     
              Signal processing is a natural collaborative area for computer                 
              scientists and electrical engineers.  The replacement of analog                
              techniques by digital techniques requires a much more intensive use of         
              computation in order to interpret communications.  The research                
              supported by this infrastructure grant includes work on how to make            
              local networks communications well amongst themselves and other                
              networks, the development of new algorithms to get rid of noise and to         
              optimize the information carrying capacity of communications links,            
              the development of algorithms that will allow networks of computers to         
              work the same way as cellular phone networks, and more theoretical             
              work in studying the mathematical underpinnings of learning, algebra,          
              and compilers.
