Title       : U.S.-Australian Cooperative Research: Climate Prediction Design for Agricultural
               Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9015110

Award Number: 9015110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 1,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Lamb   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven T. Sonka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Peter Lamb of the University of Illinois/State Water Survey                    
              Division and Dr. Neville Nicholls of the Australian Bureau of                  
              Meterorology Research Centre. This research is to extend and                   
              broaden a University of Illinois/State Water Survey research                   
              program concerned with the design of growing season climate                    
              predictions for midwestern agriculture. In this cooperative                    
              project, the U.S. effort will be extended to address the                       
              climate prediction design issue for grain sorghum production                   
              in northeastern Australia. This new research will enhance the                  
              extensive economic modeling capabilities developed by the                      
              U.S. midwestern work. It will also attempt to exploit the                      
              substantial growing season climate prediction skill that is                    
              inherent in the strong control that the El Nino-Southern                       
              Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon exerts on northeastern Australian                
              rainfall. The project will provide a perspective on results                    
              reached for the U.S. Midwest (where the growing season                         
              climate is less predictable), furnish a better understanding                   
              of the value of currently achievable climate prediction                        
              skill, provide a modus operandi for designing and valuing                      
              climate prediction systems for other sectors of Australian                     
              agriculture, as well as for developing nations whose growing                   
              season rainfall is strongly controlled by ENSO.                                
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration in combining                    
              Australian atmospheric scientist expertise and Australian                      
              data on Southern Oscillation (SO)-based seasonal rainfall                      
              with the extensive economic modeling capabilities of the                       
              U.S.research team. This is important fundamental work on                       
              climate prediction design research, as well as having                          
              potential for improving agricultural productivity.
