Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Catalytic Antibodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1993      
File        : a9015687

Award Number: 9015687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Benkovic sjb1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1143,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a two year cooperative research                        
              project involving Professor Stephen Benkovic, Department of                    
              Chemistry, Pennsylvania State University, and Professor Eiko                   
              Ohtsuka, Hokkaido University, Japan. The objective of the                      
              collaboration is to develop catalytic antibodies that                          
              promote amide synthesis and transesterification of phosphodi-                  
              esters in RNA structures. This research will exploit two                       
              recent scientific advances in this area, namely (1) the                        
              production of antibodies that resemble the transition state                    
              of a given reaction which catalyze the synthesis or breakage                   
              of chemical bonds with substantial rate accelerations and with                 
              exquisite specificity; and (2) the demonstration that such                     
              monoclonal antibodies can be constructed in bacteria. These                    
              advances open the way for constructing a library consisting                    
              of several million FAB fragments, screened for binding and                     
              tested for catalytic activity.  Additionally, the production                   
              of gram quantities of a desired antibody can now be carried out                
              on a cost efficient basis using fermentation.  It is hoped,                    
              as a result of this research, to develop catalysts which will                  
              be useful in understanding the mode of action of ribozymes,                    
              the RNA cleaving enzymes, as well as developing superior                       
              means of constructing amide bonds expediting the synthesis of                  
              hormonally active peptides.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Both collaborating researchers are highly competent scientists                 
              with distinguished accomplishments, and each is considered an                  
              expert in his individual field. Their strengths are compleme-                  
              ntary; Professor Benkovic will concentrate on the mechanism                    
              of catalysis and Professor Ohtsuka on the structural properties                
              of 2D NMR.  Any advances in this area will have significant                    
              benefits, both scientific and industrial.  If this project is                  
              successful it should have a major impact on modern biology.
