Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Metal Iron Mediated Synthesis of Phosphate
               Derivatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9015171

Award Number: 9015171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald M. Milburn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Ronald M. Milburn of Boston University and Dr. Alan Sargeson                   
              of the Australian National University (ANU). The objective of                  
              the research is to better understand metal ion mediated                        
              synthesis of phosphate derivates. Previous collaborative work                  
              between Dr. Milburn and Dr. Sargeson demonstrated extraordinary                
              hydrolytic reactivity for a phosphate ester in a cobalt(III)/                  
              phosphate ester system. This work has been the basis for                       
              further advances made at ANU, at Boston University, and                        
              elsewhere, in the area of metal ion promoted reactions of                      
              phosphate derivates (especially in the hydrolysis of phosphate                 
              esters and polyphosphates). The emphasis of the prior                          
              collaboration was on degradation of phosphate derivatives; this                
              project will focus on synthesis of phosphate derivatives                       
              mediated by metal centers, including reactions which can lead                  
              to the formation of new phorphorus bond frameworks.  Systems                   
              to be studied will include phosphate ester complexes of                        
              cobalt(III), for both mononuclear and dinuclear complexes, in                  
              which reaction between the phosphate ester and a proximate                     
              coordinated phosphate may lead to diphosphate formation (and                   
              concomitant ester hydrolysis). While the research is                           
              exploratory, its potential is significant for results of                       
              considerable importance in further understanding of metal                      
              ion/phosphate interplay in biological systems.                                 
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent U.S.-Australian collaboration.                
              Previous collaboration in phosphate chemistry between Dr.                      
              Milburn and Dr. Sargeson led to a variety of new ways to                       
              activate phosphate derivatives, which have been used worldwide.                
              This collaborative work with its emphasis on synthesis of                      
              phosphate derivatives has the potential for similar impact.                    
              Overall, this research will advance basic understanding of                     
              both synthesis and degradation of phosphate derivates through                  
              the use of metal ions. There is also additional opportunity                    
              for this project to have potential application to biotechnology                
              related-problems, in particular, those centering around                        
              developing metal ion hydrolytic reagents for site-specific                     
              cleavage of DNA/RNA regions.
