Title       : U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research: Transverse Doppler Experimentation in
               France and Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9015380

Award Number: 9015380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7556               (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon L. Newhouse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5342,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in bioengineer-                 
              ing between Dr. Vernon Newhouse, Drexel University, and two                    
              European investigators:  Dr. Dominique Cathignol, National                     
              Institute for Health and Medical Research (INSERM), Lyons,                     
              France and Dr. Piero Tortoli, Electrical Engineering                           
              Department, University of Florence, Italy.  The objective of                   
              the project is to find more accurate methods of blood-flow                     
              measurement.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Dr. Newhouse and his research group have discovered a new                      
              method of blood-flow measurement, in which the transducer is                   
              held at right angles to the blood-flow.  But tests are                         
              required to perfect this method and to shed more light on the                  
              interpretation of data. The laboratory in Florence has Doppler                 
              systems whose parameters can be adjusted optimally for this                    
              transverse Doppler method.  Such systems are not available                     
              commercially.  Dr. Tortoli and his associates are willing to                   
              test this method in simulated blood-flow and living subjects.                  
              In order to develop the Transverse Doppler method further,                     
              the US investigator has developed new transducer designs                       
              which will make it possible to separate flow parameters, such                  
              as turbulence and mean flow velocity.  The research group in                   
              Lyons headed by Dr. Cathignol will assist Dr. Vernon to                        
              construct these new transducer shapes and test them with the                   
              instrumentation in his laboratory, which is highly sophisti-                   
              cated and not generally available in the US.
