Title       : U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research: Electron Capture and Beta Decay in the
               Evolution of Large Stars; Double Beta Decay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9015982

Award Number: 9015982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald E. Brown Gerald.Brown@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T.T.S. Kuo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5911,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a collaborative program of research with                   
              Helio Dias of the University of Sao Paulo and Laercio Losano                   
              of the Federal University of Paraiba in Brazil and Francisco                   
              Krmpotic of the University of La Plata in Argentina collab-                    
              orating with G. E. Brown and T. T. S. Kuo of the State                         
              University of New York at Stony Brook.  This program will                      
              calculate and estimate rates of weak interaction relevant to                   
              the evolution of stars, also rates of two-neutrino and                         
              neutrinoless double beta decays.  The best available two-body                  
              matrix elements of the nucleon-nucleaon interaction will be                    
              used in various large shell model calculations.   In the case                  
              of stellar evolution, one of the objectives is to obtain                       
              rates for transitions between excited states of the relevant                   
              nuclei.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project will bring the Brazilian and Argentinian work                     
              into contact with the best effective nuclear interactions and                  
              provide an improved calculation of electron capture rates                      
              and beta decays in stellar evolution, as well as double beta                   
              decay.  The principal investigators in Brazil and Argentina                    
              are well experienced in shell-model and number-projected                       
              calculations while the Stony Brook side has had considerable                   
              experience in stellar evolution, electron capture and single                   
              and double beta decays.  On the U.S. side, Stony Brook                         
              graduate students M. Aufderheide and D. B. Stout are already                   
              involved in this work.  Other graduate students will be                        
              brought in.  Besides the Brazilian and Argentinean principals,                 
              a successful research program will certainly influence                         
              postdoctoral and postgraduate research in the Universities of                  
              Sao Paulo, Paraiba and La Plata.
