Title       : CCD Photometry of T Tauri Stars and Supernovae at Van Vleck Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9015877

Award Number: 9015877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93100              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Herbst wherbst@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in astronomical instrumentation have permitted                 
              small observatories in liberal arts colleges to automate the                   
              operation of their telescopes and to measure the brightnesses of               
              astronomical objects quickly and accurately with modern "CCD"                  
              (Charged Couple Device) detectors.  In the last few years the                  
              Principal Investigator (PI) and his colleagues have used awards                
              from the Keck Foundation and the NSF to upgrade their Wesleyan                 
              University 24-inch telescope in these ways.  In this NSF grant he              
              plans to use them as a combined research and teaching tool for                 
              undergraduates.  The PI and his students will observe selected                 
              T Tauri and supernova stars over time.  The T Tauri stars are                  
              thought to be extremely young, and are known to have both irregular            
              and periodic components to their variability.  The irregular                   
              component is likely to arise from material falling onto a                      
              circumstellar disk around the star.  In contrast, the periodic                 
              component is likely to be produced by the appearance and subsequent            
              disappearance of a magnetic "spot" from our view as the star                   
              rotates.  A secondary project will be the monitoring of supernovae             
              light in nearby galaxies.  Supernovae are known to be members of               
              a discrete number of subgroups each with well defined properties               
              determined by their "light curve" with time.  These properties can             
              be related to the absolute luminosity of the supernova.  The PI                
              will monitor supernova light curves in order to determine how many             
              belong to each of these subgroups, thereby providing information               
              on the probability of different types of supernova-generating                  
              evolutionary scenarios, as well as the absolute luminosities of                
              these stars themselves.  By comparing observed brightnesses with               
              derived luminosities the PI will be able to determine the distance             
              to the supernova and hence the external galaxy.
