Title       : U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Control and Inverse Problems in Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9015007

Award Number: 9015007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11050              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Thomas Banks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kazufumi Ito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chunming Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professors H. T. Banks, K. Ito and C. Wang                 
              of the University of Southern California to continue their                     
              collaboration in applied mathematics research with Professor F.                
              Kappel and others of the University of Graz and K. Kunisch of                  
              the Technical University of Graz, Austria.  They share interests               
              in control theory that focus on the problems of estimating                     
              parameters in partial differential equations from known                        
              observation of a given process and also the approximation of                   
              functional and partial differential equations stressing                        
              applications to control and inverse problems.  The specific                    
              topics on which they will work include modeling and parameter                  
              estimation techniques in size/age structured population models,                
              the identifiability of parameters in models of visco-elastic                   
              systems, and the development of an approximation framework for                 
              nonlinear dynamics in a Banach space setting.                                  
                                                                                             
              These U.S. and Austrian mathematicians have been among the                     
              leaders in the development of methods and applications in a                    
              wide variety of problems in optimization, approximation and                    
              parameter estimation for functional and partial differential                   
              equations.  Their productive collaboration has already resulted                
              in numerous publications containing applications to meaningful                 
              physical and biological problems.  The proposed work promises                  
              to continue this contribution by focusing on technically                       
              interesting problems with relevance to mechanics and population                
              dynamics.
