Title       : Dissertation Research: Seasonality and Human Evolution in the Southern Levant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1990   
File        : a9015973

Award Number: 9015973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7690               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Bar-Yosef obaryos@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Ofer Bar-Yosef, Mr. Daniel Lieberman,               
              a graduate student in Anthropology at Harvard University, will                 
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  His goal is to                    
              determine the seasons in which prehistoric "Natufian" sites were               
              occupied and to accomplish this he will combine analysis of                    
              archaeological faunal remains with controlled experimentation.                 
              The Natufian period (12,500 to 10,500 bp) immediately precedes                 
              the development of agriculture and therefore it is likely that                 
              adaptions which occurred during this earlier time set the process              
              in motion.  Archaeologists have postulated that the Natufians                  
              were the first people in the region to settle and occupy single                
              sites year round and that this factor plays a major role.                      
                                                                                             
              A large body of prior research indicates that cementum - a tissue              
              which attaches the tooth root of mammals to the bone is deposited              
              continuously over the life of an animal.  It often appears as                  
              alternating lighter and darker bands which are correlated to                   
              season of the year.  However, the mechanisms which underlay the                
              apparent relationship are not well understood and it is unknown                
              whether changes are related to factors such as seasonal variation              
              in diet hardness, diet quality or reproductive status.  In order               
              to apply this technique in a meaningful way to the large series                
              of gazelle remains recovered from many Natufian sites, Mr.                     
              Lieberman will conduct controlled studies on goats in which diet               
              hardness and quality is varied and effect on cementum growth                   
              noted.  He will also study goats and sheep with known                          
              reproductive histories.  On this basis, he will then examine                   
              archaeological materials.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will shed                  
              increased insight into the process which led to the domestication              
              of plants and animals - one of the most fundamental "revolutions"              
              in human history.  Secondly, it will assist in the development of              
              an analytic technique which may be used by many scientists for a               
              wide variety of purposes.  Finally, it will further the training               
              of an extremely promising scientist.
