Title       : Heterogeneous Atmospheric Chemistry: Elucidating the Importantce of Reactions
               Involving Aqueous Droplets and Ice Crystals Through Cluster Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1993    
File        : a9015855

Award Number: 9015855
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615100             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. W. Castleman awc@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is directed to identifying the mechanisms and                
              quantifying the rates of atmospherically important heterogeneous               
              processes.  The full range of these processes includes the                     
              transfer of molecules from the gaseous to the condensed state by               
              new particle formation or by adsorption onto or dissolution into               
              a microdroplet or aerosol particle, together with concomitant                  
              chemical conversion.  These processes can serve to remove species              
              from the gas phase, thereby altering their lifetimes, transport                
              and removal processes, and at the same time influencing their                  
              further participation in gas phase reactions and enhancing those               
              possible in the condensed phase.  The thrust of the present                    
              proposal is on studies designed to elucidate the mechanisms of                 
              reactions which involve aqueous systems comprising the liquid                  
              media associated with (some) aerosols, cloud droplets and ice                  
              crystals through an investigation of clusters.                                 
                   Some critical experiments will be conducted in each of the                
              aforementioned areas, including work designed to elucidate                     
              transformations in aqueous phases and the influence of various                 
              neutral and ionic species.                                                     
                   The proposed studies are subdivided into four general areas.              
              The first, to which major emphasis will be given, constitutes an               
              in-depth investigation of reactions involving water clusters,                  
              both pure and containing other constituents, along with important              
              atmospheric molecules and free radicals.  An investigation of                  
              mixed cluster systems between water and other molecules such as                
              salts and acids, along with a determination of the role of                     
              various co-clustered species on the structure and bonding, will                
              also be undertaken.  The second area, which is related to the                  
              aforementioned, involves an investigation of the thermochemistry               
              of mixed clusters.  The primary objective of this aspect of the                
              work is to provide data from which to determine the partial                    
              pressure of constituents interacting with droplets (related to                 
              activity coefficients).  The third aspect of the work involves                 
              studies of the influence of light on the reactions identified to               
              be important in the first area.  The fourth activity constitutes               
              a calculational phase of the program devoted to elucidating the                
              structure and bonding of cluster species identified in the other               
              three phases of the program as being of critical importance to                 
              the reactions and the activity coefficients.  Calculations of                  
              vibrational frequencies and related dynamical aspects of clusters              
              will be of value in interpreting the results of the proposed                   
              studies in the first three areas.
