Title       : Cooperative Research in Power Plant Surveillance and Diagnostics (U.S. - Turkey
               Cooperative Science; Science in Developing Countries)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9015008

Award Number: 9015008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Kerlin utne@utkux.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Belle R. Upadhyaya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5940      TURKEY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 1231,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This proposal supports the collaboration of                      
              Drs. T.W. Kerlin and B.R. Upadhyaya of the University of                       
              Tennessee (UT) and Dr. Ozer Ciftcioglu of Istanbul Technical                   
              University (ITU) in Turkey.  The expected theoretical and                      
              implementable results of this collaboration should yield new                   
              information on: 1) behavior of reactor process signals; 2)                     
              cause of variations in plant signatures; 3) use of signal                      
              fluctuating components for instrument fault monitoring; and                    
              4) use of non-invasive tests for component surveillance and                    
              preventive maintenance. The proposed research will be                          
              carried out at both UT and ITU.  Dr. Ciftcioglu is an expert                   
              in the area of alarm reliability algorithms for stochastic                     
              processes whose expertise will integrate well with                             
              activities already underway at UT involving instrument                         
              calibration verification and on-line monitoring of smart                       
              sensors.  The UT scientists will visit the facilities at ITU                   
              and the ITU participants will visit UT.  Additionally, a                       
              four-day workshop will be held in Istanbul in order to                         
              exchange information.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project in engineering systems will enable                        
              leading experts in the United States and Turkey to combine                     
              complementary talents and pool research resources in areas                     
              of strong mutual interest and competence.  Dr. Ciftcioglu                      
              will have an opportunity to become familiar with research                      
              techniques and facilities at UT and, likewise, Drs. Kerlin                     
              and Upadhyaya will benefit from the time spent in Istanbul.                    
              Therefore, this proposal fulfills objectives of the Science                    
              in Developing Countries Program in its exchange and transfer                   
              of scientific knowledge through an international                               
              collaboration.
