Title       : REU/SGER: Phase-Space Ordination and the Complexity of Successional Trajectories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9015862

Award Number: 9015862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18674              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Glenn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steward T. A. Pickett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   There has been a renewed interest in the theoretical and                  
              experimental analysis of pattern and process during succession.                
              Although much current research focuses on mechanistic processes                
              causing successional change, hierarchy theory allows us to                     
              explore patterns and their causes at any spatial scale of                      
              interest.  The purpose of this research is to analyze the                      
              complexity of successional trajectories in phase-space                         
              ordination.  The P.I.'s propose to use ordination methods such as              
              canonical correspondence analysis to construct successional                    
              vectors in phase-space.  The complexity of the successional                    
              trajectories in phase-space can be measured using fractals.  The               
              P.I.'s will analyze the complexity of succession in three sets of              
              field data:  ten long term plots at Hutcheson Memorial Forest,                 
              New Jersey, (2) two samples of a chronosequence at Cedar Creek                 
              Natural History Area, Minnesota, and (3) eight long-term plots                 
              from the Rothamstad Park Grass Experiment, Harpenden, UK. In                   
              addition, they will use ZELIG, a spatially explicit forest                     
              succession simulation model (available to us through the Konza                 
              Prairie Long-term Ecological Research site), to simulate forest                
              succession at different spatial scales.  From the model output,                
              they can determine the effects of spatial scale and time interval              
              between samples on the measurement of complexity during                        
              succession.  In addition, they can compare patterns of complexity              
              in the model output to patterns in the field data.  The methods                
              described in this proposal go beyond the traditional individual-               
              population-community hierarchy to provide a unique approach for                
              analyzing and describing complex patterns in plant community                   
              dynamics.  Further development of such model will provide                      
              important insights into change currently taking place in the                   
              environment.
