Title       : Systems Technology for Building a National Collaboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9015407

Award Number: 9015407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Su-Shing Chen                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1292689            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Schatz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott E. Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 2875,
Abstract    :
              This research is funded under the Special Initiative on                        
              Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology.  This is one of              
              eleven winners under that competition.                                         
                                                                                             
              This project is to develop the systems technology necessary to                 
              build a nationwide information infrastructure for the scientific               
              community and to demonstrate this technology by applying it to a               
              mini-collaboratory for a specific community of molecular biologist             
              that studies the genetic structure of the C. Elegans nematode.  The            
              goals are to collect the community knowledge into a digital library,           
              develop the technology to manipulate the library, and to learn how             
              to facilitate effective utilization of this technology for sizeable            
              communities.  This mini-collaboratory will take advantage of the               
              underlying communication support provided by NSFNET to support users           
              nationwide.  The researchers address several research problems                 
              necessary to the successful design of the mini-collaboratory.                  
              These include designing bulk transfer protocols that facilitate the            
              rapid movement of data across wide area networks, discovering                  
              efficient data clustering and caching strategies, providing a                  
              uniform interface for displaying editing, searching and grouping a             
              wide range of complex objects, and supporting directory services               
              that can be used to locate many distributed resources.
