Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Fluids in Amphibolite-to Granulite-Facies
               Lode Gold Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1992      
File        : a9015198

Award Number: 9015198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Brown pbrown@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510800   Deep Mineral Deposits                   
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1556,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Philip E. Brown of the University of Wisconsin-Madison and                     
              Dr. David Groves of the Key Centre for Strategic Mineral                       
              Deposits of the University of Western Australia. Most                          
              available data on the nature and genesis of Archean lode                       
              gold mineralization has been gathered on mesothermal deposits.                 
              Fluid compositions and the timing of mineralization are                        
              reasonably well agreed upon. There is however considerable                     
              continuing debate as to the source of the ore components and                   
              the fluid. The objective of this collaborative project is to                   
              conduct a fluid inclusion study of lode gold deposits of the                   
              Yilgarn Craton in western Australia. The area to be studied                    
              contains gold deposits hosted in amphibolite-to granulite-                     
              facies metavolcanic and metasedimentary rocks. This research                   
              will compare these results which are representative of lower                   
              crustal levels and therefore less modified, more proximal,                     
              ore fluids to data from the better-studied mesothermal                         
              deposits. Extending the range of deposits studied through                      
              this project will allow the development of genetic models and                  
              general understanding of the mechanisms of gold mineralization,                
              and their relationships to late-Archean tectonics.                             
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent U.S. and Australian                           
              collaboration. Dr. Brown has many years of experience in                       
              fluid-inclusion studies involving ore deposits and/or                          
              metamorphic terranes and the background in theoretical fluid                   
              modeling that will be necessary to interpret the pressure-                     
              temperature-composition history of the fluids trapped in                       
              inclusions in high-grade metamorphic rocks. The Australian                     
              research group has an excellent international reputation, and                  
              the documentation of mineralization in the Yilgarn Craton                      
              required for the study.  In addition to providing useful data                  
              on the fluid characteristics and conditions of mineralization,                 
              the research has the potential for broader application in                      
              interpretation of gold deposition world-wide in Archean                        
              terranes and in exploration models for similar gold deposits.
