Title       : Facility for Experimental Exploration and Validation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9015667

Award Number: 9015667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1116211            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald M. Masson masson@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon Kasif  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Johnstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Rao Kosaraju  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Goodrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,2887,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This infrastructure award is for the purchase of a network of high             
              speed workstations.  This network of workstations is to support                
              research in artificial intelligence, programming languages, geometric          
              computing, and fault tolerant computing.  The artificial intelligence          
              research is concentrated in four areas: machine learning, constraint           
              satisfaction networks, parallel logic programming, and knowledge               
              representation.  The research in programming languages involves the            
              translation of CCS specifications to an implementation language which          
              provably implements concurrency and provably satisfies real time               
              constraints.  The research in geometric computing is focused on                
              computing higher-degree curves and surfaces, alternate representations         
              for curves and surfaces, efficient methods for representing geometric          
              modes, and motion planning.  The research in fault tolerant computing          
              is concentrated on self-monitoring systems.                                    
                                                                                             
              Johns Hopkins University will use its infrastructure grant to improve          
              the environment for experimental research in computer science,                 
              information science, and computer engineering.  Artificial                     
              intelligence is the generic name given to computer based research on           
              performing actions normally described as "intelligent actions."  Johns         
              Hopkins researchers will explore learning and reasoning actions.               
              Languages to instruct computers in their operations have been studied          
              for many years.  The goal of these languages is to succinctly describe         
              the desired operation with as little error as possible.  The                   
              programming language research at Johns Hopkins pursues this goal for           
              systems that must respond in "real time".  Computers are used                  
              extensively in robots. In order for reasoning to be performed about            
              the environment in which the robot resides, a mathematical model of            
              that environment must be constructed.  Johns Hopkins researchers will          
              be studying how to construct and use better mathematical models.               
              Finally, the network as a whole will be used as a test bed for                 
              algorithms to detect faulty computers or links on the network.
