Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Chromophore-Quencher Complexes for
               Studies in Photochemical Redox Splitting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9015262

Award Number: 9015262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Meyer tjmeyer@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1966,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative research between Dr. Thomas Meyer              
              of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Dr. Richard             
              Keene at James Cook University, Townsville, Australia. This                    
              project will extend and broaden an NSF-supported research program              
              in which the study of chromophore-quencher (C-Q) complexes of                  
              ruthenium and rhenium is intended to advance basic understanding               
              of photoinduced electron-transfer processes.  For example, it was              
              shown that optical excitation to a metal-to-ligand charge transfer             
              (MLCT) state in one ruthenium complex led to reductive quenching               
              via intramolecular electron transfer.  The study showed that MLCT              
              excited states of ruthenium and rhenium complexes could be used                
              successfully in the study of photochemically induced electron and              
              energy reactions.  The major objective of this U.S.-Australian                 
              cooperative project is the preparation and photophysical study of              
              ruthenium in which electron transfer donors and acceptors are                  
              chemically attached to MLCT chromophores.  To advance this area of             
              study, new ligands will be designed in which spatial control of                
              electron transfer can be achieved in order to maximize the                     
              efficiencies of formation and the lifetime of redox separated                  
              states.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The project represents excellent collaboration between the Keene               
              group (synthetic methodology for ligand modification) and the                  
              Meyer group (photophysical studies).  This is important fundamental            
              work in establishing new photochemical electron transfer systems and           
              discovering new processes of energy and electron transfer.
