Title       : REU: Phytoplankton Population Dynamics at the Hawaii Ocean Time Series Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9015883

Award Number: 9015883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,9117,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Phytoplankton play a central role in biogeochemical cycles.                    
              Simply measuring biomass and production is not sufficient; a                   
              detailed assessment of the community structure is necessary to                 
              elucidate the population dynamics, annual variability and                      
              responses to short-term physical events.  The objectives of this               
              project are: (1) to determine the composition of the                           
              phytoplankton community at the GOFS Hawaii Ocean Time-series                   
              station, (2) to estimate the contribution of the different algal               
              populations to the total biomass, and (3) to understand depth                  
              distribution and temporal patterns and to elucidate annual                     
              variability.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              In order to characterize and quantify the different populations                
              of cells of the phytoplankton community a number of different                  
              techniques will be employed.  Flow cytometry will allow rapid                  
              discrimination of different groups such as eukaryotic                          
              picoplankton, Synechococcus - cyanobacteria, and the newly                     
              discovered prochlorophytes.  It will provide an efficient and                  
              quantitative way to measure cell concentration and to quantitate               
              pigment fluorescence and scatter signature on a single-cell                    
              basis.  Immunofluorescence techniques, using antibodies                        
              specifically targeted at prokaryotic (Synechococcus) and                       
              eukaryotic (e.g. prasinophytes, coccolithophorids) groups and                  
              pigment analyses (by HPLC and spectrofluorometry) will permit                  
              further refinement of the taxonomic composition of the community.              
              The latter will be specifically helpful for the smaller                        
              eukaryotes and for the prochlorophyte component which has a                    
              unique divinyl-chlorophyll signature and which is believed to be               
              very important in oligotrophic waters.                                         
                                                                                             
              This project will provide the first detailed time-series data on               
              the structure of the phytoplankton community in the central                    
              Pacific gyre.  The results will complement the core measurements               
              made at station ALOHA by adding a quantitative analysis of the                 
              primary producer community, which will serve as a basis for                    
              future realistic modeling efforts.  Contrasting our findings with              
              a parallel project to be conducted by S.W. Chisholm and R.J.                   
              Olson (MIT/WHOI) at the GOFS Bermuda site, where phytoplankton                 
              exhibits pronounced seasonal variability, will reinforce the                   
              value of both studies.
