Title       : MR Imaging of Neuronal Pathways in Vivo.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1990     
File        : a9015373

Award Number: 9015373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Norman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Information is carried through the brain by bundles of nerve                   
              fibers called tracts.  One of the well-known tracts is that from               
              the retina of the eye to a region of the midbrain called the                   
              optic tectum.  Neuroanatomists traditionally trace the                         
              connections of these tracts, from the cell groups of their origin              
              to their specific target nerve cells, by using special dyes.  The              
              tracing requires cutting the brain into thin sections, to examine              
              the cells microscopically, and reconstruct the three-dimensional               
              pathway from the series of sections.  In contrast, this study                  
              will explore a new method, called magnetic resonance imaging                   
              (MRI), to trace such pathways.  The basic technique is already                 
              used in clinics as a "non-invasive" way of revealing soft brain                
              internal structures from human patients, using a computer to                   
              reconstruct the 3-dimensional images from the machine.  This                   
              study tests whether magnetic material can be molecularly bound to              
              be taken up like other tracers by particular pathways in small                 
              animal brains, and whether the resolution of small features in                 
              the brain can be achieved satisfactorily.  Then the animal can be              
              examined with an appropriately scaled MRI machine, and the                     
              computerized reconstruction of the pathway made, without                       
              sacrificing the animal at all.  If successful, this pilot study                
              will have great                                                                
              impact on neuroscience by introducing a fundamentally new way                  
              of doing neuroanatomy on animals where the physiology is known,                
              and will introduce the possibility of repeated neuroanatomical                 
              study on the same individual by this non-invasive technique.
