Title       : Bacterioplankton Dynamics in the Sargasso Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9015888

Award Number: 9015888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Ducklow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig A. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The research objectives of this study are to obtain an                         
              understanding of the annual cycles of bacterial biomass and                    
              production in the open sea.  Such studies have previously been                 
              identified by the JGOFS program as necessary core measurements,                
              which are considered essential for a better understanding of                   
              carbon and nitrogen fluxes through planktonic systems.  The                    
              studies will be conducted at the Bermuda Biological Station for                
              Research (BBSR) in the Bermuda Atlantic Time Series (BATS).  In                
              order to make high precision estimates of bacterial production                 
              initial studies will examine a number of radioactively labeled                 
              compounds such as thymidine, adenine, and leucine by conducting a              
              series of calibration experiments for an empirical determination               
              of conversion factors to be used for the different compounds.  In              
              the second year, regular sampling of the annual cycle of                       
              bacterial biomass and production at stations off Bermuda will                  
              begin in conjunction with the ongoing BBSR/JGOFS cruises.  In                  
              addition, more detailed and intense studies will focus on two                  
              critical periods, the spring phytoplankton bloom and the                       
              conspicuous summer subsurface bacterial abundance maximum which                
              has been identified in previous work conducted at Bermuda.                     
              Finally, work on modelling ecosystem structure at Bermuda will be              
              continued and extended which will provide data for model                       
              validation, and developing new models of plankton dynamics.
