Title       : Architectures for Multichannel Optical Fiber Communication Using Arrays of
               Surface Normal Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9015735

Award Number: 9015735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $612167             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. McInerney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julian Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin J. Malloy  (Co-Project Director current)
              S. Sohail Naqvi  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              During the next three years the                                                
              Principal Investigators intend to                                              
              establish an interdisciplinary                                                 
              research project to develop novel                                              
              schemes for transmitting many                                                  
              channels within the terahertz                                                  
              bandwidth of a single-mode optical                                             
              fiber, by extension of existing                                                
              efforts in III-V semiconductor                                                 
              optoelectronics, diode laser physics                                           
              and engineering, high-speed detector                                           
              development, surface-emitting                                                  
              lasers, spatial light modulators,                                              
              and optical switches, and parallel                                             
              optical information processing.  The                                           
              emphasis will be on interfacing many                                           
              parallel data streams into a single                                            
              optical fiber using two-dimensional                                            
              surface-normal architectures.  This                                            
              addressed vertical cavity surface-                                             
              emitting laser and spatial light                                               
              modulator arrays.  The initial                                                 
              emphasis in this program will be on                                            
              dense time-division multiplexing and                                           
              demultiplexing at a specific center                                            
              wavelength, by means of arrays of                                              
              spatial light modulators.  Further                                             
              efforts will be aimed at pipelining                                            
              several such sets of time-                                                     
              multiplexed data into a fiber using                                            
              wavelength-division multiplexing.                                              
              Physical device models and global                                              
              Monte Carlo simulations of complete                                            
              systems will be used to study the                                              
              properties of various architectures,                                           
              for comparison with experiments.                                               
              At the end of three years the                                                  
              investigators will have developed a                                            
              working prototype system for time-                                             
              division multiplexing of ten data                                              
              channels timed and recovered by                                                
              using interleaved gain-switched or                                             
              mode-locked picosecond pulse trains                                            
              and phase mudulator arrays.  An                                                
              important element of this scheme                                               
              will be the development of optical                                             
              coincidence detectors for time-                                                
              division demultiplexing, based on                                              
              arrays of bistable etalons or                                                  
              thresholding optical detectors.  The                                           
              principal investigators also will                                              
              have assessed the feasibility of                                               
              combining several groups of time-                                              
              division multiplexed data at                                                   
              different wavelengths, using arrays                                            
              of single-mode edge-emitting and                                               
              surface-emitting lasers, and arrays                                            
              of spectrally matched detectors.
