Title       : Adhesion, Deformation, and Fusion of Monolayers, Bilayers, and Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1992   
File        : a9015537

Award Number: 9015537
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob N. Israelachvili jacob@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Zasadzinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In the first (two-year) research period, the roles of                          
              different interbilayer forces and bilayer fluidity on the                      
              molecular-scale deformations of adhering and fusing bilayer                    
              using novel electron microscopy and surface force measurements                 
                                                                                             
              have been studied.  These experiments identified a                             
              particularly important role for hydrophobic forces in adhesion                 
                                                                                             
              and fusion.  In this follow-up project, it is further proposed                 
                                                                                             
              to study how hydrophobic, stearic, and ionic interactions                      
              operate at the molecular level.  Various time-dependent                        
              effects associated with hydrophobic forces and adhesion are                    
              investigated.  Lipid mixtures and lipid-protein membranes are                  
                                                                                             
              used.  The effects of fusion-inducing proteins, such as                        
              Synexin, are probed.  The Surface Forces Apparatus will be                     
              used in parallel with a variety of Electron, scanning                          
              Tunneling, and Atomic Force Microscopy techniques.  The                        
              results will be important in (i) developing the capability to                  
                                                                                             
              directly study the interactions of real biological membranes                   
                                                                                             
              and of other biological macromolecule; (ii) the development                    
              of chemicals and processes which can control adhesion or                       
              fusion of vesicles, liposomes, and biological cells in                         
              biotechnological processes; and (iii) the effectiveness of                     
              surfactant as dispersant, in flotation, in foams, and in                       
              emulsions.
