Title       : Multidimensional Dynamics of Type II Supernovae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9015976

Award Number: 9015976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Arnett darnett@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Fryxell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9256,
Abstract    :
              The study of hydrodynamics (HD) is critical in several areas of                
              astrophysics.   One of those areas concerns certain brief phases               
              of stellar evolution, lasting minutes or even seconds, in which                
              very rapid structural changes can occur in the star, critically                
              affecting their evolution.  The most common of these events in the             
              sudden core-collapse of a massive star, leading to the explosion               
              of a "supernova" (SN).  It has long been known that the remnant                
              "shell" from supernova explosions aggregates into filamentary and              
              "elephant trunk" structures that indicate HD instabilities as the              
              SN blast wave expands into interstellar space.  The most recent                
              observations of the supernova "SN1987a" in the Large Magellanic                
              Cloud show "finger" shaped structures rich in the element nickel               
              that developed weeks or even days after the explosion.  The                    
              Principal Investigator (PI) plans to use a new HD numerical                    
              calculation procedure, the Piecewise Parabolic Method (PPM) to                 
              perform numerical simulations of the detonation and explosion of               
              Type II supernovae such as SN1987a.  The new technique is generally            
              far more efficient than old ones and will permit calculations to               
              be done in two and even three dimensions, thereby permitting an                
              understanding of the development of small structures in these                  
              remnants.  Moreover, with a Co-Investigator and student, the PI                
              will utilize a new theory of convection that is essential to                   
              understand the observed swirling of gas "blobs".  Many of the heavy            
              elements on the Earth are synthesized during the critical moments              
              following this explosion.   It now seems that heavy elements such              
              as nickel are synthesized unevenly in the small "finger"                       
              structures.  This project should provide some understanding of how             
              and why this uneven formation of heavy elements occurs.   The                  
              techniques and computer programs developed for this study are                  
              expected to find future application in several other astrophysical             
              contexts, such as Type I supernovae (accreted matter on a hot white            
              dwarf from a double star companion), pulsation in large amplitude              
              variable stars, and convection in stable stars such as the Sun.
