Title       : Forced Convection Phase-Change Heat Transfer with StreamwiseCurvature and
               Two-Phase Approach Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1990  
File        : a9015859

Award Number: 9015859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence W. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is predominantly an experimental study of forced                  
              convection boiling heat transfer from small regions to a                       
              channel flow.  Application of the results lie in the design of                 
              equipment where small, high-heat-flux regions must be cooled:                  
              x-ray sources for lithography and medicine, microwave                          
              klystrons, lasers, microelectronic and optical devices, gas                    
              turbines, fusion reactor instrumentation and first walls,                      
              high-speed aircraft leading surfaces and quenching in                          
              materials processing.  Theoretical or scientific value lies in                 
              the description of the boiling behavior in situations where                    
              the thermal boundary layer and bubble boundary layer                           
              thicknesses are small relative to the channel size.  Effects                   
              to be documented are:  heating length, bulk velocity,                          
              subcooling, pressure, fluid type, streamwise curvature of the                  
              heated wall and the void fraction of the flow approaching the                  
              heated surface.  The program begins by completing an ongoing                   
              study on the effect of wall concave curvature on subcooled                     
              flow boiling characteristics.  In this study, all the voids                    
              are constrained to very near the heated surface.  The next                     
              phase and the main portion of the study is one where the flow                  
              approaching the heated region is a two-phase mixture of vapor                  
              and liquid in thermodynamic equilibrium.  In this study, the                   
              effect of approach flow void fraction and two-phase flow                       
              regime will be investigated in flow within straight channels                   
              and within concave-curved channels.  With concave curvature,                   
              voids are rapidly transported away from the heated wall by the                 
              cross-stream pressure gradient established in the curved flow.                 
              This effect is presently being investigated for a situation                    
              where the approaching flow is a subcooled liquid.  The                         
              continuation project will characterize the stronger benefit                    
              that will be seen when the entry flow is a two-phase mixture                   
              in that there will be a substantial increase, between straight                 
              flow and curved flow, of the heat flux at the point of                         
              departure from nucleate boiling (DNB).  Once characterized and                 
              described, this can be capitalized upon in the design of                       
              cooling schemes for the above engineering systems.
