Title       : Infrastructure for Parallel Processing Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9015696

Award Number: 9015696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1251898            (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Jay Siegel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,2887,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to develop computing infrastructure in the         
              areas of parallel languages and compilers, automatic parallelization           
              of algorithms, computer vision, and simulation and synthesis of                
              digital devices.  The infrastructure consists of a state of the art            
              Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) computer along with support            
              staff to ensure that the computer hardware and software are properly           
              maintained.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The parallel languages and compilers for parallel computers research           
              focusses on the problem of the dependence of efficient software on the         
              underlying parallel architecture.  This dependence makes the                   
              development of portable software which is also efficient difficult and         
              to date impossible.  The research focusses on languages in which               
              parallelism can be expressed free of architecture assumptions and              
              compilers that will compile programs using these architecture                  
              free constructs into efficient code for specific parallel                      
              architectures.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The automatic parallelization of algorithms research focusses on the           
              problem of efficiently mapping algorithms to SIMD computers.  The SIMD         
              computer executes by having many processors execute the same                   
              instruction on different data.  Thus the movement of data and the              
              choice of which processors should execute an instruction is critical           
              in order to obtain high performance.  This research focusses on a              
              software tool that can be adapted to a variety of SIMD architectures           
              and which will perform the parallelization of algorithms to be used            
              with these architectures.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Computer vision and image processing have been ideal applications for          
              SIMD computers because the processing of images can be broken down             
              into the processing of sub-images, each sub-image algorithm being the          
              same, followed by uniform data movement between processors.  The               
              computer vision research aims to develop a collection of algorithms            
              for vision and image processing that will efficiently use the SIMD             
              architecture.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The research projects on the simulation and synthesis of digital               
              devices use the processing power of the SIMD computer to perform tasks         
              that would require supercomputer computational capabilities.  These            
              projects include the synthesis of digital diffractive elements and the         
              simulation of the operation of semiconductor devices.  The synthesis           
              of digital diffractive elements, used in optics, requires substantial          
              computational capabilities and input/output capacity (on the order of          
              10,000 hours on a VAX 780).  Similarly the modeling of semiconductor           
              devices requires substantial computational resources(the solution of           
              order 30,000 sparse matrices).  Both of these research projects                
              propose to develop algorithms for use on the SIMD computer in order to         
              obtain the computational capability necessary to solve problems of             
              this magnitude. //
