Title       : Dynamic Behavior of Chemical Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9015853

Award Number: 9015853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250491             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Hudson hudson@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Analyzing the chemical and physical processes occurring in                     
              chemical reactor dynamics has practical uses over and above                    
              the elucidation of fundamental phenomena.  An understanding of                 
              these processes and being able to determine the controlling                    
              parameters is necessary for design and scaleup of industrial                   
              reactors.  This research project is a continuation of the                      
              principal investigator's work on the unsteady state behavior                   
              of electrochemical reactors.  Such systems are ideal for                       
              fundamental studies of reaction dynamics because they are                      
              relatively stationary (they have less drift over the time                      
              scale of the dynamics) and they exhibit many types of                          
              interesting dynamic behavior such as complex periodic                          
              oscillations, low order chaos, quasiperiodicity, etc.  The                     
              parameters are easily controlled (potential or current, for                    
              example) so that transitions among states can be investigated.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              In this project several dynamic phenomena will be studied                      
              using electrochemical reactions.  The studies will include                     
              surface patterns and the relationship of temporal and spatial                  
              behavior, transitions from low order chaos to more complex                     
              phenomena, coupled systems, and studies of bifurcation among                   
              states.  The experimental work will involve electrodissolution                 
              of metals, electrodeposition, and electrocatalytic reactions.                  
              The results will be analyzed using methods from nonlinear                      
              dynamics (including neural networks) and will compare                          
              experimental data with model predictions.
