Title       : U.S.-Philippines Cooperative Research: Choice in Decisions of Uncertain or
               Diminishing Returns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1991       
File        : a9015810

Award Number: 9015810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18055              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Hineline   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 5927      EAST ASIA, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 1130,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Philip N.                           
              Hineline, Professor of Psychology, Temple University, to                       
              pursue with Dr. F. G. David, Professor of Psychology,                          
              University of the Philippines, for a period of 24 months, a                    
              program of cooperative research on choice in situations of                     
              uncertain or diminishing returns.  The proposed research                       
              grant will enable Dr. David to continue his involvement in a                   
              research project in the psychology laboratories of Temple                      
              University.  Professor David has been integrally involved                      
              in the formative stages of that project during a one-year                      
              post-doctoral fellowship supplemented by an additional year                    
              via sabbatical leave.  The continuing participation would                      
              entail two summer periods at Temple University, during 1991                    
              and 1992, and communications via electronic mail concerning                    
              data analyses and manuscript preparations during the                           
              intervening and subsequent periods.  The research concerns                     
              pigeons' choices between differently distributed food                          
              deliveries:  One set of experiments addresses a prediction                     
              of optimal foraging theory, that birds become risk-prone                       
              under negative energy budgets.  Other experiments concern                      
              pigeons' sensitivities to, and preferences among, differing                    
              forms of variability in food delivery, and a third set                         
              concerns choices between fixed vs. escalating work require-                    
              ments for food delivery.  These last procedures mimic the                      
              depleting patches of a foraging situation, so its results                      
              will be relevant to foraging theory; it is of special                          
              interest because advantageous short-term choices are                           
              disadvantageous in the longer term.                                            
                                                                                             
              This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in                   
              Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the                       
              level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers                     
              and their counterparts in developing countries through the                     
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and                         
              techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual                     
              benefit.
