Title       : Experimental And Theoretical Investigation of Bridge Motion in Turbulent Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1992   
File        : a9015272

Award Number: 9015272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: J. Eleonora Sabadell                    
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271881             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y.K. Lin linyk@casr.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1474      NAT & MAN-MADE HAZARD MITIGATI
Fld Applictn: 0304020   Extreme Wind                            
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9228,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Motion stability and statistical properties                                    
              of the response of long-span bridges under                                     
              turbulent wind excitations are investigated                                    
              experimentally and theoretically in this                                       
              project.  Experimental investigation is                                        
              conducted on bridge sectional models in a                                      
              water-channel facility.  Similarity                                            
              requirements between a model and the                                           
              prototype are met by suitably proportioning                                    
              the model, and by connecting the model to                                      
              heavy cylinders which are located in the air                                   
              chambers outside the water channel.  Fluid                                     
              forces induced by the structural motion are                                    
              measured when a model is programmed to                                         
              oscillate sinusoidally in a given mode                                         
              through a range of frequencies.  Both the                                      
              coupled type forces (e.g. lift induced by the                                  
              torsional motion), and the uncoupled type                                      
              forces (e.g. lift induced by the vertical                                      
              bending motion) are measured.  Theoretical                                     
              models for bridge motion are then formulated                                   
              to incorporate such experimentally determined                                  
              fluid-force generating mechanisms, and motion                                  
              stability boundaries and structural responses                                  
              are computed for the theoretical models.                                       
              Finally, the theoretical predictions are                                       
              compared with another set of experimental                                      
              results obtained when a structural model is                                    
              excited by fluid flows of specified mean                                       
              velocities and turbulence levels.  The                                         
              comparison provides a basis for further                                        
              refinement of theoretical models.  Flow                                        
              visualization experiments are also conducted                                   
              to gain fundamental insights into structure-                                   
              fluid interaction.  The velocity field                                         
              obtained from flow visualization provides                                      
              additional means for calculating the fluid                                     
              forces on structural models.
