Title       : U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Phylogenetic Relationshipsin the Meloini
               (Coleoptera: Meloidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9015968

Award Number: 9015968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6880               (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Pinto john.pinto@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
              This award will support Professor John Pinto of the University                 
              of California Riverside in a research collaboration with                       
              Professor Marco Bologna of the Universita degli Studi                          
              dell'Aquila, Italy.  The researchers intend to undertake                       
              phylogenetic studies for the tribe Meloini, a group of                         
              approximately 200 species belonging to the beetle family                       
              Meloidae.  This family is of considerable interest to                          
              entomologists because of several distinctive life history                      
              traits, and its reputation as including species that are                       
              pests of crops and domestic animals.                                           
                                                                                             
              The meloini is currently defined by the larval stage.  It                      
              includes all genera of the subfamily Meloinae known to have                    
              phoretic larvae, i.e. larvae that obtain their food source,                    
              in this case bee larvae and provisions, indirectly by                          
              attaching to the adult bee.  Adults of the tribe do not share                  
              any special similarity that indicates group membership.  This                  
              study proposes to analyze cladistically all available                          
              characters in all taxa (at the generic group level) currently                  
              assigned to the Meloini, taking into consideration the                         
              possibility that larval similarity is due to convergence and                   
              not homology.  Analysis of unrelated genera in the subfamily                   
              Nemognathinae, whose members are all phoretic as larvae, will                  
              be particularly instructive in this effort.  This research                     
              will result in a revised classification of the tribe, greater                  
              elucidation of the evolution of phoresy, and new information                   
              on the larval stages and behavior of several species of                        
              Meloidae.
