Title       : U.S.-France (INRIA) Collaborative Research: Massively Parallel Computational
               Fluid Dynamics Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1994  
File        : a9015795

Award Number: 9015795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charbel Farhat charbel@alexandra.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver A. McBryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 4080,5918,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between US                      
              and French scientists on the topic of massively parallel                       
              processing of computational fluid dynamics and large-scale                     
              coupled computational fluid and solid dynamics problems.                       
              The US investigators are Dr. Charbel Farhat and Dr.                            
              Oliver McBryan, University of Colorado at Boulder, and Dr.                     
              Elaine Oren and Dr. Jay Boris, Naval Research Laboratory,                      
              Washington, DC. The French participants are Dr. Alain                          
              Dervieux and Dr. Bernard Larrouturou, French National                          
              Institute for Computer Science and Automation (INRIA),                         
              Sophia-Antipolis, France.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The proposed research includes five components:  steady                        
              and unsteady flow computations on unstructured meshes,                         
              direct and large-eddy simulations on structured grids,                         
              multigrid methods applied to flow problems, and transient                      
              fully coupled fluid/structure simulations.  The application                    
              problems, real-gas flows at high Mach number, transonic                        
              combustion, transonic combustion, detonation physics,                          
              turbulent flows and aeroeleastic analysis of full configura-                   
              tion aircraft structures, are chosen because of their                          
              technological importance and in order to demonstrate to                        
              the engineering community the potential of the emerging                        
              massively parallel technology in solving problems that are                     
              presently beyond the reach of sequential supercomputers.                       
              The research team at Colorado will bring their extensive                       
              "hands on" experience with massively parallel finite                           
              element/difference computations using novel adn intrinsi-                      
              cally parallel numerical algorithms.  This team will also                      
              be responsible for the coordination of the project and the                     
              integration of the fluid and structure engineering                             
              software.  The research group at INRIA will contribute                         
              expertise in steady flow finite element computations with                      
              unstructured meshes.  The NRL team will bring their                            
              advances in unsteady flow parallel computations using                          
              unstructured grids, as well as their expertise in massively                    
              parallel computing.
