Title       : SGER: Environmental History of the White Nile Headwaters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0313862

Award Number: 0313862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34831              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristina Beuning beuninkr@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
              (SGER) program, will use funds to collect a series of cores from Lake Albert in
              East Africa.  The investigator and an undergraduate student will travel to Lake
              Albert and collect a suite of Kullenberg piston cores from the deepest waters
              of Lake Albert, ship the cores to the publicly accessible National Limnological
              Research Center at the University of Minnesota, develop a chronology for the
              cores, complete isotopic and morphological analyses of charred grass epidermis
              in these cores to assess the relative contribution of C3 and C4 grass species
              in the region, and examine shifts in grass species in conjunction with various
              proxies of climatic and environmental conditions.

Lake Albert is located
              within the western Rift and is well sited to record shifts in the relative
              contributions of Atlantic and Indian Ocean moisture sources to the African
              monsoon as well as changes in the hydrologic input among the various equatorial
              African lakes that feed the Nile River.  Previous research has shown East
              African lakes to be sensitive to abrupt decadal-scale variability in climate
              and environmental conditions and unique recorders of such change. New and
              well-dated sediment cores from Lake Albert could provide critical, yet missing,
              details of this climatic behavior. 

In a previous award (i.e.,
              ATM-9912052/0196564), Beuning was funded by the Paleoclimate Program to analyze
              fossil grass cuticles from East African lakes to better understand changes in
              the relative extent of C3 and C4 grass distribution in tropical Africa over
              time.  The award was made at a reduced budget and scope of work to allow
              Beuning to hone her analytical techniques for the isotopic analyses of
              cuticles.  As a result, Beuning left Lake Albert off the list of research
              sites.  In the intervening years, however, Beuning has successfully proved her
              isotopic techniques.  

As chance would have it, a commercial seismic
              expedition is being conducted on Lake Albert in the spring of 2003.  Beuning
              has been offered several days of ship time on the RV Kilindi to core the lake. 
              No local vessels on the lake are sufficient for coring so, the commercial
              expedition is an opportunity to cost-effectively leverage private and public
              funds to achieve a significant payoff for the international community of
              paleoclimtic researchers. With a small financial investment, the wider
              scientific community could benefit from a new and publicly accessible
              paleoclimatic archive.  

