Title       : International Travel - Third Pacific Basin Conference of Adsorption Science and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2003      
File        : a0313534

Award Number: 0313534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Ritter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: Trave 	International l - Third Pacific Basin
              Conference of Adsorption Science and Technology
Proposal
              Number:		CTS-0313534
Principal Investigator:	James Ritter
Institution:			USC
              Research Foundation



Funding will support travel expenses for
              participants from US academic and nonprofit research institutions to attend the
              3rd Pacific Basin Conference on Adsorption Science and Technology (AST) in
              Kyongju, Korea on May 25-29, 2003.  The AST conferences were established in
              1997 in order to promote scientific collaboration in the area of adsorption
              science and technology among scientists and engineers, especially those from
              Pacific Basin countries.  The primary goal and hence intellectual merit of the
              3rd Pacific Basin Conference on AST is to allow scientists and engineers from
              the Pacific Basin Region to present their most recent research efforts in the
              area of Adsorption Science and Technology and to outline further developments
              in this area.  In particular, this will allow US participants from academia and
              industry to interact with their international counterparts and especially to
              enhance and/or establish collaborations and scientific exchange with adsorption
              researchers from the Pacific Basin Region.  The conference will cover a wide
              variety of adsorption related fields from fundamentals to applications, and
              consist of plenary sessions, oral sessions and poster sessions.  To set the
              stage for the conference, ten plenary speakers will present in-depth overviews
              of key research areas covering materials, molecular simulations, equilibria,
              kinetics, and processes.  The conference will last for four and one-half days,
              and host approximately 200 participants from around the world, with about 20
              participants from the US.  The broader impacts of the 3rd Pacific Basin
              Conference on Adsorption Science and Technology are mainly associated with the
              publication of the conferences proceedings volume.  


