Title       : Bluegrass Algebra Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0313597

Award Number: 0313597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto Corso corso@ms.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Uwe Nagel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators are organizing at the University of Kentucky the Bluegrass
              Algebra Conference (April 12-13, 2003) in addition to the third Hayden-Howard
              lecture delivered by Professor Craig Huneke on April 11, 2003. The lecture
              honors the contributions of UK faculty members Thomas Hayden and Henry Howard,
              by bringing an outstanding mathematician to the University of Kentucky each
              year to deliver a colloquium lecture on research at the forefront of modern
              Mathematics. The additional conference will consist of ten lectures -
              accessible to an audience of graduate studens - given by internationally known
              mathematicians working in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry: Prof.
              Shreeram Abhyankar (Purdue), Prof. Stephen Dale Cutkosky (Columbia, Missouri),
              Prof. Shankar Dutta (Urbana-Champaign), Prof. William Heinzer (Purdue), Prof.
              Melvin Hochster (Michigan), Prof. Joseph Lipman (Purdue), Prof. Juan Migliore
              (Notre Dame), Prof. Claudia Polini (Notre Dame), Prof. Bernd Ulrich (Purdue),
              Prof. Wolmer Vasconcelos (Rutgers). Among the areas to be covered we list:
              resolutions of singularities, liaison theory, Hilbert functions, tight closure
              and its applications. We propose that at least 20 graduate students and young
              researchers within three years from their Ph.D. receive funds to support their
              participation in these events. The amount requested will be sufficient for
              travel as well as local expenses.

Commutative Algebra is of central
              importance among the various branches of Modern Algebra because of the power
              and efficiency of its structures, which put it in contact with a variety of
              disciplines, such as Computational Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, Control Theory,
              and Robotics. During the academic year 2002-03, Commutative Algebra is also
              receiving particular attention because of a year long program, which is
              currently held at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley
              under the direction of Professor Huneke. These facts have led the Mathematics
              Department at the University of Kentucky to select Professor Huneke to deliver
              the third Hayden-Howard lecture. There are also at least three long term goals
              that we expect to achieve by organizing the additional Bluegrass Algebra
              Conference. In first place, we are seeking to increase the collaboration among
              the strong Algebra groups at nearby major institutions. Our second goal is to
              encourage and foster scholarly interests within the smaller Algebra groups at
              the regional institutions in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.  Finally, we are
              seeking to expose our
graduate students to current trends of research in
              Algebra and at the same time have them interact with fellow graduate students
              at other institutions. It is worth recalling that the Department of Mathematics
              at UK has a successful history in training a large number of students in
              Algebra.

