Title       : Development of a Structural and Stratigraphic Framework for the McMurdo Sound
               Region, Western Ross Sea.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0313974

Award Number: 0313974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry J. Wilson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs of the National Science Foundation, provides support
              for a workshop to develop a structural and stratigraphic framework for the
              McMurdo Sound region of the western Ross Sea.  Extensive new information has
              accumulated in recent years on the structure, stratigraphy, landscape
              evolution, glacial history, and volcanic chronology of the Transantarctic
              Mountains and Victoria Land Basin in the southern McMurdo Sound region.  New
              seismic, magnetic and gravity data have also been acquired in the area. 
              Participants in the workshop will assess and synthesize both old and new data
              sets in the context of modern knowledge of the rift basin architecture.  The
              principle objective of the workshop is to produce an updated, regional
              structural and stratigraphic framework for the coupled rift/rift-flank system
              in the southern McMurdo Sound region, incorporating volcanic and glacial
              processes as key drivers of this unique geodynamic system.

Broader
              Impact
The workshop will be international in scope, with participants from
              Germany, Italy, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States of
              America.  The workshop activities will improve and enhance international
              collaboration on Antarctic sciences questions and will help to develop a
              well-integrated science community with international partnerships for future
              interdisciplinary research.  Workshop results will be reported at international
              science symposia, future planning workshops focused on Antarctic research
              frontiers, and via established community World Wide Web sites, to ensure broad
              dissemination

