Title       : SGER: An Integrated Study of Post-Flood Hydrology, Ecology, Politics and Policy
               Change: A Cross-National, Urban Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0313984

Award Number: 0313984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Binayak P. Mohanty   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Lindquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5930,5936,9189,9237,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0313984
Mohanty
Natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, and hurricanes
              have impacts
far beyond the physical damage related to the actual event. The
              policy and
political impacts of natural disasters can be immediate, in the
              form of
federal disaster relief aid, or long-term, as in changes to
              long-standing
land use regulations. As a result of Tropical Storm Allison,
              Houston
suffered over $5 billion in damages, the loss of 22 lives and an
              estimated
73,000 homes. Recently, as a result of major flooding in Central
              Europe, the
German city of Dresden, and Prague, in the Czech Republic,
              experienced
similar disasters, the impacts of which are being estimated in the
              billions
of dollars. The similarity of these events provides a unique
              research
opportunity to contribute a broader understanding of the role of
              focusing
events on policy development, politics, and the general health and
              well
being of society. From a research perspective, we are interested
              in
understanding how focusing events, such as urban flooding, develop
              and
propagate across scales and influence decision processes in regard
              to
physical infrastructure and subsequent changes in policy. The objectives
              of
this SGER proposal are two-fold. First, we propose to initiate contact
              with
social and physical scientists in Europe and develop a
              collaborative
research team capable of focusing on the broad topic of public
              policy change
as a result of urban flooding. Researchers will expand upon
              personal
contacts in their respective areas and seek out additional
              collaborators in
substantive research areas within the physical and social
              sciences, as well
as geographical areas impacted by both recurring and
              nonrecurring urban
flooding events. In so doing, we will also identify sources
              of relevant and
reliable data, and to the extent possible, collect baseline
              hydrologic,
ecologic, and social field data on the impact of the recent
              flooding
incidents such as those in Germany, the Czech Republic, and Houston.
              The end
point of this phase of the SGER project will be a well-defined,
              and
committed interdisciplinary and cross-national research team. The
              second
objective is to integrate the disciplines of political
              science/public
administration, hydrology and the geosciences into a
              strategically sound
large scale, multi-year cross-national, collaborative,
              interdisciplinary
research proposal for submission to either multiple NSF
              programs, or one
major cross-cutting NSF initiative. The context for this
              proposal is
cross-national. The integration of the physical and social
              sciences also
reflects the current interest from NSF in approaching complex
              social and
natural problems through multiple perspectives.



