Title       : Core Support of the Water Science and Technology Board
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0313601

Award Number: 0313601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Parker sdparker@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0313601   Parker   The Water Science and Technology Board is the focal point for
              studies related to water resources and hydrologic sciences accomplished under
              the aegis of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
              Engineering. The Board's objective is to improve the scientific and
              technological basis for resolving important national questions and issues
              associated with the efficient management and use of ground and surface water
              resources. In carrying out its responsibilities and in serving the national
              interest, the Board responds to requests for evaluations and advice through its
              ad hoc studies concerning specific and generic issues in water resources,
              influences action by initiating studies of issues that merit consideration by
              public agencies and others, identifies issues and topics of research related to
              water resources, and cooperates with other units of the National Research
              Council and groups with mutual interests outside of the National Research
              Council.
The intellectual merit of the Board is important in advancing
              knowledge and understanding covering the traditional scientific and engineering
              aspects of water resources and the economic, institutional, legal, educational,
              and social aspects, as well. The Board consists of members from all of the
              disciplines involved in water resources activities. The Board responds to
              specific requests from government, state and local agencies, and others. The
              Board also projects future needs for and capabilities of multi- disciplinary
              water-related research and education in the sciences, engineering, and
              technology. These projects are separately funded and carried out by ad hoc
              committees under the oversight of the Board. At each of the three meetings of
              the Board, liaison representatives provide comments and suggestions to aid the
              board in developing its program and reports on its activities.

