Title       : Travel Grant for Third Chemical Engineering Conference for Collaborative
               Research in Eastern Mediterranean (EMCC-3)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0313280

Award Number: 0313280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48361              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacques L. Zakin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald G. Baird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jacques L. Zakin
Ohio State Research Foundation

"Travel Grant for Third
              Mediterranean Chemical Engineering Conference for Collaborative Research."
              

This grant supports travel funds for U.S. academic representatives to
              attend the 3rd Chemical Engineering Conference for Collaborative Research in
              Eastern Mediterranean (EMCC-3) to be held in Thessaloniki, Greece, May 14-16,
              2003. The participating countries are Turkey, Greece, Israel and the U.S.
              Academic chemical engineers from other Eastern Mediterranean countries will
              also be invited. The purpose of the Workshop is to acquaint researchers from
              the participating countries with current research in five areas in chemical
              engineering: Advanced Materials and Processes, Chemical and Catalytic
              Processes, Bioengineering, Transport Phenomena and Separation Processes, and
              Process Systems Engineering, in order to promote collaborative research among
              them. These areas were selected as they are key topics in research in all of
              the countries. The major theme of EMCC-3 will be Nanoscience in Chemical
              Engineering.

This is the third conference. The two previous successful
              conferences were at the Technion, in Haifa, Israel in March 1999 with
              representatives from Turkey, Israel and the U.S. and in Ankara and Istanbul in
              May, 2001 with participation by chemical engineers from Greece as well as the
              other three countries. 

Prof. Andreas Acrivos of the City College of the
              City University of New York will be Honorary Chair of the Conference. Three
              distinguished U.S. chemical engineers will be Plenary Speakers: Prof. Matthew
              Tirrell of the University of California, Santa Barbara, Prof. George
              Stephanopoulis of MIT and Prof. Ignacio Grossman of Carnegie Mellon University.
              In addition, 25 U.S. speakers will be invited from the 5 areas, a blend of
              senior researchers and promising young investigators. There will be five
              Keynote Lecturers from the U.S, one in each research area. Distinguished
              invited speakers from the other three countries have committed to participate
              and 20 speakers from each country will be invited. There will also be poster
              presentations from these countries, some presented by graduate students. In
              addition, several researchers who developed collaborations since the first
              Conference will be invited to participate in a special session in order to help
              encourage other future collaborators. Special travel supplements also will be
              provided to 5 participants to visit and lecture in countries other than
              Greece--Turkey and Israel-to develop and/or promote collaboration. Other US
              participants are expected to attend with approval from the organizers and with
              support from other financial sources. 

Broader Impacts:  The two previous
              EMCC Conferences have had major impacts in acquainting US, Turkish, Israeli and
              Greek academics with each other and with their research interests and
              capabilities and in fostering research collaborations. The proposed third
              conference will provide further opportunities and especially with the many
              Greek researchers expected to attend. 

The added benefit of these
              conferences is the exposure they have provided for large numbers of graduate
              students from the three countries to interact directly with both seasoned and
              young faculty researchers from the US and the other countries. Another benefit
              has been the fruitful discussions on curriculum issues among faculty of the
              participating countries. The U.S. will benefit from this program by virtue of
              the productive relationships that are expected to emerge leading to the
              transfer of expertise. 

Draft reports summarizing the activities in each
              research area will be prepared at the meeting by the U.S. Leaders in each
              research area with the help of their counterparts from the other three
              countries and will then be circulated for editing and to prepare the final
              report. This report will be posted on a general EMCC Web Site to be developed.
              In addition, it is expected that about 30 papers from the proposed Conference
              will be published in Chemical Engineering Communications as for EMCC-2.

