Title       : Biochemical Sensors Utilizing Cavity Ring-Down Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0313996

Award Number: 0313996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry N. Blount, III                    
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Zare zare@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1253      OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Zare
MPS-0313996

This Small Grants for Exploratory Research
              (SGER) award supports research into the applicability of the newly emerging
              technique of Cavity Ring-Down Spectroscopy - based sensors as probes for
              biomolecules in the condensed phase, with particular emphasis on potential
              bioterrorism agents.  Four developmental strategies will be pursued to bring
              the extraordinary sensitivity of Cavity Ring-Down Spectroscopy (CRDS) to
              biosensor technology.  Each has its own potential advantages for
              implementation, selectivity, and sensitivity.  The first approach is the use of
              a cell whose entrance and exit windows are at Brewster's angle to minimize
              absorption losses when inserted inside an optical cavity.  The purpose of this
              device is to miniaturize the detector so that very small volumes of liquid can
              be analyzed. Such a device has particular promise when coupled to
              microseparations, such as capillary electrophoresis or lab on a chip. The
              second approach is the use of an optical cavity in which the light makes
              optical contact with the surroundings by means of an evanescent wave. This
              device is sensitive to absorption changes at the surface where the optical
              contact is made.  It has the advantage of keeping the light on the inside so
              that it is immune to questions of turbidity in the medium in contact with the
              surface.   The third approach is the use of surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
              coupled to CRDS. It is also sensitive to the liquid-surface interface and its
              value will depend on the ease with which analyte-sensitive probe molecules can
              be coupled to the metal (gold or silver) surface used in SPR. The fourth
              approach is the direct contact of the liquid with the two mirrors that
              constitute the optical cavity. This approach is by far the simplest to
              implement, and an assessment will be made of what limits its operations,
              particularly in regard to analyte selectivity.  This research could well
              provide the basis for broad and important applications in the detection and
              quantification of biomolecules.  

This activity is jointly supported by the
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences and by the Instrumentation and Instrument Development Program
              in the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological
              Sciences.

