Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Greek, Phoenician, and Roman Colonization versus
               Holocene Climatic Change: Economic Implications on a Developing Indigenous
               Society, Western Sicily
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0313938

Award Number: 0313938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Kolb aloha@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay A. Stravers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Kolb and Dr. Jay Stravers, Mr. Chad Heinzel
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will continue his
              participation in archaeological excavations of the Sicilian-Scandinavian
              Archaeological Project in western Sicily's Salemi Region.  The project is
              investigating the primary, social and environmental, factors leading to the
              rise and fall of an indigenous society during Sicily's Late Bronze Age to Early
              Iron Age (1100 to 600 BC) transition.  The Salemi Region provides landscape
              sediment-assemblages, fluvial and alluvial fan sedimentation that contains a
              well-preserved geoarchaeological record.  This record is especially significant
              because it retains important indicators of past climatic, landscape, and social
              changes. Preliminary excavations and survey have successfully revealed the
              presence of a major hilltop settlement that includes, streets, walls,
              fortification towers, nearby springs and streams, fossil land snail shells, and
              adjacent agriculturally rich slopes.

Understanding the environmental factors
              responsible for landscape development in any geologic setting is a critical
              step towards identifying natural versus human induced landscape modifications. 
              Mr. Heinzel's research will provided an important high-resolution climatic data
              set for the past 15,000 years in western Sicily.  Such information will provide
              a physical context for on-going archaeological (Late Bronze through Roman Age)
              excavations in the western Mediterranean region.  These data will provide a
              platform from which local and regional interpretations of cultural development
              and landscape usage patterns will be made.  Mr. Heinzel's use of fossil snail
              shells will serve as an indicator of time (Carbon dating) of
              deposition/occupation and past climate change (stable isotopic Carbon and
              Oxygen geochemistry) is a first in Sicily.  Well-preserved snail shells
              recovered from the project's geologic and archaeological excavations will
              provide insightful data regarding past changes in rainfall, temperature, and
              vegetative cover.    

This research is important because it contributes new
              environmental information regarding past abrupt climatic changes and
              agricultural developments in western Sicily that are essential unknown
              variables in our current state of knowledge.  These environmental data will
              provide insight when interpreting the daily lives of Sicily's pre-historic and
              historic evolving occupational phases.  In addition, these data will be
              available for future climate models in the Mediterranean region.  Models that
              may predict the effects of future climatic change and land use practices on our
              own developing society.  Mr. Heinzel's research also rescues and records
              information from contemporary destructive agricultural practices and assists in
              the training of a promising young scientist. 


