Title       : Heteroscorpionate Ligands: Applications to Bioinorganic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0313865

Award Number: 0313865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl J. Carrano carrano@sciences.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Professor Carl J. Carrano at San Diego State University to
              study a family of ligands that allows for the systematic variance of donor
              atom, charge, steric bulk, hydrogen-bonding and other factors that can have an
              important effect on metal-catalyzed biotransformations.  Ligand effects on
              oxygen atom transfer reactions between acceptors such as organophosphines and
              models for molybdoenzymes will be systematically studied.  New sulfur-rich
              model complexes to more closely mimic enzyme active sites will be prepared. 
              Pentaacoordinate complexes of iron will be prepared as models for several
              non-heme iron oxygenase enzymes in order to determine the effects of the donor
              atom set, charge, and hydrogen bonding and other factors that control
              oxygenation versus oxidation.  Pseudotetrahedral iron complexes will be
              synthesized and studied as models for peptide deformylases and compared with
              analogous complexes of Co(II), Ni(II) and Zn(II) in order to determine why
              Fe(II) rather than Zn(II) is employed by nature in these unique hydrolytic
              enzymes.

Relatively small complexes of metal ions will be prepared that
              simulate the structure and function of metal active sites in enzymes.  Studying
              these complexes will help to elucidate the fundamental nature of the function
              of the metal ions in a number of important enzymes.

