Title       : SGER: Geometric Morphometrics-Based Visualization and Analysis of Morphological
               Integration: A New Look at Bivalve Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0313560

Award Number: 0313560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31245              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Roopnarine proopnarine@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SGER: Geometric Morphometric-based Visualization and Analysis of Morphological
              Integration:  A New Look at Bivalve Evolution

Peter D.
              Roopnarine
EAR-0313560

ABSTRACT

The proposed research is a novel
              approach to morphological integration, a long-standing interest in
              morphological studies.  Morphological integration is a measure of the
              relationships among morphological characters at the level of the organism. 
              Patterns of morphological integration are descriptions of how the phenotype of
              a monophyletic group of organisms is actually assembled from recognized
              characters. Variation of patterns within a monophyletic clade is therefore
              representative of adaptive histories, as well as phylogenetic and functional
              constraints. The present study proposes to develop a new method for the
              derivation and analysis of patterns of morphological integration within a very
              diverse and geologically old clade of bivalved molluscs, the superfamily
              Veneroidea. Viewing patterns of morphological integration within a clade, and
              over geological time, will allow this study to address an important
              paleobiological concept, namely the precise role of phenotypic construction in
              morphological constraint, adaptive radiation, and phylogenetic
              diversification.

	This proposal is novel  because integration patterns will
              be derived   from geometric morphometrics-based analyses, which will allow
              direct visualization on the phenotypes of the study organisms. The analyses
              will also encompass the longest interval of geologic time yet considered for a
              study of integration, approximately 80 million years. Furthermore, it is
              proposed that these patterns be analyzed in the recent frameworks of network
              theory and the mathematics of complexity because: 1) Patterns of morphological
              integration are true networks of relationships among regions of the organism's
              morphology, and 2) Network theory has been applied recently  to both the very
              lowest levels of the biological hierarchy, such as genomic organization and
              gene function , and the highest levels, such as trophic food webs. Patterns of
              morphological integration at the level of species and monophyletic clades
              represent  a critical link between these two ends of the hierarchy.


