Title       : Infrastructure Management Research and Education Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0313949

Award Number: 0313949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardo W. Flintsch flintsch@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The decline in the number of students interested in infrastructure management
              experienced in the last decade has been identified as one potential impediment
              for the development of this important sector.  Efficient and well-maintained
              infrastructure systems are essential for societal stability, economic growth,
              and sustainable competitiveness.  The objective of the Infrastructure
              Management Education and Research Workshop is to develop a plan to facilitate
              the strengthening of infrastructure management research and education by
              addressing this problem.  The strategic plan will identify: (1) areas of
              research focus, (2) possible causes for the decline in infrastructure
              management student enrollment, (3) strategies to increase the number of
              undergraduate and graduate students interested in infrastructure management,
              and (4) potential solutions for the impediments identified.  The meeting may
              also facilitate long-term collaborative efforts and networking among the
              participating scientists.  
The long-term goal of the proposed initiative is
              to enhance infrastructure management practices through research and education. 
              The workshop is envisioned as a first step towards the establishment of
              long-term collaborative efforts that will have a broad impact by focusing on
              the following specific aims: (1) provide enhanced learning opportunities in the
              area of infrastructure management for both undergraduate and graduate students
              so that they may be motivated to pursue careers in the infrastructure area; (2)
              increase the number of students interested in infrastructure preservation and
              management; (3) perform research and scholarship activities that enhance human
              welfare by advancing the state of knowledge in infrastructure preservation,
              renovation, and management; and (4) establish a network of infrastructure
              management scientists, educators, and students who will promote the exchange of
              knowledge and ideas in this field.  These activities will contribute to the
              provision of a more reliable infrastructure at a lower cost, thus increasing
              the competitiveness of our industries and promoting sustainable development.

