Title       : Structural Controls on Magma Transport and Vertical Coupling in the Continental
               Lithosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0313626

Award Number: 0313626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Klepeis kklepeis@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An international field forum in Fiordland, New Zealand (April 26 to May 6, 2003)
              is providing members of the Solid Earth Science community with an opportunity
              to examine the mechanisms by which magma is generated, segregated and
              transported through continental crust and how these processes affect the
              mechanical evolution of the lithosphere. The Fiordland location is significant
              because few field sites allow geoscientists to examine directly structural and
              magmatic features that evolved simultaneously within large sections of the
              lower crust. Fiordland contains rare exposures of high-pressure migmatite and
              lower crustal structural features that formed at unusually deep levels of a
              Cretaceous mountain system (25-50 km paleodepths). The spectacular preservation
              of features at this site are stimulating new ideas and are providing a basis
              for evaluating the processes of melt generation and escape from the lower crust
              and how migrating magma interacts with deformation at the lithospheric scale.
              Specific issues addressed  include: 1) evidence of rapidly evolving thermal and
              structural regimes in the lower crust and effects on lithosphere evolution; 2)
              evidence of fluid and melt sources and changing mechanisms of magma segregation
              and transport through the lower crust; 3) feedback mechanisms among crustal
              melting, granulite facies metamorphism and deformation; 4) effects of crustal
              melting and magmatism on vertical coupling/decoupling processes within the
              lithosphere; 5) flow patterns in natural lower crustal shear zones and their
              relationship to deformation and magma transport processes; 6) space-time
              controls on deformation partitioning and strain localization processes in the
              lower crust. 

The unique geologic setting of Fiordland allows 30
              geoscientists to exchange current knowledge and new ideas that are well
              expressed by the geology of specific field sites. This project also partially
              supports 5-8 students and a post-doctoral associate to attend the meeting. The
              participation of young scientists provides opportunities for students to meet
              other geoscientists conducting research in the same or similar fields of
              interest, but with different expertise. It also allows them to interact with
              mature scientists and an opportunity to study some spectacularly exposed deep
              crustal processes. 


