Title       : Collaborative Research: Silica Cycling in the Central North Pacific Gyre: Roles
               of Rhizosolenia Mats and Suspended Diatoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9401990

Award Number: 9401990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Brzezinski brzezins@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401990  Brzezinski         Global mass-balance consideration, vertical nutrient
               profiles, and seasonal nutrient cycle data all indicate that  the large
              subtropical mid-ocean gyres may account for the  majority of the global oceanic
              production of biogenic  silica.  Although diatoms can become abundant during
              spring  blooms in these regions, the available evidence suggests  that most of
              the annual silica production in summer and  autumn.  This may be especially
              true in the oligotrophic  North Central Pacific which does not have a strong
              seasonal  cycle of phytoplankton production due to Persistent  stratification. 
              The surface waters of the Central North  Pacific contain the highest
              concentrations of silicic acid  of any oligotrophic gyre.  It is unknown
              whether this  greater availability of silicic acid results in higher rates  of
              silica production in this region compared to other mid  ocean systems. 
              Siliceous biomass in this region has been  reported to be overwhelmingly
              dominated (>90%) by centimeter-  sized mats are not effectively sampled by
              traditional water  bottle samplers and are typically collected by divers.  This
               give rise to a unique situation where silica cycling  in  this region, which
              is likely to be significant in global  terms, may be dominated by large rare
              sells that would be  essentially invisible to investigations which employ 
              traditional sampling methods.         This project will be the first study of
              the production  and dissolution of biogenic silica in the oligotrophic  Central
              North Pacific Ocean.  Our study will combine  traditional water column sampling
              using water-bottle  samplers with collections of mats made by divers to compare
               the relative roles of these large mats and suspended  diatioms in the cycling
              of biogenic silica in the surface  waters of this  region.  This study will
              have two major  objectives:  (1) to evaluate of the magnitude of silica 
              production in the North Central Pacific Gyre, and (2) to  assess the relative
              contribution mats of Rhizosoleni a sp.  and unaaggregated diatoms in the
              cycling of Si.  This work  will be conducted during two cruises out of Hawaii.
