Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Group Proposal for Research: Topologyand Differential
               Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9401714

Award Number: 9401714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274900             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Browder browder@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401714  Browder       Research will be carried forward in the areas of
              cohomology  of groups, with applications to group actions on manifolds, and 
              various topics on symplectic manifolds.  Among the areas  considered are the
              Euler characteristic of central extensions by  Z of groups, such that the
              resultant group is finite dimensional,  the rank of symmetry of products of
              spheres, i.e. the calculation  of the maximal rank of products of Z/p which act
              effectively (or  freely) on products of spheres, and related problems on other 
              manifolds.  In symplectic geometry the research will focus on  Hamiltonian
              group actions, with particular attention to questions  on the cohomology of the
              reduced spaces, the symplectic quotient,  the ring structure of this
              cohomology, with applications to  moduli spaces of flat vector bundles.  Also
              to be considered are  obstructions to the construction of symplectic structures
              and  questions related to the algebraic topology of symplectic  manifolds.     
                Manifolds are the generalized spaces in which so much of  modern physics and
              engineering find their natural expression, and  whose topological (i.e.
              continuous) properties have been found to  play a crucial role in the
              expression of these theories.  In  particular, the symmetry properties or the
              dynamical properties  of these spaces, especially the spaces of mechanics, the
              so  called symplectic spaces, and the dynamics associated to them are  basic to
              understanding many physical and mathematical problems.   This project will make
              its contribution using means from  algebraic topology and differential
              geometry.  ***
