Title       : Mathematical Sciences: One Higher Dimensional Wavelets fromFractal Interpolation
               Functions: Construction and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1994       
File        : a9401352

Award Number: 9401352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Geronimo geronimo@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401352  Geronimo       Work supported by this grant focuses on the application
              of  wavelets to signal and image processing as well as to numerical  analysis. 
              The wavelet approach to problems in these areas has  followed two basic paths:
              developing the wavelet from the  solution of a scaling equation or via splines.
               A third procedure  to be pursued in this work derives from recent construction
              of  fractal interpolation functions.  The construction has advantages  of both
              of the previous methods, namely explicit regularity  results, easily calculated
              inner products and linear phase as in  the spline case and orthogonality,
              compact support and continuity  as in the dilation equation case.  The method
              also has a  multidimensional generalization that gives wavelets which are  not
              tensor products of univariate functions.  This project  continues
              investigations into the construction and application of  wavelets using fractal
              interpolation functions in one and  higher dimensions.  In one dimension, the
              focus will be on  constructing smoother (at least differentiable) compactly 
              supported and orthogonal wavelets.  In higher dimensions, the  goal is to
              construct continuous, compactly supported orthogonal  wavelets. Applications
              will be made to image processing by  exploiting the unique properties (e.g.
              symmetry and regularity)  of the wavelets.       The study and applications of
              wavelets represents are   relatively new branch of harmonic analysis in which
              single  functions are used to generate Hilbert (or other) space bases by  which
              functions may be represented.  While this in itself is not  too difficult, one
              seeks wavelets with additional properties such  as smoothness, compact support,
              localization in time and  frequency.   Coupled with all of these demands, one
              also asks for  computational simplicity.  Remarkably, there are such functions.
               The goals of this research are to extend and refine basic  knowledge in this
              field by combining existing techniques  with those developed in parallel within
              t he field of  fractal interpolation.
