Title       : The FASEB Conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication and Segregation
               on July 23-28, 1994, Santa Cruz, CA.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9401595

Award Number: 9401595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Molly Fitzgerald-Hayes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9401595  Fitzerald-Hayes  A conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure,
              Replication and Segregation will be held by the Federation of American
              Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) July 23-28, 1994 at the University of
              California at Santa Cruz.  The meeting will be include a Yeast Genome Workshop
              to update the community on the international effort to sequence the yeast
              genome and to discuss the implications of this work for yeast research.  In
              light of the recent progress made to elucidate the motor components of the
              yeast kinetochore, the Committee has decided to include a special session on
              Molecular Motors.  Other sessions will cover such topics as nuclear
              architecture, DNA replication, cell cycle control, telomeres and position
              effects, mutations that cause missegregation, meiotic chromosome segregation
              and the components of the mitotic spindle.  %%%  A conference on Yeast
              Chromosome Structure, Replications and Segregation will be held by the
              Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) July 23-28,
              1994 at the University of California at Santa Cruz.  The main objective of this
              conference is to bring together a small group of leading scientists in the
              field to discuss their recent work and exchange ideas.  The participation of
              minority researchers and younger scientists as well as postdoctoral fellows and
              graduate students will be encouraged. There is abundant evidence that what is
              discovered from studying yeast is relevant to our understanding of mammalian
              chromosomes.  Many of the components that participate in the organization and
              function of chromosomes are highly conserved among all eucaryotes, from yeast
              to man.  Already, some of the molecular and genetic studies on yeast
              chromosomes have led to discoveries of similar gene products in higher
              organisms. Understanding the basic mechanisms of chromosome segregation is
              essential for the prevention of chromosome transmission problems in humans. 
              Aneuploidy, genome rearrangements and other chromosomal abnormalities are k
              nown to play important roles in cancer, spontaneous abortion and birth defects.
               ***
