Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Algebraic Topology to Fixed Point Theory,
               Dynamics, and Cohomology of Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1998 
File        : a9401073

Award Number: 9401073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross Geoghegan ROSS@MATH.BINGHAMTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401073  Geoghegan       Professor Geoghegan will investigate problems at the 
              interface of algebra and topology, involving fixed point theory,  dynamics and
              group theory.  In collaboration with the Canadian  topologist A.  Nicas, he has
              developed a new "one-parameter fixed  point theory."  From this come trace
              formulae for Fuller  index-type invariants of non-singular flows, and new 
              K_1-invariants and "non-commutative" zeta functions for  suspension flows.  The
              extension of the latter to non-suspension  flows is a goal of the present
              project.  Their "first order Euler  characteristic" is a new invariant in
              topology and group theory  having properties analogous to the classical
              ("zeroth order")  Euler characteristic.  They will continue to compute this in 
              specific cases and develop a full theory.  The proposal also  covers Professor
              Geoghegan's interests in geometric group theory,  with particular reference to
              local properties of K(G,1) complexes  which imply that G is a duality group, in
              the sense of Bieri and  Eckmann.  He seeks a criterion having the same
              relationship to  duality groups as the manifold property has to Poincare
              duality  groups.       This project is about the connections between topology, 
              which is a kind of fundamental geometry, and group theory, which  concerns the
              formal study of symmetries.  The layperson is not  accustomed to separating the
              "group" of symmetries possessed by  an object from the object itself, but group
              theory does just  that.  It transfers the symmetries from where they first
              arose to  new mathematical objects (where they again appear as symmetries  but
              in a different way), thus revealing subtle new features of  the group.  One
              aspect of this general philosophy, sometimes  called Geometric Group Theory,
              reaches into the depths of  Algebraic Topology, with its enormous wealth of
              methods and  examples, to find new and revealing settings for the group being 
              studied.  In the present instance, the methods of time-dependent  fixed point
              theory are particular ly relevant.  The investigator  and his collaborator have
              developed a new aspect of this part of  topology and are using it to detect new
              invariants of certain  kinds of groups.  While application outside mathematics
              is not  the driving force, they have had success in applying their work  to
              Dynamics, specifically to the behavior of closed orbits of  flows in certain
              situations, dynamics now being considered  seriously applicable mathematics. 
              Furthermore, the investigator  has participated in a collaboration with an
              applied mathematician  and an electrical engineer to use some of his methods in
              the  theory of electrical circuits.  ***
