Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Size and Regularity Estimates for Solutions to Hyperbolic
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9401819

Award Number: 9401819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Michael Beals beals@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401819  Beals       The work supported by this award involves the study of 
              several questions on properties of solutions to strictly  hyperbolic partial
              differential equations.  The equations are an  outgrowth of the classical wave
              equation which lies at the heart  of the theory of hyperbolic equations. 
              Refined estimates in the  linear case will be derived, to analyze the
              properties of  solutions to the physically more realistic nonlinear problems. 
              Among the questions to be considered are:  estimates of time  decay for
              appropriate measures of the size of a solution  and analysis of nonconstant
              coefficient problems corresponding  to nonuniform media in which wave
              propagation takes place.   Such estimates will also be considered for solutions
              to wave  equations on domains with boundary, such as in the exterior of an 
              obstacle, to find the best possible time decay subject to the  weakest
              restrictions on the data.  Finally, smoothness properties  of solutions to
              nonlinear wave equations as determined by  the corresponding properties of the
              data will be treated.   The general propagation of smoothness in a wave
              satisfying  a nonlinear equation will be reconsidered in a setting of  less
              initial smoothness.  Examples will be considered where  the formation of
              nonlinear singularities develop in cases in  which nonsmooth surfaces appear,
              both for interior domains and in  the presence of a boundary.       Partial
              differential equations form a basis for mathematical  modeling of the physical
              world.  The role of mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the
              equations as it is to  provide qualitative and quantitative information about
              the  solutions.  This may include answers to questions  about uniqueness,
              smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis  often develops methods for
              approximation of solutions and  estimates on the accuracy of these
              approximations.  ***
