Title       : New Light on Late Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9401238

Award Number: 9401238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. McMillin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
              Program, is  concerned with elucidation of the mechanisms of excited state
              relaxation in square planar, four-  coordinate complexes of platinum(II) and
              copper(II).  The work is based upon earlier  observations that the lifetimes of
              excited states of such compounds are strongly affected by  secondary
              interactions of the complexes with their environments.  As a result they have
              potential  as molecular probes and sensors.  Specific studies will include
              characterization of the  photochemistry of platinum(II) terpyridine and
              copper(II) porphyrin complexes both in fluid  media and intercalated into DNA,
              and attempts to increase the excited state lifetimes of the  former complexes
              by modification of the terpyridine ligand through substitution.  Techniques  to
              be employed will include luminescence, absorption and CD spectroscopies in
              conjunction with  quenching reactions and temperature dependent measurements.  
               Absorption of electromagnetic radiation generates excited electronic states
              that may revert (relax)  to the ground state by non-irradiative (heat
              generating) or irradiative (emission of light)  pathways.  A great deal of
              information can be obtained about the electronic structure of  compounds that
              undergo irradiative relaxation by studies of their emission spectra. 
              Irradiative  relaxation can be highly dependent upon the environment in which
              the molecule resides and  under favorable circumstances the observation of an
              emission spectrum can be used as a probe  of the molecular environment.  This
              project has as its major objective the development of a  better understanding
              of the ways in which relaxation of excited states of certain transition metal 
              compounds occur and how these are determined by the molecular environment. 
              There are many  potential applications in a number of areas including
              photosensors, photodynamic cancer therapy,  and molecular electronics.
