Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Topology of Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1995    
File        : a9401086

Award Number: 9401086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Daverman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401086  Daverman       The aim of this project is to characterize (1) 
              low-dimensional manifolds and (2) a class of nicely structured  functions
              -approximate fibrations - defined on them.  Both  components involve close
              scrutiny of continuous functions on  these objects, with severe restrictions
              imposed on the point  preimages.  The first comprises the final aspects of a 
              far-reaching effort to characterize manifolds topologically;  primarily it
              calls for determination of an appropriate geometric  notion of general position
              to fulfill the role played by the  Disjoint Disks Property in the
              characterization of high  dimensional manifolds.  The second arises because
              recent results  in the piecewise linear category make it reasonable to expect 
              discovery of widespread additional conditions under which one  quickly and
              easily detects an approximate fibration;  specifically, it seems that for many
              n-manifolds  N , any map  from an (n+k)-manifold onto a reasonable space  X 
              with each  point preimage homotopy equivalent to  N  will be an approximate 
              fibration.  Interest in this class stems from andtrades upon  computable
              relationships among domain, range, and typical fiber.   New tools are sought
              for this effort, geometric ones in the first  case, to distinguish genuine
              manifolds from pretenders, and  algebraic ones in the second case, both to
              improve the  recognition criteria and to expand the applications.       The
              projected research activity focuses on manifolds, a  foundational project in
              that these objects are central to so much  mathematics.  One aim is to
              characterize low-dimensional  manifolds, which would crown the far-reaching
              effort to  characterize manifolds topologically, with complete success 
              recently achieved in dimensions greater than 4, and hopes for  related success
              in the two remaining dimensions of interest.  A  second aim is to characterize
              certain nicely structured  functions, approximate fibrations, defined on
              manifolds.  This  effort appears promising now because several resu lts from
              the  past two years make it reasonable to expect discovery of  additional,
              useful conditions under which one could quickly  detect this class of
              functions.  The resultant ease and variety  of computations about the various
              objects at hand would be a  significant benefit.  New tools are sought for each
              of these  efforts, geometric ones in the first case, to distinguish genuine 
              manifolds from pretenders, and algebraic ones in the second case,  to provide
              additional relationships among domain, range, and  fiber of the functions under
              consideration and thereby to expand  the applications.  ***
