Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Probability Theory with Minimum Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9401194

Award Number: 9401194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michel Talagrand talagran@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    The main theme of this work is "probabilities with minimal  structures",
              and in particular the research of upper and lower  bounds for stochastic
              processes under general conditions.  Connected sidelines are applications to
              Banach spaces, to  combinatorics, to probabilistic analysis of hard problems,
              to  random Fourier series and of course to more classical  probabilistic
              questions such as trajectories of stochastic  processes and gaussian processes.
               The central philosophy is to  give priority to tools that require very little
              structure over  more specific arguments.  The ideas of isoperimetry in product 
              spaces, that have given a new understanding of the notion of  probabilistic
              independence will continue to be a central tool.  The true scope of these ideas
              has been realized only recently,  and the potential for future progress and
              applications should not  be underestimated.       The main thrust of this
              research is to pursue the  development of abstract tools of probability in
              particular in  relationship with the classical idea of isoperimetry. It was 
              realised by the investigator that the classical idea of  isoperimetry can be
              made meaningful in a much more general  setting than was previously believed.
              This gave rise to new  families of inequalities that have solved numerous
              problems in  abstract probability, and had impact in areas where probability 
              is a tool rather than an object of study in itself, and in  particular
              operation research and theoretical computer science.  The potential of these
              idea, both at the theoretical level and  the level of applications starts only
              to be understood, and  appears very promising.
