Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Modified Lagrangian Methods in Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9401871

Award Number: 9401871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Teboulle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1039,9146,CVIS,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401871  Teboulle    The research program will focus on proximal-like methods
              and  their applications to nonlinear constrained optimization  problems. 
              Central to this study is a recently proposed new class  of proximal-like
              mappings associated with closed convex  functions, where the usual quadratic
              term is replaced by a kind  of quasi-distance.  When applied to the dual of an
              optimization  problem, these give rise to wide variety of modified Lagrangians 
              methods which have many attractive properties not present in the  classical
              quadratic augmented Lagrangian.  The research project  will attempt to provide
              a unifying framework for the design and  analysis of modified multiplier
              methods for solving nonlinear  programming problems.  The program's objective
              propose to sharpen  and extend the mathematical theory needed to analyze the
              above  algorithms.  In particular, the research will consider new  variants of
              modified Lagrangians for both convex and nonconvex  programs, and will develop
              a complete convergence theory.   Related decomposition algorithms within the
              proximal framework  will also be investigated.    This project will focus on
              the study and development of new  methods for solving nonlinear constrained
              optimization problems.   Such problems consist of minimizing/maximizing an
              objective  subject to some constraints which are determined by the nature of 
              the particular model/problem.  Optimization techniques play a  central role in
              the solution of fundamental problems arising in a  wide range of applications
              such as: computerized tomography,  finance, geophysical sciences, production
              and manufacturing,  robotics, to mention just a few.  One area of this research
              will  concentrate on developing the mathematical theory needed to  analyze a
              new class of methods for solving nonlinear problems. In  particular, the PI
              will focus on the design and analysis of  reliable and fast algorithms.  The
              second main research area will  concentrate on decomposition methods for large
              scale problems.  Recen t advances in computer technology have motivated the
              search  for constructing new algorithms for specific classes of large  scale
              problems, by taking full advantage of the structure of this  problem classes. 
              Such problems arise for example in structural  optimization, water distribution
              systems, and planning problems  under uncertainty.  Here, the PI will study and
              develop splitting  methods, which are leading to highly parallel algorithms. 
              In  both areas, the role of optimization methods is central.   Improvement of
              methods and their practical applications would  thus have a beneficial impact
              on contributing to the solution of  real life problems.
