Title       : FASEB Summer Research Conference: Plant Development and Cell Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1994       
File        : a9401210

Award Number: 9401210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip N. Benfey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Fourth FASEB Conference on Plant Gene Expression will  bring together cell
              biology and molecular genetic approaches  to the study of plant development. 
              The meeting topic was  chosen in light of recent success in gene cloning
              combined  with technological advances that permit analysis of  developmental
              events at a finer level than previously  permitted.  The session cover topics
              ranging from  gametogenesis through reproduction.   Attempts to balance  the
              use of genetics and cell biology will be focused on in  each session, including
              a consideration of the factors that  influence cell fate, such as neighboring
              cells, the  environment, the cytoskeleton, and meristem prepatterning.  The
              meeting should provide an atmosphere for the exchange of  data and ideas gained
              from different experimental systems.  The FASEB meeting will focus on
              development, rather than  attempting to cover all areas of plant biology.  By 
              combining genetic, molecular and cell biology approaches to  questions of
              development, scientists should come together  who may not normally attend the
              same meetings.
