Title       : FASEB Conference: Virus Assembly, July 23-28, 1994 held at The Vermont Academy,
               Saxtons River, Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9401254

Award Number: 9401254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia G. Spear   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger W. Hendrix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherwood R. Casjens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Spear  9401254  This award is for partial support of a conference entitled
              "Virus  Assembly" to be held under the auspices of the Federation of American 
              Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) from July 23 to 28, 1994, at  the
              Vermont Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont. The purpose of the  conference is to
              bring together scientists working on all aspects of  virus assembly and
              structure (including the initial disassembly steps  associated with viral entry
              into cells) for bacterial, plant, animal  and human viruses. The intention is
              to encourage communication of ideas  and hypotheses about virus assembly and
              structure, across the usual  taxonomic barriers, and to promote dissemination
              of results obtained  with a variety of different viruses using a variety of
              different  experimental approaches, including biochemical and genetic methods
              as  well as X-ray crystallography, electron microscopy and image 
              reconstruction. There are no other conferences devoted entirely to  problems of
              virus assembly and structure, across the viral taxonomic  groups, except the
              previous two FASEB conferences on this topic held in  1990 and 1992.  The
              previous conferences in this series were enormously  successful and achieved
              the kind of communication desired. It seems  likely, given the current rate of
              progress in this field, that the  FASEB conference of 1994 also achieve the
              desired goals.  %%%                             The purpose of the conference
              is to bring together, for exchange of  information, the leading researchers on
              the structure and assembly of  viruses. Viruses infecting humans, animals,
              plants and bacteria are all  included in the program because their similarities
              and differences help  to define the general principles of virus structure and
              assembly. It is  important to understand these general principles, in part
              because the  assembly of proteins and nucleic acids into complicated structures
              is  vital to the functioning of human cells and tissues as well as of the 
              viruses. In addition, some of the  most promising new antiviral drugs  and
              agricultural pest control strategies are likely to act by  interfering with
              virus assembly. Understanding the structures of  viruses allows one to predict
              the properties of agents that should be  able to block virus assembly and
              therefore prevent the spread of virus  infection.  ***
