Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1996  
File        : a9401355

Award Number: 9401355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Jerison jerison@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401355  Jerison       The primary goal of this mathematical research is to
              obtain  existence, regularity and estimation on the size and shape of 
              solutions of elliptic partial differential equations.  The  solutions are
              variational solutions, that is, minimizers or  higher critical points of energy
              or some other cost function.   The methods employed are symmetry and invariance
              in the form of  Fourier analysis, rescaling and iteration, curvature and 
              convexity, maximum principle and comparison functions, Green's  formula and
              more elaborate integration by parts formulas,  asymptotic analysis and
              perturbations and trial functions for  energy estimation.  The first problem is
              to estimate eigenvalues  of eigenfunctions defined on convex domains or on
              positively  curved surfaces.  Good estimation necessitates locating the nodal 
              line, that is, the arc where the eigenfunction vanishes.  The  problem of
              locating the nodal line is viewed as a two-phase free  boundary problem.  In
              addition, it work will be done on the  evolution to equilibrium for two-phase
              free boundary problems.  A  second problem to be addressed is a classical
              allocation problem  first proposed by Monge in the 18th century.  The problem
              can be  viewed as a linear programming problem.  It can be formulated as  one
              of deciding how to retrain a group of workers to fit new jobs  at minimal cost.
               The approach to be used is geometric and  related to the study of
              volume-preserving maps of N-space and the  theory of the Monge Ampere equation,
              a fully nonlinear partial  differential equation.       Partial differential
              equations form a basis for mathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The
              role of mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is
              to  provide qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions. 
              This may include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.
               In addition, analysis often  develops methods for approximation of solutions
              and estimates on  the accuracy of these  approximations.  ***
