Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Non-linear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9401168

Award Number: 9401168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Caffarelli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Caffarelli  9401168       This project continues mathematical research on
              several  broad areas involving nonlinear partial differential equations.   Of
              the two central themes, one concerns Lagrangian coordinates  and allocation
              problems.  In its physical interpretation, the  work is concerned with the
              deformation or evolution of a material  body.  In particular, efforts will be
              made to understand how  compression and rotation control the deformation.  For
              instance,  if the infinitesimal compression is controlled, what other  quantity
              of the rotation must be controlled to assure that  the deformation be smooth? 
              This question, a Lagrangian version  of the Helmholtz divergence-curl
              decomposition for a velocity  or instantaneous deformation field, has arisen
              naturally in  several areas where one must compute large deviations 
              (computational plasticity, models for front formation in  meteorological
              sciences, discretization of incompressible flows)  as well as problems of
              allocation, where one tries to allocate  resources into a new distribution
              which minimizes the allocation  costs.  A second theme concerns free boundaries
              and their  singular perturbations.  These arise in continuum mechanics when  a
              rapid transition takes place in which the model assumes the  presence of a
              sharp interphase (the burning of a flame, the  solidification of a liquid,
              etc.).  Studies of how well the sharp  transition approximates the continuous
              phenomena will be carried  out.  For instance, the geometric properties of the
              sharp  transition versus a narrow band of continuous transition, or when  the
              limit of the continuous phenomena is actually the expected  sharp transition
              will be analyzed.       Partial differential equations form a basis for 
              mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The role of  mathematical
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as  it is to provide
              qualitative and quantitative information about  the solutions.  This may
              include answers to questions  about uniqueness, smoothness and gr owth.  In
              addition, analysis  often develops methods for approximation of solutions and 
              estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.   ***
