Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Political Reform on Rural Social
               Conflict in Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1994     
File        : a9401114

Award Number: 9401114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4823               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Evans pevans@garnet.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401114  Evans         This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral 
              Dissertation Research Program.  The study will examine the effect  of political
              reform on rural social conflict in Columbia.  During  the past decade, Columbia
              has presented contradictory trends  toward democratizing reform and escalating
              political violence, a  paradox that defies the predictions of prevailing
              theories of  democratic transition and guerrilla movements.  New theories 
              suggest that elite-sponsored violence may escalate in reaction to  increased
              peasant control over rural institutions, or that in  some cases more
              representative institutions can now mediate  peaceful, institutional
              resolutions to conflicts.  This research  will study the effect of a specific
              reform, allowing the direct  election of county executives, on several rural
              conflicts.  The  four stages of the investigation will focus on: 1) the
              national  context of violent democratization, 2) the causes of rural social 
              conflict, 3) the effect of reform on these conflicts, and 4) the  mechanisms
              accounting for these effects.  %%%       This research will contribute to
              political sociology and to  the sociology of development.  The key
              international issues for  policy makers today revolve around the success or
              failure of  various routes to democratization, so the findings of the study 
              should have substantive significance.  In addition to the  scientific gains to
              be achieved by the research, this award will  materially assist a highly
              promising student in completing  research for the Ph.D. dissertation.  Thus it
              contributes to the  future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough 
              training of the next generation of social scientists.    ***
