Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Smooth 4-Manifolds and Their Donaldson Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1998     
File        : a9401032

Award Number: 9401032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Fintushel ronfint@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401032  Fintushel       The main concern of this project is to study smooth
              simply  connected 4-manifolds by using invariants obtained from gauge  theory. 
              This has three parts.  The first is to understand the  structure theory of the
              invariants themselves.  For manifolds of  simple type, this has been
              accomplished by Kronheimer and Mrowka  and, using completely different
              techniques, by the investigator  and R. Stern.  The investigator and R. Stern
              have also proved a  blowup formula for the Donaldson invariant of a general 
              4-manifold, and one expects that this formula, together with the  techniques
              used in the simple-type case, will lead to a general  structure theory.  The
              second part of this project is the  calculation of Donaldson invariants.  The
              investigator intends to  use his technique of 'rational blowdowns' to provide 
              calculations.  This involves giving a general formula for the  Donaldson
              invariant of a rational blowdown, which has essentially  been done by the
              investigator and R. Stern (some details remain  to be checked) and which leads,
              e.g., to the calculation of  complete Donaldson invariants for all elliptic
              surfaces and many  other interesting examples.  The final part of the project
              is to  produce new examples to which these invariants can be applied in  order
              to find some order in the classification theory.       Four-dimensional
              manifolds are spaces which locally have the  structure of 4-dimensional
              Euclidean space (e.g. 3 'spatial' and  one 'time' dimension).  These manifolds
              play a central role in  topology, for in 4 dimensions both the powerful
              techniques of  higher dimensional surgery and the more special and intricate 
              techniques of lower dimensions break down.  This is, of course,  also the most
              physically relevant situation, and there is a vast  literature in theoretical
              physics related to 4-dimensional  topology.  For many years 4-manifolds were
              studied by applying  techniques from both higher and lower dimensions, and the
              results  were mostly unsatisfactory.  In 1 984, Simon Donaldson introduced  a
              powerful technique stemming from the interplay between  4-dimensional geometry
              and theoretical physics via the Yang-Mills  equation.  Donaldson's techniques
              have had startling  consequences, and a school of topologists and geometers has
               formed in the hope of using these techniques to understand  4-dimensional
              topology completely.  (That this is not too far  removed from the physics which
              helped spawn the theory is  evidenced by the many contributions by physicists
              such as  Witten.)  In the last year, especially, progress has been very  rapid.
               The investigator hopes to make further contributions both  to the
              understanding of the Donaldson invariant and to the  classification of
              4-dimensional manifolds.  ***
