Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Wavelets: Theory and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1994      
File        : a9401785

Award Number: 9401785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ingrid Daubechies ingrid@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9139,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Daubechies  9401785         Work supported by this award focuses on the
              mathematical  development of wavelet analysis and its applications.  This is a 
              branch of harmonic analysis closely allied with applications to  many areas of
              science.  The underlying goals of wavelet analysis  are (i) to determine
              functions whose integer translates and  dyadic dilates form orthogonal (or
              biorthogonal) bases for  square-integrable functions (ii) to ensure that the
              basis  elements localize both time and frequency and (iii) that they  have the
              requisite smoothness dictated by the problem.  Normally,  wavelets are also
              expected to have compact support.  In this  project five goals are to be
              addressed.  They include analysis of  the smoothness of infinitely supported
              wavelets, the construction  of redundant families of analytic wavelets
              associated with a  multiresolution analysis and a study of the consequences of 
              truncating wavelet filter coefficients and finding ways of doing  the trunction
              in a stable manner.  Work will also be done in  applying wavelets, with new
              filters, and a new nonlinear  squeezing technique, to speech analysis. 
              Finally, effort will be  made to construct a special family of multifractal
              functions for  which the so-called thermodynamic formalism can be verified 
              explicitly, and which can be used as a mathematical laboratory.         The
              theory of wavelets, as it has become known, is actually  a body of ideas which
              has developed dramatically over the past  decade, following several important
              discoveries by physicists,  computer scientists and engineers concerned with
              signal  processing and data compression.  It evolved into a synthesis of  many
              existing techniques into a framework which offers  possibilities for improved
              applications and challenging  mathematical ideas which will require years to
              reach what might  be considered a mature stage.  Many areas of science are now 
              adapting wavelet constructs to important problems currently under 
              investigation.  These included statisticians lo oking for patterns  in large
              data sets, compression of fingerprint data, edge  reconstruction of images and
              the generation of fractal sets with  prescribed characteristics.
