Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Theoretical and Computational Problems Associated with
               the Tabulation of Knots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9401139

Award Number: 9401139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morwen B. Thistlethwaite morwen@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401139  Thistlethwaite       Using the vastly improved computer power now
              available on  workstations, the investigator has recently classified knots up 
              to 14 crossings.  He will continue the compilation of knots  through 15 or 16
              crossings.  This computational work is being  done jointly with J. Hoste
              (Pitzer College).  The investigator  will endeavor to answer various
              theoretical problems which arise  naturally from the classification process. 
              In particular, he  will seek to complete the computation of the mapping class
              group  of an alternating link pair, and he will look into questions  concerning
              primality of knots and questions concerning  homomorphic images of knot groups
              or subgroups of knot groups.   He will search for a second proof of the Tait
              Conjecture and for  possible extensions of this conjecture.  These extensions
              could  be used to answer conjectures concerning the asymptotic density  of
              alternating knots.       Thistlethwaite's research treats the topology of knots
              and  links.  A knot is a simple closed curve, which one may think of  as a
              closed loop of string, situated somehow in space; a link is  a more general
              kind of object, consisting of one or more separate  loops.  The mathematical
              interest lies not so much in the  intrinsic loop, but rather in the way in
              which it is situated in  3-dimensional space, i.e.  in the way in which it
              might be  "knotted."  Topologists consider that two knots (or links) are 
              equivalent if it is possible to maneuver one to the other by  bending or
              stretching; no cutting is allowed.  One of the  fascinating aspects of knot
              theory is that it contains many  problems which are easy to state and easy for
              the layman to  understand, yet which persistently resist all attempts at 
              solution.  One such problem, which William Menasco (SUNY Buffalo)  and
              Thistlethwaite solved last year, was the hundred-year old  Tait  conjecture on
              alternating links.  The comprehensive table  of knots up to 16 crossings which
              Thistlethwaite and Hoste are  currently producin g will be used to test and
              formulate other  conjectures.  In addition, Thistlethwaite will investigate the
               unknotting number of an alternating knot, this being the minimal  number of
              times it is necessary to pass a knot through itself to  render it trivial.  His
              search for an alternative proof of the  Tait conjecture will involve
              "non-Euclidean" geometry.  ***
