Title       : GEM: Correlative Ground Based and Satellite Investigations of the Dynamics of
               the Nightside Open/Closed Magnetic Field Line Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9401629

Award Number: 9401629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90086              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nelson C. Maynard nmaynard@mrcnh.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mission Research Corp
	      735 State Street
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93101    805/963-8761

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The GEM program's second major observational and analysis campaign  will be on
              the physics of the magnetotail and substorms.  A  critical question for
              magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling is to  determine from where in the
              magnetosphere do magnetic field lines  map to connect to the nighttime auroral
              ionosphere.  This question  becomes even more important for understanding
              substorm dynamics  when significant changes to the magnetospheric configuration
              occur  during this episodic release of energy.  A recent study by Burke et  al.
               1993a  has identified the high latitude boundary of the  nighttime auroral
              region as magnetically connecting to the distant  x-line in the geomagnetic
              tail.  This identifies the open/closed  boundary for magnetotail magnetic field
              lines.  We propose a  correlative analysis effort using DMSP satellite data and
              ground-  based data from Svalbard and Sondrestrom to determine the 
              characteristics of this boundary as seen jointly in both data sets,  to confirm
              the magnetospheric interpretation of the boundary where  possible using GEOTAIL
              data, and to resolve the spatial and  temporal variations of this boundary. 
              Optical data from a network  or auroral TV and meridian scanning photometers in
              Svalbard and  Greenland will be combined with radar data from Sondrestrom to 
              compare with DMSP satellite data.  Three DMSP satellites measuring  ion  drift,
              plasma characteristics and energetic particle  precipitation currently monitor
              the high latitude ionosphere  continuously.  Directly overhead passes will
              establish critical  signatures.  The spatial and temporal dynamics of this
              boundary can  then be determined with spatially separated data sets. 
              Application  of these results will place constraints on the geotail 
              configuration during substorms and will aid in the development of  a model of
              the substorm process.  We plan two observation periods:   January 1994 and
              December 1994 through January 1995.  The first  coincides with the planned GEM
              World Day period and when GEOTAIL is  at  an apogee of 100 R near midnight. 
              The second corresponds to  special observation periods for additional
              ground-based data.  We  proposed to collaborate with other GEM investigators to
              jointly  define and analyze special campaign events for elucidation of 
              substorm and geotail physics.
