Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9401538

Award Number: 9401538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Boyle mmb@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Rudolph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401538  Boyle       Boyle will work on problems involving automorphisms of  a
              shift of finite type, good maps betwen Markov processes,  expansive Z^n
              actions, finite presentations of dynamical systems,  topological orbit
              equivalence and ordered cohomology, inverse  problems for nonnegative matrices,
              and general symbolic dynamics.   As specific examples in the last three
              categories, he hopes with  collaborators and students to --characterize the
              ordered groups  which arise as the ordered first Cech cohomology group of a 
              homeomorphism of a zero dimensional dynamical  system --characterize the
              nonzero spectra of integral  nonnonegative matrices by solving an associated
              factorization  problem in the ring of formal power series with integral 
              coefficients --extend the definition of residual entropy to  smooth dynamical
              systems and determine whether in that case it is  a nontrivial invariant (as it
              can be in the zero dimensional  case). Among the topics proposed by Rudolph for
              study in  measurable dynamics are restricted orbit equivalence and 
              characteristic factors for generalized ergodic theorems.       The notion of
              restricted orbit equivalence is intended as a  method to investigate the nature
              of a dynamical system  by considering the perturbations of its orbit structure.
                The choice of restriction one places on the kind of  perturbation allowed
              controls the type of structure observed. --  In investigating the convergence
              of various kinds of  generalized ergodic theorems, one searches for natural
              splittings  into parts converging to zero, and parts with  nontrivial
              convergence, but very limiting, usually algebraic  structure. This latter
              "characteristic factor" of the averaging  method not only controls the
              convergence, but also gives  insight into the dynamics of the underlying
              system.         This is pure mathematical research in the general areas of 
              dynamical systems  and  matrix  theory.  The dynamical  parts   largely involve
              theoretical  problems  in symbolic dynamics;   this  abstract s ubject is
              involved  in practical problems of  encoding data in magnetic media, and  it 
              has  a  finite  aspect  which  has  lent  itself  to applicability. (Abstract  
              classficiation schemes gave rise to an  algorithm which is  now   part of an
              IBM product.) The matrix research  is  a continuation  of  a  successful, 
              novel application of  symbolic  dynamics  techniques and viewpoint  to  some 
              old, basic and  difficult   problems  in another subject, the   theory   of  
              nonnegative   matrices.  The   underlying philosophy of measurable dynamics is 
              to use observations  of the  behavior of a system over time to  gain insight
              into the structure of the system.  In this one can  loosen the  notion of 
              "time" to include the spatial dimensions  of a crystal or the linear dimension
              of a DNA molecule.  Such  simple changes of  perspective can lead to deep and
              fruitful  insights  into how  the  structure of the system is encoded in  its
              temporal behavior.  A central theme of the work is to use  such simple
              real-world   models  to  obtain  deeper    understanding   of dynamical
              systems.  ***
