Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Quasiconformal Analysis and Harmonic Integrals with
               Applications to Nonlinear Elasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9401104

Award Number: 9401104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tadeusz Iwaniec tiwaniec@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401104  Iwaniec       The general area of mathematical research represented by 
              this project is that of nonlinear partial differential equations.  The main
              themes grew out of problems in quasiconformal and  quasiregular mappings.  The
              work expanded in recent years to  include methods from harmonic analysis,
              calculus of variations,  Sobolev spaces, differential geometry and topology.  A
              major  impetus to the current state of quasiconformal mapping was given  by
              work of Sullivan and Donaldson on quasiconformal mappings of  four-manifolds. 
              In the course of this research, new  differential equations were discovered
              which in many ways  generalize the familiar Cauchy-Riemann system or the
              Beltrami  equation.  Basic questions to be studied include that of finding 
              conditions thatensure weakly quasiregularity implies strong  quasiregularity. 
              Work will also be done investigating  singularities of these mappings and the
              connection between  dimension and removable sets of singularities.  Additional 
              efforts will be made to analyze A- harmonic mappings and singular  integrals
              which carry certain algebraic structures, such as  Grassmannn or Clifford
              algebras with a goal of determining  dimension-free norms on the integrals when
              treated as  transformations of function spaces.         Partial differential
              equations form a basis for mathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The
              role of mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is
              to  provide qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions. 
              This may include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.
               In addition, analysis  often develops methods for approximation of solutions
              and  estimates onthe accuracy of these approximations.  ***
