Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Functional Analysis in Applied Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9401418

Award Number: 9401418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kevin Clancey                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Takac   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1305,GLCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401418  Takac       This project is concerned with development and applications
               of methods of modern functional analysis to problems arising in a  number of
              generally well-accepted mathematical models in applied  science. The
              investigator proposes to continue his development of  modern functional
              analytic techniques that are suitable for  studying large-time asymptotic
              behavior of solutions to monotone  dynamical systems. A particular emphasis of
              this part of the  proposed research will be on the large-time asymptotic
              behavior  of orbits (trajectories) in almost periodic monotone dynamical 
              processes. Various instability phenomena are described by a  parabolic system
              of complex Ginzburg-Landau equations. The  investigator proposes to establish
              the local (in time) existence,  uniqueness and complex analytic extension of
              solutions to the  parabolic system. This will be followed by a development of 
              suitable global estimates in the Lebesgue-Hardy spaces over a  region in
              multi-dimensional complex space in order to prevent all  the derivatives of the
              solution from blowing-up in finite time.  For the Ginzburg-Landau equation it
              should be possible to obtain  such estimates directly from the equation.      
              Global existence, uniqueness and complex analytic extension  of solutions to a
              mathematical model guarantee the existence and  uniqueness for all times of a
              particular physical (biological,  material or economic) structure described by
              this model, and its  smooth dependence upon the spatial and temporal variables
              (no  sudden jumps). These properties are essential for the design of 
              measurements to be performed on the physical structure. Large-  time asymptotic
              behavior of solutions to a model determines the  ultimate state of
              relationships within the modeled structure.  Mathematical models investigated
              in this project are expressed in  terms of non-linear differential equations. 
              ***
