Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Elliptic PDE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1996      
File        : a9401081

Award Number: 9401081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill C. Pipher jpipher@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401081  Pipher       This award supports mathematical research on problems 
              arising in three areas of harmonic analysis and elliptic partial  differential
              equations.  The first concerns higher order elliptic  operators on non-smooth
              domains.  Although considerable work has  already been done on equations
              defined on non-smooth domains, it  remains to understand the optimal spaces for
              prescribing boundary  data and obtaining unique solutions.  The second set of
              questions  lies in second order elliptic theory, motivated partially by 
              examples connected with the square root problem of Kato.   The question of
              solving the regularity problem, which is the  essential goal, for certain
              complex elliptic equations has  only been completely solved for the
              one-dimensional equation.   In general, without heavy symmetry assumptions, not
              much is know.   The third project concerns operators invariant under  a
              multiparameter family of dilations.  These operators may  be viewed as
              product-type operators.  To obtain sharp estimates  and bounds for the
              operators on functions which are  simply integrable, one needs a different
              point of view.  While  some work has been accomplished on restricted families
              of  dilations, the issue of understanding the boundedness of such  operators
              with general k-parameter dilations.       Partial differential equations form a
              basis formathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The role of
              mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to 
              provide qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions.  This
              may include answers to questions  about uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis  often develops methods for approximation of solutions and 
              estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.  ***
