Title       : Theoretical Stereochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1996      
File        : a9401774

Award Number: 9401774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt Mislow kmislow@chemvax.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401774  Mislow  Princeton  A number of basic questions in stereochemistry will
              be studied by the use of non-numerical as well as   computational methods.
              Geometric chirality measures will be correlated with similarity measures whose 
               variable parameters are appropriate physical properties. An attempt will be
              made to prove the important   conjecture that a molecular model and its
              enantiomorph form an achiral union under conditions of   maximum overlap. A
              previously developed algorithm will be extended in order to unite topologically
                achiral molecular knots and links on the basis of graph commonality. An
              approach previously used to   partition knots into heterochiral classes will be
              applied to the more complex problem of links and graphs.   The hierarchical
              rankings of chiral molecules will be critically reexamined in light of a novel 
               classification scheme that is capable of accommodating all such molecular
              structures.    This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the
              continuing work of Professor Kurt Mislow at   Princeton University. This
              research addresses the classification and description of molecules and arrays
              of   molecules in three-dimensional space. The arrays of molecules includes
              links of molecules similar to links   in a chain and knots such as a
              figure-eight knot. Another type of molecule that will be classified are chiral 
               molecules. These molecules are related as one's right hand to the left hand.
              The unique feature of this   work is that the classification will be made in a
              quantitative manner so that there can be a hierarchical   ranking of the
              "handedness" or chirality of a molecule. The work will then allow for a
              quantitative   description of the three-dimensional nature of a molecule or
              array of molecules.
