Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Group Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9401362

Award Number: 9401362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin R. Bridson bridson@math  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401362  Bridson       This project focuses on three areas of geometric group 
              theory: quasi-isometry invariants for finitely generated groups,  in
              particular, the study of isoperimetric inequalities; the  geometry of spaces of
              non-positive curvature and the structure of  their isometry groups; and
              automatic group theory and its  generalizations, with emphasis on the task of
              distinguishing  bewteen the various classes of groups which have arisen in this
               context.  Examples drawn from geometry and low-dimensional  topology are of
              particular interest in each case.  More  specifically, attacks are planned on
              the problems of determining  the structure of the (countable) set of functions
              that arise as  Dehn functions of finitely presented groups, and the structure
              of  the set of flats in a CAT(0) space.  (This last problem is of  particular
              interest in the case of 3-manifolds.)       Geometric group theory is a young
              and highly dynamic area of  research in which techniques from geometry and
              topology are  adapted, extended, and used to solve problems in algebra. 
              Conversely, geometric problems are converted into questions in  group theory
              (encoding the symmetry of the geometric problem in  algebra) with startlingly
              powerful results.  For example,  questions concerning the area of minimal
              surfaces (like soap  films) can be converted into questions about how hard it
              is to  solve equations in finitely presented groups.  In many cases this  leads
              to a sharp solution of the original geometric problem; this  is the nature of
              the 'isoperimetric inequalities' and 'Dehn  functions' referred to above. 
              Remarkably, if one pursues this  line further, then deep and fascinating
              connections become  apparent between linguistics (formal grammars), computer
              science  (automata theory), and the geometry of interesting spaces such as 
              3-manifolds (e.g., the universe).  The goal of this project is to  deepen our
              understanding of these connections.  ***
