Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Hyperbolic Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9401855

Award Number: 9401855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hart F. Smith hart@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401855  Smith       This award supports mathematical research focusing on 
              applications of harmonic analysis to problems in the theory of  hyperbolic
              differential equations.  Work includes the development  of estimates for the
              wave group with Dirichlet conditions on  manifolds similar to that obtained
              with the additional condition  that the boundaries be concave.  Estimates fail
              on manifolds with  convex boundaries although in these instances there exist 
              multiply reflected geodesics producing gliding rays which travel  along the
              boundary.  It is therefore of interest to find  worst case example where the
              estimates fail and try to obtain  newer estimates for this situation.  Work
              will also be done on  the Hardy space for Fourier integral operators.  Efforts
              will go  into analyzing a new function space on which the algebra of  Fourier
              integral operators of order zero act continuously.   Certain operators
              associated with oscillatory problems are not  bounded on the standard Hardy
              spaces will remain bounded on the  new spaces. One of the first tasks is to
              obtain an alternate  characterization of the space.  Finally, work will be done
               constructing frames for square integrable functions which  diagonalize the
              wave group.         Harmonic analysis combines those elements of mathematics
              best  exemplifying the ideas of synthesis.  One seeks to decompose  complex
              problems into fundamental components.  These components  are then analyzed for
              their basic characteristics.  Finally, the  solution is reconstructed through a
              recombination of the  components.  The Fourier series and Fourier transform are
               examples of tools used in this context; one discrete , the other  representing
              a continuous decomposition. More recently the  wavelet theory added new
              dimensions to some of the more classical  approaches to harmonic analysis.***
