Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Group Proposal for Research: Research on Differentiable
               Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9401755

Award Number: 9401755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wu-chung Hsiang Hsiang@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401755  Hsiang       This project involves research in topological manifolds
              and  differential geometry.  The principal investigator, Wu-Chung  Hsiang, has
              some interesting new ideas relating to the Novikov  conjecture.  Together with
              Cynthia Curtis, Hsiang is also  interested in work on four-manifolds related to
              the Poincare'  conjecture.  Curtis and Hsiang recall a theorem of Wall stating 
              that two h-cobordant four-manifolds may be "stabilized" by adding  copies of
              S^2 x S^2 in such a way that the stabilized manifolds  are diffeomorphic.  They
              study obstructions to "destabilization";  that is, they attempt to determine
              whether the original manifolds  were themselves diffeomorphic.  Curtis also
              studies  generalizations of Casson's invariant for three-manifolds and  related
              invariants.   Meanwhile, Zhuang-dan Guan studies  geometric structures on
              manifolds.  He is interested in examples  of compact holomorphic symplectic
              manifolds which are not  Kaehlerian, quasi-Einstein metrics, singularities on
              rational  curves, and homogeneous spaces.       The investigators will study
              the properties of objects which  are 3-, 4-, or higher-dimensional. 
              Specifically, they will  develop means of determining when two objects of the
              same  dimension are equivalent in some sense.  Curtis and Hsiang are  working
              together on a certain class of four-dimensional objects.   Their work relates
              to a conjecture of Poincare' dating from the  turn of the century.  Guan works
              to determine if two  same-dimensional objects are equivalent in a stricter
              sense,  taking more geometry into account.  The work of all three  researchers
              relates in a general sense to new and exciting  developments in physics.  ***
