Title       : Rapid Prototyping of Parallel Robot Vision Systems Using Virtual Reality and
               Systems Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9401142

Award Number: 9401142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1501000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. LeBlanc leblanc@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana H. Ballard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randal C. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9401142  LeBlanc        This award provides support for the establishment of a 
              laboratory that uses two types of simulation technologies in the  design of
              visually controlled robotics systems.  The first type of  simulation technology
              is the simulation of sensory interaction with  physical environments, popularly
              known as "virtual reality".   Virtual reality can replace the real world in
              testing and debugging  a system.  The second is execution-driven simulation of
              complex  parallel algorithms at the level of individual messages and memory 
              accesses, which can address the performance and low-level real-time  problems
              of interacting processes.                The experimental facilities requested
              include a Silicon  Graphics Reality (SGI) Engine for scene generation in the
              simulated  world, an upgrade of an existing SGI Challenge multiprocessor for 
              simulation of the virtual world and control software, a  computational engine
              for performing real-time intermediate to  high-level vision, a hydraulic robot
              arm for real-time  manipulation, a small-scale multi-processor for device
              control and  medium-level vision, and general purpose workstations.         
              The focus of the proposal is the development of simulations  to aid in the
              development of real-world robotic systems.  Research  topics to be explored
              include the development of principles for  constructing complex physical
              autonomous systems; the development  of new modes of simulation for virtual
              reality, and simulation and  implementation of robotic control algorithms.
