Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Wavelets and Time-Frequency Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9401340

Award Number: 9401340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher E. Heil   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GTRI
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30332    /   -

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401340  Heil       This award supports a mathematical research program in a 
              range of related areas in harmonic analysis, concentrating on  time-frequency
              analysis and wavelet theory, with potential  applications to signal processing.
               There are three main themes  of the program.  The first concerns the analysis
              and  reconstruction of signals from nonuniform samples of their Gabor 
              transforms.  The nonuniformity of the sampling set requires the  introduction
              of new techniques with results formulated in terms  of the properties of
              coherent states.  Questions such as whether  a given collection of
              time-frequency shifts of a fixed window  function are complete, are minimal,
              form a frame or form a Riesz  basis will be taken up.  The second line of
              investigation studies  singular values of Weyl operators.  These operators are
              closely  related to Gabor transform with good localizing properties, i.e. 
              operators which concentrate the energy of a function in a given  region of
              space.  The localization properties of these operators  can be inferred from
              the behavior of their singular values.   Studies of the asymptotic decay of
              these values will be carried  out.  Work on wavelets and dilation equations
              continues earlier  work which developed important applications of an older
              notion of  joint spectral radius to the existence and smoothness 
              characterizations of solutions to dilations equations.  In this  work,
              properties of non-canonical solutions will be studied.   These include
              non-compactly supported or distributional  solutions.  Connections with random
              matrices will be considered.       Harmonic analysis combines those elements of
              mathematics  best exemplifying the ideas of synthesis.  One seeks to decompose 
              complex problems into fundamental components.  These components  are then
              analyzed for their basic characteristics.  Finally, the  solution is
              reconstructed through a recombination of the  components.  The Fourier series
              and Fourier transform are  examples of tools used in this context; one dis
              crete , the other  representing a continuous decomposition. More recently the 
              wavelet theory added new dimensions to some of the more classical  approaches
              to harmonic analysis.
