Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1994       
File        : a9401397

Award Number: 9401397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Kraus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401397  Kraus         The investigator will continue the investigation of
              tensor  product properties (including the OAP and the w*-OAP) for sigma- 
              weakly closed subspaces of the full algebra of operators on a  Hilbert space
              and operator spaces. The operator approximation  property (OAP) is a matricial
              version (for operator spaces) of  the approximation property for Banach spaces.
              The investigator  has shown that a sigma-weakly closed subspace has the general
               slice map property for sigma-weakly closed subspaces if and only  if it has
              the w*-OAP. The investigator and Uffe Haagerup have  defined a property for
              locally compact groups (called the AP)  which is weaker than amenability, and
              have shown that a discrete  group has the AP if and only if its group von
              Neumann algebra has  the w*-OAP (if and only if its reduced group C*-algebra
              has the  OAP). Specific problems that will be attacked under this project 
              include:(1) Does SL(3,Z) have the AP?(2)If A is a C*-algebra does  A have the
              OAP if and only if A** has the w*-OAP?(3)Does every  exact C*-algebra have the
              OAP?       Hilbert space operators can be considered as an infinite 
              dimensional analog of matrices. There is a natural addition and  multiplication
              defined on operators so that some collections of  operators can be considered
              as operator algebras. Usually  operator algebras come equipped with a
              topological structure.  Operator algebras themselves can be used to form
              product algebras  and investigations in this project center around a certain 
              product structure on operator algebras called the tensor product.  Operator
              approximation problems are related in a natural way to  questions about the
              tensor product of operator algebras. The  focus here is on these connections
              between approximation and  tensor products.
