Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Bayesian Problems in Sample Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1996     
File        : a9401191

Award Number: 9401191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen D. Meeden glen@stat.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This proposal will consider the application of the Bayesian methodology to some
              problems in finite population sampling. Over the past several years the
              principle investigator has helped to develop a noninformative Bayesian approach
              to some problems in finite population sampling. It is based on the `Polya
              posterior' and is appropriate when one's prior beliefs about the units are
              roughly exchangeable. The first major goal of this project is to extend the
              techniques underlying the `Polya posterior' to the area of cluster sampling.
              This promises to yield a flexible and unified theory for an important class of
              problems. Recent developments in Markov chain Monte Carlo technology mean that
              Bayesian models which until recently have been computationally intractable can
              now be studied. The second major goal of this project is to use these methods
              to develop Bayesian models for survey sampling when one's prior beliefs about
              the units are no longer exchangeable. In one class of models to be considered
              the units will be assumed to be partially exchangeable, while in another class
              the populations will be assumed to be generated by a generalized urn processes.
              This should yield a collection of models that extends the type of prior
              information that can be used in an analysis in sample survey. A standard
              setting in survey sampling or finite population sampling assumes each member of
              some population possesses an unknown amount of a characteristic of interest.
              The statistician is interested in estimating a quantity related to this
              characteristic of interest. For example the characteristic of interest could be
              household income, the population all households in a given city and the
              quantity of interest the average or median household income for the city. The
              statistician will then use the values of the characteristic in a sample drawn
              from the population to estimate this quantity. The major goal of this project
              is to study how prior information about the population can be used to construct
              sensible estimates about  the quantity of interest. It will use recent
              developments in computer simulation to investigate various models for prior
              information which up until now have been impossible to study.
