Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Regularity for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9401921

Award Number: 9401921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lihe Wang lwang@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401921  Wang       This award supports mathematical research on the regularity 
              theory of partial differential equations and problems of crystal  growth. 
              Level surfaces, surfaces where functions are of constant  value, are the
              central subject in studies of phase transition,  geometric evolution and free
              boundary problems.  The work follows  the spirit of geometric measure theory
              and incorporates recent  work of Caffarelli on free boundaries.  Special level
              surfaces  appear as the boundary of crystals and the wave fronts of shock 
              waves in many mathematical models of the physical world.   This work seeks to
              understand the nature, stability and  mathematical properties of them.  Work
              will also be done on  crystal growth with Gibbs-Thomson effects.  Large-time
              existence  of these processes is established using variational methods,  which
              give the most reasonable physical solutions to this  long-standing problem. 
              Work will be done on the evolution of  crystalline surfaces and crystalline
              surface energies.  The long  range goal of the work is to understand the
              mechanical, chemical,  electrical and optical properties associated with
              solidification.       Partial differential equations form a basis for 
              mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The role of  mathematical
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as  it is to provide
              qualitative and quantitative information about  the solutions.  This may
              include answers to questions  about uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  Those
              equations often  develop as a result of some minimizing process which takes 
              the mathematical form of a variational problem.  The minimizer  then must
              satisfy a corresponding partial differential equation  which arises as a
              solution to this problem.  ***
