Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Isogenies and Operations in Complex Oriented Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9401550

Award Number: 9401550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45596              (Estimated)
Investigator: Haynes R. Miller hrm@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401550  Miller       A number of moduli problems for elliptic curves have been 
              studied, such as that of classifying elliptic curves with a given  point of
              specified exact order.  Analogous but more intricate  problems can be studied
              in the context of one-dimensional formal  groups.  The resulting algebraic
              objects also arise as  generalized cohomology rings in algebraic topology.  In 
              particular, the theory of subgroups and isogenies of deformations  of formal
              groups over a finite field is closely connected with  the Morava K-theory and
              completed E(n) cohomology of ring spectra  with higher commutativity
              properties.  Neil Strickland, the  postdoctoral associate, aims to prove a
              number of conjectures  making this connection more precise.       This research
              is part of algebraic topology, which  studies certain features of higher
              dimensional shapes, such as  how many holes they have, how the holes are linked
              together or  twisted around each other and so on.  These problems are 
              meaningful even though physical space has only three dimensions.   For example,
              if one quantity depends on seven others, then one  can imagine drawing a graph
              of the functional relationship in an  abstract eight-dimensional space.  It is
              possible and useful to  study the properties of this graph, even though it
              cannot be  realized physically.  Because it is so hard to visualize such a 
              space, it is helpful to convert questions about it into algebraic  problems.
              Broadly speaking, there are two methods of conversion,  appropriate to
              different types of questions.  In geometry, the  basic algebraic operation is
              to measure distances and angles.  In  topology, one might say that the basic
              operation is to count  holes (although it is not so easy to say what precisely
              is meant  by a three-dimensional hole in a six-dimensional object).   An
              interesting feature of the subject is that certain  topological questions give
              rise in an unexpected way to algebraic  problems which have previously been
              addressed in apparently  unrelated are as of mathematics, such as number
              theory.  The  current project aims to clarify one quite spectacular example of 
              this phenomenon, and to extend the relevant algebraic knowledge  so as to cover
              a wider family of topological situations.  ***
