Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Scattering Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9401403

Award Number: 9401403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin Zhou zhou@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zhou  9401403          This project is concerned with mathematical research on 
              problems arising in the theory of nonlinear partial differential  equations. 
              Several topics will be addressed.  Included in them  is an analysis of the zero
              dispersion limit for the focusing  nonlinear Schrodinger equation.  The
              focusing equation and many  other integrable systems have nonself-adjoint
              scattering  operators.  This type of zero dispersion problem is not well 
              understood.  Work will also be done on a perturbation theory for  nonlinear
              Schrodinger equations.  This will be done through  efforts to obtain
              relationships between the maximal norm and a  weighted quadratic norm of the
              potential.  Once this is done, the  perturbed problem can be solved by a method
              of McKean and Shatah.    A third line of investigation will examine higher
              order equations  and solitons.  Equations in the Gelfand-Dikii hierarchy give
              rise  to isospectral deformations which can be reduced to the study of  a
              Riemann-Hilbert problem.  Work will be done analyzing the long  time behavior
              of those Gelfand-Dikii flows for which the jump  matrices are oscillatory.  The
              new features of this study  includes the larger size of the matrices and the
              jump data  exhibiting singularities of different orders at the origin; from 
              this shock regions can be developed.          Partial differential equations
              form a basis for  mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The role of 
              mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations as  it is to
              provide qualitative and quantitative information about  the solutions.  This
              may include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis often  develops methods for approximation of solutions and
              estimates on  the accuracy of these approximations.
