Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology, Symplectic Geometry and Equivariant Algebraic
               Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1996   
File        : a9401858

Award Number: 9401858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted E. Petrie petrie@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401858  Petrie       This project is concerned with two general problems,
              first,  to give a description of the set of stably trivial equivariant  vector
              bundles over an affine variety (over the complex numbers)  having an action of
              an algebraic group.  Take the special case  where the variety with action is a
              representation.  It is still  an open question whether there are non-trivial
              equivariant vector  bundles over representations.  The answer depends on the
              group,  and there are many groups for which the answer is unknown.  The 
              project will extend the list of groups where the answer is known  and, when
              non-trivial vector bundles exist, it is intended to  develop a conceptual lower
              bound for the isomorphism classes of  bundles with base a representation.  Such
              results will have  applications for algebraic actions on affine space.  The
              other  object of study is the Abyhankar-Moh Problem: Let f be a  polynomial in
              n complex variables for which f=1 is isomorphic to  complex (n-1)-space.  Is
              there an automorphism of affine n-space  which when composed with f, is a
              linear function?  The answer is  known for n=2 and unknown for higher n.      
              Here is a little motivation and a layman's description of  one of the above
              problems, the Abyhankar-Moh Problem.  It fits  into one of the main problem
              areas of pure and applied  mathematics.  Given two functions of n variables,
              when can one be  transformed into the other by a change of variables
              (automorphism  of n-space)? To explain what this means and motivate the
              problem,  consider the two functions of two variables x and y: f(x,y)=x and 
              h(x,y)=x+yy.  The set of points where f(x,y)=1, i.e. x=1, and the  set of
              points where h(x,y)=1, i.e. x+yy=1, both represent an  infinite wire in the
              x,y-plane.  The first is a line, and the  second is the parabola x+yy=1.  The
              fact that each of these two  sets represents an infinite wire in the plane is
              expressed  mathematically by the fact that there is a change of coordinates  in
              the plane which transforms f into h.   The change of  coordinates x'=x+yy, y'=y
              transforms f to h, as one sees  from f(x',y')=f(x+yy,y)=x+yy=h(x,y).  An
              electrician who had to  sever a connection by cutting the wires would in each
              case have  one wire to cut.  Contrast that to the set defined by  g(x,y)=xx=1. 
              That set consists of two infinite wires represented  by the lines x=1 and x=-1.
               In this case an electrician wishing  to sever the connection represented by
              the set g(x,y)=1 would  have to cut two wires; so the situations are not
              physically the  same.  This is explained mathematically by the fact that there
              is  no change of coordinates of two-space which transforms f (or h)  to g.  The
              Abyhankar-Moh Problem fits into this setting.  In  these terms the problem is
              expressed as: Given two functions f  and h of n variables with the property
              that the sets f=1 and h=1  are ``isomorphic'' to (n-1)-space, is there a change
              of  coordinates of n-space which transforms f to h?  The above  discussion
              illustrates the case n=2, and the answer is known to  be "yes" in that case,
              but it is unknown for other values of n.  ***
