Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analytic Discs and Integral Formulas in Several Complex
               Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1994       
File        : a9401652

Award Number: 9401652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Tumanov tumanov@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Tumanov  9401652       This award supports mathematical research on problems 
              arising in the theory of functions of several complex variables.  The work
              concentrates on boundary values of holomorphic  functions; more precisely that
              of identifying functions on the  boundary of a domain which can be boundary
              values of holomorphic  functions.  Such functions must satisfy partial
              differential  equations known as the boundary Cauchy-Riemann equations.  
              Solutions are known as CR-functions.  Techniques for extending  CR-functions
              from manifolds include a newly developing process  of attaching discs to
              manifolds and looking at analytic  extensions through the discs to obtain
              holomorphic extension.   Then the discs and extensions must be sewn together 
              appropriately. Another method involves integral formulas which  give the
              extension by means of an integration process using a  kernel which depends on
              the manifold (Szego kernel). A new line  of research on a long-standing problem
              of embedding CR-structures  in domains of several complex variables will also
              be undertaken.        Several complex variables arose at the beginning of  the
              century as a natural outgrowth of studies of functions of  one complex
              variable.  It became clear early on that the  theory differed widely from it
              predecessor.  The underlying  geometry was far more difficult to grasp and the
              function theory  had far more affinity with partial differential operators of 
              first order.  It thus grew as a hybrid subject combining deep  characteristics
              of differential geometry and differential  equations.  Many of the fundamental
              structures were defined in  the last three decades. Current studies still
              concentrate on  understanding these basic mathematical forms.  ***
