Title       : Developing Critical Thinking & Content Mastery in Non-Traditional Students: A
               Comprehensive, Technologically Enhanced Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9354477

Award Number: 9354477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Lemons daniel@harold.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hope Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph G. Griswold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354477  Lemons  A significant mismatch exists between what traditional Anatomy 
              and Physiology (A&P) courses offer and what many  non-traditional students
              need. As a result these students are  not learning how living human systems
              function, but rather are  memorizing many often disconnected facts about them.
              We propose  a new, innovative curriculum which: 1) presents function first,  in
              the context of a broad organizing theme, and then introduces  anatomical and
              physiological details to explain the function,  2) reverses the order of the
              traditional teaching process by  beginning with hands-on exploration with
              physical models, and  then progressing to higher level thinking, 3) places the 
              highest priority on critical thinking about physiological  systems so students
              learn to solve problems, 4) uses computer  technology as a tool to support all
              stages of learning, not as  the focus of it, 5) provides structured
              out-of-class support  and 6) uses assessment as an integral part of the
              learning  process, not just an endpoint. To demonstrate this new  approach, we
              present in detail our modified learning cycle  method for the unit on the
              heart. When this new curriculum is  completed, we plan to: 1) Facilitate its
              implementation, a) in  other CCNY courses, b) at the three community colleges
              whose  faculty are involved in the project and c) at three local high  schools.
              2) Disseminate widely the learning cycle exercises and  the student assessment
              plan. 3) Publish about, and present the  project at the national level. Nothing
              could be more important  from our perspective, than to introduce competent,
              critical  thinkers into the science pipeline from our courses, and we  expect
              the new A&P sequence to be a model curriculum for doing  this. We also expect
              to see significant improvement in the  critical thinking ability and A&P
              content mastery of women and  minorities who makeup the overwhelming majority
              of our student.  ***
