Title       : A National Teacher Enhancement/Implementation and Evaluation Project for Grades
               9-10 Scope, Sequence, and Coordination in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9354085

Award Number: 9354085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4092000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald F. Wheeler gwheeler@nsta.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bill G. Aldridge  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Science Tchrs Assoc
	      1840 Wilson Boulevard
	      Arlington, VA  22201    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                              ABSTRACT    ESI-9354085    A National Curriculum
              Development and Evaluation Project for High          School Scope, Sequence,
              and Coordination in Science    The National Science Teachers Association(NSTA)
              will lead a  carefully focused project in developing and evaluating an (SS&C) 
              program at the high school level. Thirteen high schools having  diverse
              populations and resources will participate in this project,  along with
              suitably identified control classes that utilize  traditional curricula. These
              schools are from California, Iowa,  Montana, New York, North Carolina, Texas
              and Washington, DC. The  140 participating teachers will attend inservice
              workshops which  provide the philosophical constructs of the SS&C science
              education  reform and prepare them to use instructional materials which are 
              congruent with the SS&C approach. The evaluation of the project is 
              comprehensive considering both the teacher enhancement  component  and student
              outcomes.      The project will focus on: (1) the natural science, i.e.
              biology,  chemistry, earth sciences, and physics; (2) the high school level 
              from grade 9 through grade 12; (3) the specification and  incorporation of the
              basic tenets of SS&C at all sites; (4)  coordination of teaching the science
              subjects, designed so as to  achieve integration of the sciences by students;
              (5) answering  important evaluation questions, regarding the efficacy of the
              SS&C  approach, before embarking on widespread implementation.    All sites
              will: follow the SS&C principles of providing every  science subject every
              year, explicitly taking into account  student's prior knowledge; provide a
              sequence of content from  concrete experiences and descriptive expression to
              abstract  symbolism and quantitative expression; revisit concepts,  
              principles, and theories at successively higher levels of  abstraction;
              coordinate learning in the four science subjects so as  to interrelate basic
              concepts and principles.    The project will work closely wit h the National
              Science Education  Standards Development process at the NRC. The SS&C Framework
              for  grades 9-12 will be revised to meet the requirements of those  standards,
              while conforming to the tenets of SS&C Materials will be  prepared in the form
              of Anthologies of appropriate readings and  core laboratory experiments adapted
              from extant sources. Project  evaluation will establish, through evidence in
              the form of student  achievement, that a program based on SS&C tenets will
              achieve the  fundamental goal of the SS&C reform: to make the natural science 
              understandable by, accessible to, and useful in, the lives of all  students.
