Title       : Visualization Technologies in Environmental Curricula (VTEC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9354599

Award Number: 9354599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Bereman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Malone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall A. Kramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Youngblood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Crawford-Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Sigma XI Sci Res Soc
	      
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  27709    919/549-4691

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354599  Bereman  The Visualization Technologies in Environmental Curricula
              (VTEC)  Project is a large scale partnership effort among: Sigma Xi, the 
              Scientific Research Society; North Carolina State University; Duke  University;
              the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; The  North Carolina
              Supercomputing Center, North Carolina Central  University, The North Carolina
              System of Community Colleges; and  industry, government, faculty and student
              consultants. VTEC is a  two-year project to develop, demonstrate and evaluate: 
                An interdisciplinary, problem-oriented, team-based environmental  case study
              development strategy involving faculty, undergraduate  students, and
              consultants from industry, government, and  supercomputing centers.   
              Environmental curriculum case studies and instructional materials  which
              effectively integrate the power of computer networking and  visualization
              technology in enhancing understanding of scientific  concepts and their
              interrelationship with other disciplines in the  solution of complex
              environmental issues. These visualization--  enhanced case studies are intended
              to increase environmental and  scientific literacy and to improve undergraduate
              student attitudes  toward science and technology careers, particularly among
              women and  underrepresented minorities.    Comprehensive, project-driven
              computer visualization and networking  skills development at the N.C.
              Supercomputing Center to enable  excellence in curriculum development for
              collaborators from  participating universities and community colleges.  ***
