Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships-Environmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9354870

Award Number: 9354870
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Murdoch murdoch@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The program will bring together two exciting, but previously  separate,
              approaches to the study of environmental biology:  modeling and experimental
              investigation of processes, versus the  analysis of spatial pattern.  The first
              approach (strongly  represented among UCSB's biologists) seeks to understand
              the  dynamics of ecological systems by analyzing the mechanisms that  determine
              the dynamics of populations, communities and ecosystems.   The second approach
              is well represented among geographers at UCSB  and involves an impressive range
              of techniques aimed at analyzing  pattern over a very large range of spatial
              scales.  We propose a  program involving which takes advantage of the
              potentially strong  synergism among quantitative geography, and experimental
              and  theoretical ecology.    The program involves (a) new cross-disciplinary
              courses, (b)  mechanisms and funding for students to gain industrial
              experience,  and (c) opportunities for thesis research in collaboration with 
              off-campus organizations.  Matching funds have been offered from  industry and
              from a state-funded program in toxicology.    To promote greater minority
              student enrollment in the program, we  propose a consortial relationship
              between UCSB and California State  University, Los Angeles (CSULA), a
              designated Minority  Undergraduate Institution that grants Bachelor's and
              Master's  degrees, but not the PhD degree.  Our efforts will focus on  students
              in CSULA's Environmental Research and Education Center,  whose acting head is
              an accomplished ecologist with expertise in  the research theme we propose, and
              with experience in developing  minority student research groups.
