Title       : Active Learning Environment For Large Nonscience-Majors Astronomy Classes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9354525

Award Number: 9354525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273412             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Meyer   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354525  Meyer  Almost all universities teach large introductory astronomy
              classes  for nonscience majors. These classes are typically among the larger 
              and more popular science classes aimed at nonscience majors, and in  many cases
              constitute the last formal science education the  students will ever have.
              Unfortunately, these classes are typically  organized around large lectures,
              and demand little or no  participation from the students. This creates an
              environment in  which the students too often resort to an uncritical
              memorization  of facts, and therefore do not learn the lessons which astronomy
              is  trying to teach them.  This project is developing an astronomy  class aimed
              at nonscience majors which as much as possible actively  engages the students
              in critical thinking. Modern and relatively  inexpensive CCD technology is now
              being used at many universities  to teach astronomy observation laboratories to
              small numbers of  astronomy students; the project incorporates this technology
              into  laboratories designed for large classes of nonscience majors as a  method
              of increasing the degree of student participation. It also  takes advantage of
              the nearly ubiquitous presence of computer  classrooms which most universities
              have implemented over the past  few years, and expands the analysis part of the
              laboratories into  a separate computer-homework component. This component is
              used to  enhance the lecture part of the course as well, and thus serves not 
              only to increase active learning, but also to break down the  barrier between
              the lecture and the laboratory.  The project pays  particular attention to the
              practical difficulties of achieving  these goals in classes which may well
              enroll 200 students, most of  whom are not exceptionally computer-literate. It
              also focuses on  how such an environment can be maintained in the long term
              without  burdensome and unrealistic demands on faculty time and/or other 
              teaching resources.
