Title       : Visual Programming Labs for Teaching Computer Science Concepts to Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  1997    
File        : a9354708

Award Number: 9354708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marian G. Williams Marian_Williams@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Canning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick D. Krolak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9345708  Williams  Both the ACM Task Force on the Core of Computer Science and
              the  NSF Disciplinary Workshops on Undergraduate Education recommend 
              scheduled, structured laboratory sessions for undergraduates  studying computer
              science.  In our experience, students can  make little progress during a lab
              session when they are working  in a traditional programming language. 
              Therefore, we are  creating lab software and manuals for a series of "visual
              labs"  in which students use a visual programming environment instead  of a
              traditional programming language.  They create and test  models (of a CPU, a
              robot's sensor configuration, a finite  state machine , a database query, or a
              genetic algorithm, for  example), rather that write code.  Each set of labs is
              based on  one knowledge area from the Task Force curriculum.  We have 
              previously created labs for computer architecture, programming  languages, and
              robotics.  We are now creating labs for database  and information retrieval and
              for two other knowledge areas  (tentatively artificial intelligence and
              software methodology  and engineering).  Each set of labs is created by: 
              defining  pedagogical goals; designing user interaction; developing 
              specifications and designs for the software; implementing the  software in the
              C programming language and in the EYES visual  programming toolkit; writing and
              desktop publishing a manual;  conducting user tests of the software and manual;
              and revising  the software and manual based on the results of the user tests.  
              The software and manuals are then used in class.  Our previous  studies
              revealed that visual labs improve student performance,  compared to no lab at
              all.  We are currently conducting formal  studies to compare visual labs to
              traditional programming labs  that cover the same concepts.  We are using an
              experimental  design developed in conjunction with the university's human 
              subjects committee.  These studies will reveal whether visual  labs are a
              useful adjunct to the undergraduate computer scie nce  laboratory curriculum
              and will yield information about the  usefulness of visual programming for
              instruction.  Results will  be published in journal and conference papers.  The
              lab  software and manuals are available for distribution to other  interested
              colleges and universities.
