Title       : MIE: JSU-Model Institution for Excellence Planning Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1993 
File        : a9354158

Award Number: 9354158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert L. Bridgewater                   
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74849              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Lyons jelyons@ccaix.jsums.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abdul K. Mohamed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7177,
Abstract    :
              9354158  Lyons, Sr.    Several sources indicate that HBCUs have been the major
              source of  B.S. degrees awarded to African-Americans i Science, Engineering 
              and Mathematics (SEM) disciplines.  But the situation is rapidly  changing. 
              Several data also suggests that SEM bachelor degrees  awarded to
              African-Americans by HBCus has been declining since  1987.  The Jackson State
              University School of Science & Technology  (JSU-SS&T) is submitting a proposal
              for a planning grant to develop  thorough, comprehensive Model Institution for
              Excellence (MIE)  implementation project that will enhance existing programs
              and  create new areas of strength in science and technology.   The  planning
              grant will provide resources to review, assess, and  evaluate in a systematic
              way, the process presently being used in  the recruitment retention, and
              graduation of students in SEM  education.  Enhanced/corrective strategies will
              be planned for  implementation using known models which have proven successful.
                 The overall project goal is to enhance and strengthen JSU's SEM 
              degree-producing capacity all levels and increase the number of SEM  graduates,
              especially minorities quality scientists/engineers who  can contribute to
              advancing the state of SEM knowledge and address  the technical problems of
              society.  Specific focus will be directed  toward identifying, enhancing, or
              developing programs to increase  SEM recruitment, enrollment, retention,
              graduation rate, and  students pursuing graduate degrees.  It is expected that
              all areas  will be improved by at least 100% over the 1988-92 (five-year) 
              average.  Activities to be developed in support of JSU MIE goals  include: 
              curricula analyses and restructuring, enhancement of  specialized SEM academic
              programs, development of new degree  programs, development of a comprehensive
              SEM student support  center, integration of information technology into the
              curricula,  and enhancement of the educational/research support infrastructure.
                 Jackson State University's administrat ion is totally committed to  the
              success of the MIE initiative - planning phase and  implementation.  It's
              commitment is demonstrated by the fact that  the Project Director is the
              President of the University and the Co-  Project Director is the Dean of the
              School of Science & Technology,  the unit responsible for the planning and
              implementation of the  project.  Several faculty representing various
              disciplines are  responsible for key components of project planning and 
              implementation.  The project leadership by the President of the  University
              will stimulate involvement of the whole University, with  its various support
              mechanisms, to ensure inclusion, diversity and  success.    To develop a
              complete, comprehensive proposal to establish a Model  Institution for
              Excellence at JSU, a total of $75,000 is being  requested.  In an effort to
              sustain program operations beyond  federal funding, the JSU MIE key strategy is
              to establish and  maintain a SEM Endowment through contributions form industry 
              partners committed to the MIE program goals and continuity.   Several
              representatives from industry partners in this planning  process and indicated
              continued support through the development and  implementation phases.
