Title       : MIE: Cayey University College as a Model for Excellence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1994     
File        : a9354160

Award Number: 9354160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert L. Bridgewater                   
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67872              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Ross   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose M. Velazquez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wilfredo Otano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of PR Cayey Univ Col
	      Antonio R Barcelo Ave
	      Cayey, PR  00736    787/738-2161

NSF Program : 1582      MODEL INST OF EXCELL NON-RESER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354160  Ross    Cayey University College will design methods to further develop
               itself as a Model Institution for Excellence (MIE) in  undergraduate Science
              and Mathematics.    The MIE program will contribute to significantly increasing
              the  number and quality of Puerto Rican students entering and  progressing
              through the educational pipeline, and pursuing  graduate degrees in the Natural
              Science, Computer Sciences,  Engineering and Mathematics (SEM). This
              comprehensive long term  program is possible at Cayey because of an existing
              commitment to  this objective.    Cayey intends to sustain the success of the
              MIE program in the  Natural Sciences and Mathematics faculty and curricula with
              a  balanced teaching and research practice. The balance will be  insured and
              enhanced by the creation of a support structure with  three components:
              Student, Research and Academic development.    The Student Development
              Component will deal directly with  students at pre-college, college and
              college-to-graduate levels.  Specific activities will be developed for
              recruitment of high  school students, enrichment and support of undergraduates,
              as  well as information and support for college-to-graduate students.  Also,
              activities will be provided for the development of  scientific literacy to
              potential students, their families and  members of the community.    The
              purpose of the Research Development component is to  strengthen the overall
              Science and Mathematics research  capabilities. It will administer research
              grants and handle  specific research related activities in coordination with
              the  Academic component.    The Academic Component proposes to complement the
              learning  experience with undergraduate research, creating a climate of 
              excitement with the learning process which comes from discovery.  Such an
              experience is conceived to promote students to move on to  graduate SEM
              programs. As a whole, the component will strengthen  the undergraduate programs
              through the following activities;  revision of curricula a nd programs to
              integrate undergraduate  research as a unifying structure, co-curricular
              activities with  visiting specialists and speakers, renovation of teaching 
              methodology, recruitment of new faculty, and acquisition of  modern equipment
              and instrumentation.
