Title       : Combining Computers and People to Reform Academic Advising in Engineering
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1994   
File        : a9354676

Award Number: 9354676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack L Waintraub                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip C. Wankat wankat@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul K. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. LeBold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Beckwith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354676  Wankat     Weak academic advising programs in the engineering education
               system contribute to considerable dissatisfaction among  successful students
              and to the decision of other students to  leave engineering.  This research
              will develop a proactive  engineering academic advising system which will
              provide better  quality academic advising to all students, particularly those 
              who need it the most.  The academic information computer  program will use
              hypermedia to provide both career and specific  academic advising information
              at both engineering colleges and  remote sites such as community colleges.  The
              advisor contact  computer program will keep track of all of the student's 
              significant contacts with advisors and professors, and will  guide the
              efficient use of scarce advising resources so that  the students who most need
              help will receive it.  The new  advising system will use people to provide the
              personal contact  which many students now miss in engineering education.  
              Formative and summative evaluations will also be done of the  different parts
              of the project.  Transferability of the entire  system will be tested at Purdue
              North Central and at Clemson  University.  Workshops and papers will be
              presented to  encourage adoption of aspects of this advising system at other 
              universities.  The deliverables from this project are: 1.  development of a
              proactive advising procedure and a computer  program to keep track of student
              contacts, and 2. development  of an engineering-specific, academic advising
              computer program.  ***
