Title       : A Graduate and Training Program in Geofluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9354936

Award Number: 9354936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Person   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354936  Person    Fluid circulation, composition, interaction, and history are
              of  fundamental importance in understanding crustal dynamic processes  as
              diverse as the evolution of mid-ocean ridges, basin formation,  collision
              tectonics, climate change, ocean history, paleolimnology,  and the fate of
              pollutants.  The GEOFLUIDS program embraces this  commonality on a global scale
              as a unique organizational concept  for multi-disciplinary graduate training
              and research in crustal-  scale geohydrology at the University of Minnesota.  A
              candidate who  masters the underlying principles and global linkages will be 
              especially prepared for academic and societal contributions in the  21st
              century.    The Winchell School of Earth Sciences recently established the 
              endowed Gibson Chair and Gibson Visiting Professorships in  hydrogeology, along
              with state-of-the-art modeling facilities and  matching support.  Coupled with
              the recent growth of the  Limnological Research Center, new directions in
              stable-and heavy-  isotope geochemistry, and exceptional analytical facilities,
               critical mass now exists for collaborative guidance of new  educational
              initiatives and interdisciplinary research  opportunities in crustal-scale
              geohydrology for Graduate Research  Traineeships.  The Ph.D. program combines
              Geosciences and a  University Water Resources Minor,  GRT students will gain
              unique  experience through collaboration with national laboratories and 
              international research efforts.  The GEOFLUIDS program includes  proven
              strengths in effective scientific management of university-  wide
              interdisciplinary graduate reseach training as well as  recruiting and outreach
              to attract outstanding undergraduates.   Recruitment plans include a weekend
              short course for undergraduates  and training workshops for their professors
              from Midwestern  colleges, partnerships with historically Black institutions
              with  professorship, and a lively interdisciplinary seminar forum.   Matching
              funds totaling $20,000/year will be used to fac ilitate the  administration and
              recruitment of the GEOFLUIDS program.  ***
