Title       : Promoting Physics Learning Through Writing and Peer Evaluation of Explanations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1994   
File        : a9354375

Award Number: 9354375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth S. Krane                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Bendall sbendall@sciences.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred M. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354375  Bendall  Students who enroll in introductory physics courses already
              have  ideas about how the world works. Very often these beliefs are in 
              contradiction with those of the expert physicist. There is evidence  that
              traditional instruction has little impact on the  pre-instruction beliefs of
              students. What is lacking on the  students' part is an integrated conceptual
              understanding of the  fundamental principles, laws and concepts of physics. In
              contrast,  physicists understand and utilize comparatively few principles and 
              concepts of physics to explain a wide variety of phenomena;  principles such as
              conservation of energy and concepts such as  acceleration. In order for
              students to develop a conceptual  understanding in physics, they need the
              opportunity to make sense  of the physics principles and concepts for
              themselves. Our goal is  to provide them with this opportunity through a two
              part learning  strategy. First, students will write extensive explanations
              which  require the use of specific physics ideas. The act of writing well 
              constructed explanations externalizes students' thoughts, helps  them to
              organize their thoughts in meaningful ways, and helps  students to make
              qualitative connections between ideas. The  explanation assignments will
              require consideration of traditionally  difficult issues such as the
              differentiation between velocity and  acceleration. These assignments will be
              developed based on a  taxonomy of conceptual change proposed by Dykstra.
              Second, students  will participate in a collaborative peer evaluation of the 
              explanations. Through peer evaluation students are able to see how  others
              think about physics concepts and principles, individuals can  clarify their own
              thinking, and they can receive immediate feedback  from peers. We have proposed
              a number of evaluations to guage the  impact of our strategies on student
              understanding. If successful,  our learning strategy could be implemented in
              both the university  algebra-based and calculus-based physics courses , and
              with  modifications could be used at other course levels.
