Title       : Problem-Based Learning in Introductory Science Across Disciplines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9354606

Award Number: 9354606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold B. White halwhite@.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Onn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Groh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Duch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah E. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheella Mierson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354606  White  A major objective of undergraduate education is to produce 
              students who are independent learners and who can make reasoned  decisions.
              Traditional science courses in lecture format  present content efficiently, but
              a large proportion of students  do not actively engage the material and so
              graduate with a  superficial or incorrect understanding of many basic science 
              concepts. We have assembled a critical mass of faculty who have  independently
              initiated pilot projects introducing  problem-based active group learning in
              their individual courses  in biology, chemistry, physics, biochemistry and
              astronomy. We  now propose to expand and integrate these efforts to stimulate 
              active learning in introductory science courses so that our  students develop
              the skills of critical thinking and analysis  in order to go beyond factual
              knowledge to a deeper  understanding of science. The courses involved include
              those  for majors and non-majors, those with small and large  enrollments, and
              those for honors and non-honors students.  While individual approaches vary, at
              the heart of each course  revision is the use of realistic problems or
              activities to lead  groups of students to new concepts. What is unique in this 
              program is our coordinated effort to incorporate problem-based  learning across
              several science disciplines at the introductory  level. The seven faculty
              involved in this project actively  review each other's courses, meet
              frequently, and seek ways to  make interdisciplinary connections for students.
              The scale and  diversity of our project provide opportunities for us 
              individually and collectively to assess the effects of  problem-based
              instruction, with the University of Delaware's  Center for Teaching
              Effectiveness providing the structure and  support for local, regional, and
              national dissemination of our  findings.
