Title       : MIE: Excellence in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1994      
File        : a9354135

Award Number: 9354135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert L. Bridgewater                   
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Isai T. Urasa Isai.Urasa@hamptonu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 1582      MODEL INST OF EXCELL NON-RESER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354135  Urasa                               Hampton University will undertake a
              plan which will be equivalent  to an institutional self-study in science and
              engineering  programs. It will document the accomplishments made in the last 
              fifteen years, identify weaknesses, and by learning from past  experiences,
              develop new and more effective ways by which the  institution's capacity to
              produce science and engineering  graduates will be considerably enhanced.   
              The six month planning process will include reviews of all  aspects of the
              science and engineering programs, starting as far  back as fifteen years ago.
              The accomplishments made will be  evaluated in relation to the resources
              available for these  activities. Those factors which will be determined as
              having  impeded the institution's progress in science and engineering  will
              also be evaluated and documented.    Following the review process, a plan which
              is expected to  contribute significantly to the university's future objectives 
              and goals in science and engineering will be developed. Included  in the plan
              will be the establishment of new areas of study to  expand or augment existing
              academic programs, putting a special  emphasis on identified areas of national
              and global needs. New  approaches of recruiting and retaining students in
              science and  engineering will be developed. The planning process will also 
              develop cost effective mechanisms for providing qualified science  and
              engineering students financial support; obtain new laboratory  and other
              instructional facilities to improve existing ones and  to expose students to
              new technology; and enhance student  involvement in undergraduate research both
              here on campus and at  other sites, including industrial research facilities
              and  National laboratories.
