Title       : Collaborative Research: An Integrated,Computer-Assisted Approach to Teaching
               Introductory Geology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9354602

Award Number: 9354602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Hurst steve@rogue.geo.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354602  Hurst  This project is a collaborative effort between Duke University
              and  the University of North Carolina.  An introductory geology  laboratory
              course is being developed which emphasizes a  multidisciplinary approach to
              solving geological problems using  state-of-the-art information technologies. 
              Laboratories are being  designed as case studies utilizing an electronic data
              bank  integrated with more traditional maps and hand samples.  Each case  study
              requires students to use tools such as satellite images,  topographic and
              geologic maps, cross-sections, three-dimensional  animations, and simplified
              geophysical and geochemical data to  unravel the geologic history of an area.
              Hypothesis formulation and  testing are being emphasized.  Not only are
              students learning  factual information in the context of real geologic
              problems, but  they also are seeing how geologists use physics, chemistry, 
              mathematics, and biology to study Earth. In addition, they are  becoming
              familiar and comfortable with the use of computers and  sophisticated data
              handling techniques in a user friendly  environment.  Laboratories and
              exercises are being designed by  investigators from both institutions. 
              Software programming is  being carried out at Duke.  Evaluation and assessment
              are primarily  utilizing the larger introductory classes at UNC.  Duke faculty
              and  students have created over twenty computerized  prototype "field  trips"
              over the last two years, and a pilot study of how the  technology employed in
              the field trips can be applied to teaching  introductory geology has been
              conducted.  Thus, the investigators  are able to use the programming expertise
              and classroom testing  experience already gained in developing this
              comprehensive  introductory laboratory course.  Dissemination is planned
              through  several channels including: 1) a full-day workshop at a GSA  national
              meeting; 2) the distribution of an announcement to all  geology departments in
              the country; 3) publication of the results  in the Journa l of Geological
              Education; and 4) commercial  publication of the products.
