Title       : Gateway to Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1994   
File        : a9354816

Award Number: 9354816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack L Waintraub                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Riedel RIEDELS@VAX.CSD.MOIEDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon K. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Wenzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354816  Riedel  This proposal requests support for the development of an 
              innovative, interdisciplinary course called GATEWAY TO  ENGINEERING. The course
              is designed to introduce first-year  engineering students to their chosen field
              in a creative and  exciting way. The course will be developed by an 
              interdisciplinary group of 10 engineering faculty, and will be  taught by these
              faculty to pilot groups of first-year students.  Integral to the design of the
              course is an ongoing assessment  of its success in achieving its objectives.
              These objectives  include: encouraging students to form a supportive academic 
              community, improving study skills and survival tactics of  first-year students,
              nurturing creativity in design, providing  a foundation in engineering science
              in several areas, involving  each student in hands-on laboratory experiences,
              providing  several opportunities for students to design, providing  connections
              between engineering faculty and first-year  students, introducing students to
              the engineering profession in  a variety of ways, improving the retention rate
              of engineering  students from the first to the second year, and ensuring that 
              each student makes the choice of engineering on the basis of  reliable
              information and experience.  GATEWAY TO ENGINEERING targets a pilot group of
              first-year  engineering students; it involves an interdisciplinary team of 
              engineering faculty; it provides significant engineering  science content,
              hands-on laboratory experience and design  opportunities for each student; it
              enables students to join the  engineering academic community by coming to know
              their peers,  their teachers, and some upper division students in  engineering;
              it combines the results of previously-successful  first-year programs with
              innovative pedagogical techniques in  a new and creative way; and it gives the
              first-year students a  clear understanding of both the study and the practice
              of  engineering.
