Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships in Machine Tool Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9354980

Award Number: 9354980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiri Tlusty jtlusty@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Ziegert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K. Scott Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354980  Tlusty    The Machine Tool Research Center (MTRC) at the University of 
              Florida will establish a three phase Machine Tool Research Graduate 
              Traineeship program designed to lead students from the B.S. to the  Ph.D. in a
              five year period.  During the first phase of the  program, the students will
              concentrate on coursework.  They will  identify an area of research interest
              and complete a non-thesis  Master's research project which will serve as the
              basis for their  eventual doctoral research.  Following the completion of the
              M.S.  degree in the second year, the students will enter the second phase  of
              the traineeship which consists of a one-year, off campus  internship at an
              industrial site or an internationally recognized  research lab.  The internship
              will be arranged carefully to  coincide with the student's research area. 
              Following the  internship, the trainees will return to the MTRC to concentrate
              on  their doctoral research.    The NSF Machine Tool Research Traineeships will
              be nationally  advertised.  Particular emphasis in recruitment will be placed
              on  women, minorities and the disabled.  Institutions which are the  leading
              producers of women, minority, and disabled B.S. level  Mechancial or
              Manufacturing Engineering graduates will be  identified.  MTRC faculty will
              make recruiting visits to at least  four of these institutions.  Eight of the
              most promising candidates  identified will be invited to visit the UF campus to
              meet with MTRC  faculty and students at departmental expense.    Recent
              expnsion of the MTRC necessitates an increase in the number  of graduate
              students.  The Mechanical Engineering department is  currently restructuring
              its graduate programs to place an increased  emphasis on the Ph.D. degree.  The
              Machine Tool Research Graduate  Traineeship program will allow the MTRC to
              significantly increase  its Ph.D. productivity.  ***
