Title       : Integrating Social Impact and Ethics into the Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9354626

Award Number: 9354626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Feldman mfeldman@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Dianne Martin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354626  Martin  The purpose of this proposal is to develop a plan and materials
              for  integrating social impact and ethics topics across the computer  science
              curriculum.  It will address the two major problems that  hamper the
              implementation of an across-the-board curricular change:  The lack of materials
              that can be adapted or adopted into the  existing CS curriculum and the lack of
              awareness and expertise on  the part of most CS faculty regarding the need and
              methodology for  presenting such material in their courses.  The project is 
              comprised of three interrelated tasks: 1) define the content of  teaching
              modules to be developed that will facilitate the  presentation of these topics;
              2) develop the actual modules that  can be disseminated as a teaching kit to
              interested CS departments  and faculty members; and 3) develop a pilot faculty
              enhancement  seminar that can be presented for interested CS faculty members to
               prepare them to use the materials.  The first task will be  implemented as
              follows:  a two-day working conference of experts in  ethics, social impact,
              and computer science curriculum will be  convened to determine the appropriate
              content for the teaching  modules.  They will discuss possible topics for a
              freshman  computers-and-society course, the traditional computer science core 
              courses, and the senior design course.  The expected outcome of  this
              conference will be consensus from this group regarding which  topics, how much
              time, and the level of such topics that should be  included in the CS
              curriculum.  The second task will be implemented  as follows:  Based upon the
              recommendation of the working  conference, teaching modules will be developed
              that can be used  together as a single course or independently within a number
              of  courses across the curriculum.  These modules will include  scenarios,
              exercises for discussion and written comment, and  teaching strategies for
              presenting the topics.  The modules will be  developed for a freshman course,
              use in computer science cor e  courses, and use in a senior design course. 
              These modules will be  sent out for comment and pilot testing by computer
              science  professors.  A kit of teaching modules will be developed for  general
              dissemination.  The third task will be implemented as  follows:  Based upon the
              materials developed, a pilot two-day  faculty enhancement seminar will be
              developed and conducted to  provide guidance to computer science professors
              regarding how to  effectively use the materials.  Based upon results from the
              pilot  seminar, a kit for faculty enhancement seminars will also be  developed
              for general dissemination.  ***y
