Title       : Reform of the "Non-Calculus" Introductory Physics Course from a Constructivist
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9354528

Award Number: 9354528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell H. Potter potter@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence B. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354528  Potter  There is widespread and growing agreement that very serious 
              problems exist in the introductory courses in all science  disciplines. Many of
              the factors at the root of the problems in  these courses have only recently
              been identified by researchers in  cognitive psychology and science education.
              We believe that most of  the problems with introductory science courses and the
               "non-calculus" introductory physics course in particular, stem  directly from
              the way in which instructors conceptualize the  teaching and learning process. 
              The goal of this proposal is to  construct and fully implement a new
              introductory physics course  which will replace the standard "non-calculus"
              course at UC Davis.  The model we are proposing is grounded in the direct
              implications  for instruction that are emerging which support a constructivist 
              theory of how learning and conceptual understanding actually  develops in an
              individual student. The course will by necessity  have to be taught within the
              constraints normally found at large  universities and so will serve as a viable
              model for other  institutions.  The objectives of this proposal are to
              transform the  traditional non-calculus introductory physics course into a 
              constructivist based course, to produce instructor and TA training  materials
              in constructivist methodologies, to produce a student  textbook along course
              lines, and to give support and guidance to  other institutions desiring to make
              these changes. The expected  outcomes include an increase in student conceptual
              understanding  and appreciation of physics, an increase in math and critical 
              thinking skills in students, and a pedagogically appropriate model  of a
              science course for pre-service teachers.
