Title       : Environmental Physical and Mathematical Science and Engineering: Joint Hampton
               University- Virginia Tech Traineeship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9354875

Award Number: 9354875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Dillard john.dillard@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Isai T. Urasa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                An interdisciplinary, inter-institution graduate study program  involving
              Hampton University and Virginia Tech (VPI) (see  appendix I) is proposed to
              enhance the possibility for minority  students to obtain the Ph.D. degree.  In
              the program students  will obtain the M.S. degree at Hampton University and
              will  complete advance study by obtaining the Ph.D. degree at Virginia  Tech
              with research on environmentally significant and relevant  topics.  A unique
              student and faculty exchange program is  incorporated into the overall
              traineeship effort.  The research  areas and education in environmental science
              and chemistry  provide a balanced program for advanced study.  Research topics 
              available for students in the program include 1) synthesis of  organic
              compounds using environmentally benign supercritical  solvent media (carbon
              dioxide), 2) conversion of aromatic and  chlorinated aromatic compounds via
              microbial oxygenation and  transformation into medicinal and pharmaceutical
              materials,   3) synthesis and characterization of porpyrins, the development 
              of polymeric materials for use in organic synthesis, 4) synthesis  and
              characterization of nitrated heterocycles, 5) transition  metal catalysis in
              organic synthesis, 6) studies of organic free  radicals and radical ions, 7)
              trace element speciation in aqueous  media; analytical methods development with
              atomic absorption  spectroscopy, ion chromatography, and high performance
              liquid  chromatography, 8) studies of trace element transport in ground-  water
              by suspended particles, 9) development of slurry injection  analytical methods
              for the direct elemental analysis of  geological samples, 10) design of
              extraction procedures and  analytical  methodology using environmentally benign
               supercritical fluids for the analysis of hazardous chemicals in  marine and
              estuarine samples, 11) chromatographic methods for the  analysis of organic
              contaminants in water, 12) assessment of  placer heavy-mineral resources,
              nutrient influx in natural water,  13) studi es of crystal growth and surface
              adsorption reactions of  interest in chemical oceanography, 14) investigation
              of non-  solvent and non-organic solvent methods for treatment of and  adhesive
              bonding to adherend surfaces, 15) environmental  awareness in materials
              selection and processing methods for the  preparation of high performance
              adhesive and composite materials,  and 16) noise-induced transitions in
              nonlinear, dissapative, and  physico-chemical dynamical systems.
