Title       : Graduate Research Traineeship Program in Environmental Physical and Mathematical
               Science & Engineering: Environmental Hazard Mitigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9354889

Award Number: 9354889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. F. Spencer spencer@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Gray  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal seeks $537,500 over five years to support Ph.D.  graduate
              students in the Department of Civil Engineering and  Geological Sciences
              (CE/GEOS) at the University of Notre Dame.   Research performed by these
              students will concentrate on the  critical area of mitigation of natural and
              human-made  environmental hazards.  The CE/GEOS unit is uniquely positioned  to
              address environmental hazards from a multidisciplinary  viewpoint because its
              faculty is an integrated mix of individuals  with both science and engineering
              degrees.  Among the critical  problems that can be creatively attacked within
              this  multidisciplinary framework are technology for the seismic design  of
              landfills and the associated uncertainty modeling and risk  assessment,
              mathematical modeling of toxic chemicals in surface  water and groundwater
              systems, and biological degradation of  hazardous materials.  The support
              obtained will expand  opportunities for highly qualified students to perform
              state-of-  the-art research that complements and expands activities in the 
              Department aimed at assuring excellence in Ph.D. education.   Particular
              emphasis will be placed on identification,  recruitment, and retention of
              students from groups  underrepresented in academia, with two of the five
              requested  scholarships being designated to support such students.  To 
              increase this applicant pool, alliances have been made with three  institutions
              (Prairie View A&M University, Texas Southern  University, and St. Mary's
              College) which graduate a significant  number of underrepresented students. 
              The program will be  structured to achieve the goal of preparing students for 
              leadership positions as teachers and researchers in the diverse  aspects of
              environmental hazard mitigation.
