Title       : Home Experiments: Effective Tools in Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1993   
File        : a9354365

Award Number: 9354365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Latif M. Jiji   (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Liaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354365  Jiji   This program introduces innovative changes in undergraduate 
              instruction, targeting a broad segment of engineering  education, enhancing
              students' learning and improving  comprehension in both theoretical and
              laboratory courses.  This  is done via the creation of 14 modules describing 14
              home  experiments for integration into theoretical and laboratory  courses in
              thermodynamics, fluid flow, heat transfer and  mechanics of materials.  Each
              module gives a description of the  experiments, typical results obtained at
              home, and laboratory  results obtrained using sophisticated techniques.  The
              program is designed to achieve (1) an increase in student  involvement and
              thereby their motivation; (2) education of  students in the processes of
              simplification, approximation and  modeling; (3) encouragement of students to
              adopt and utilize  modeling processes by developing and providing all necessary
               material, thus minimizing the demands on instructors. These  objectives will
              be achieved by integrating simple experiments  which students can perform at
              home in: (i) theoretical courses  to better understand theoretical concepts and
              principles, and  (ii) laboratory courses to appreciate and demystify complex 
              laboratory measurements and elucidate the role of theory.The  program will be
              evaluated in two stages: internally at CCNY and  externally at a participating
              college.  Internally, the program  is monitored and evaluated during two
              consecutive semesters in  four undergradute courses.  External evaluation is
              based on  program utilization in the four courses during one semester.   Both
              evaluations will be conducted by a faculty member in the  CCNY School of
              Education.The program findings are to be  disseminated through presentations
              and exhibits at national  conferences of professional societies such as ASME
              and ASEE,  and though publication of articles in appropriate journals.  Two key
              features of the program are that it can be integrated  with existing
              curriculums, and is cost effective. O nce the  modules are developed for a
              specific discipline, their adoption  by institutions is essentially cost free.
