Title       : The Physics of Medical Technology: Science every patient wants to know
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1993  
File        : a9354422

Award Number: 9354422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth S. Krane                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36868              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne M. Amador Kane samador@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354422  Amador  The proposed curricular development project, "The Physics of 
              Medical Technologies" addresses two serious concerns: the  scientific education
              of college students not majoring in the  natural sciences, and the enrichment
              of standard freshman physics  laboratories. The interdisciplinary field of
              medical physics offers  an exciting opportunity to create general audience
              courses which  teach a great deal of basic physics in the context of learning
              how  sophisticated medical instrumentation works. Importantly, the  physics is
              limited in scope to relatively few topics, but these can  be explored in depth.
              For example, geometrical optics plays a role  in the understanding of fiber
              optic scopes, laser surgery, and  ultrasound, while the concept of energy
              occupies a central place in  the discussion of both laser surgery and radiation
              therapy. The  main outcome of this project would be curricular materials for 
              dissemination: a complete set of lecture notes, written at the  appropriate
              level for a general audience course, supporting  materials such as sample
              problems and demonstrations, and five  original discovery-oriented laboratories
              which blend the essential  science with medical applications. The latter will
              be appropriate  for either a general audience course or for introducing topical
               applications into standard freshman physics. All three components,  lecture
              notes, problems, and labs, have been designed to emphasize  conceptual learning
              in conjunction with core quantitative  techniques, such as estimation, modeling
              of data, and engineering  design concerns. A detailed evaluation plan involving
              feedback from  three off-site peers and a graduate assistant will assist in 
              refining these course materials before they are advertised through  mailings
              and journal articles. By encouraging instructors  interested in teaching such a
              course and providing them with  material help, the project will have an impact
              beyond its immediate  student audience.
