Title       : Hypermedia Textbook for Computer Science 1 and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1994   
File        : a9354641

Award Number: 9354641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102430             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Skolnick skolnick@cs.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Spooner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354641    Skolnick  The problem addressed by this work is the development of a 
              hypertext/hypermedia "textbook" for use in the teaching of  introductory
              computer science to undergraduates.  There are two  factors that are unique to
              the milieu in which this course is  being taught:  1. it is a required course
              for all  undergraduates and 2. the course uses a network of over five  hundred
              workstation computers (in lecture halls, labs and  dorms).  Thus, the course is
              aimed at a wide range of students  who need to learn the basics of programming
              and the fundamental  concepts in computer science and to understand how 
              computational issues appear in their chosen disciplines.  These  admittedly
              ambitious goals are being addressed by orienting the  hypertext around a
              carefully chosen set of case studies out of  which there are links to material
              on the larger course  objectives.  For example, there exist case studies
              involving  curve fitting and image processing, with direct tiebacks to  science
              and engineering disciplines.  Further, because of the  large numbers of
              available workstations, our objectives is to  develop a hypertext/hypermedia
              textbook that can be used by  students to learn in individual and group setting
              and by  professors to instruct in lectures, labs and interactive  classrooms. 
              Since the course is oriented around case studies,  material from the hypertext
              is gradually integrated into the  existing curriculum, i.e., as an addendum to
              currently used  texts.  As further case studies develop into hypertext the 
              course shifts away from the use of hardcopy texts.  Evaluation  of our efforts
              is made by tracking the performance of students  on material learned in a
              traditional format versus hypertext;  in addition, mechanisms can be added to
              the hypertext which  monitor (for non-grading uses) the patterns of usage.  
              Dissemination of case studies is via the XMosaic Internet  viewing program,
              which permits viewing of documents by anyone  connected to the Internet.  The
              significance of this wo rk is  that it goes beyond the focus of current
              introductory computer  science courses (which are oriented towards majors) and
              moves  towards the teaching of computer literacy as we believe it  eventually
              must be taught.  Further, the exploitation of  hypermedia seems to be an ideal
              way to deal with variations  both in the prior background of students and in
              what they find  interesting and relevant to their future computational needs. 
              ***
