Title       : Introductory Physics: A Pilot Project for an Elementary Course based on Guided
               inquiry,with the Theme of "Energy"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1993   
File        : a9354595

Award Number: 9354595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth S. Krane                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37233              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeastern Louisiana U
	      100 West Dakota
	      Hammond, LA  704012512    504/549-2000

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9354595  Meltzer   Undergraduate science courses taken by preservice teachers 
              typically have textbook-centered lecture formats. There is a  need for new
              course designs which implement ideas found  beneficial in recent educational
              research. It is essential that  pilot forms of the courses be offered, tested
              and evaluated,  and that reports of the successes and problem areas of such 
              courses be widely disseminated.This proposal is for a pilot  project to
              develop, implement, and assess an elementary physics  course, appropriate for
              preservice teachers, which would embody  a number of the recent innovations in
              educational theory and  practice. Among the problems which need to be
              investigated is  the question of just how severely the breadth of topical 
              coverage will have to be reduced from standard levels, in order  to ensure that
              what is covered is actually learned and retained  by the students.The theme of
              "energy" is used as a conceptual  pivot to tie together the various topics.
              Students'  pre/misconceptions regarding physical phenomena will guide the 
              presentation, activities, and discussion. After pretesting to  determine
              student preconceptions, issues related to their  preconceived ideas will be
              investigated by the students through  guided "mini-research-projects." These
              projects will be carried  out by the students working in small groups;
              discussions  centered around each group's results will lead to a systematic 
              summing-up by the instructor to provide perspective, and tie  into the next
              topical area with the thread of the theme "energy  transformation and
              conservation." During course delivery,  ongoing testing and other assessment
              will guide the pacing and  depth of the topical coverage.The target audience is
               prospective elementary and middle-school teachers, and other  non-technical
              students. The project has the potential to  significantly improve the knowledge
              of and attitude towards  physics on the part of those whose typical experience
              with  college physical science tends to be dist asteful and  nonproductive.
