Title       : Native American Telecommunications Forum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1993 
File        : a9354116

Award Number: 9354116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50444              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Buller   (Principal Investigator current)
              LaDonna Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Americans for Indian Oppor
	      681 Juniper Hill Road
	      Bernalillo, NM  87004    505/983-2878

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9354116  Buller    Although relatively slow to start, Native American 
              telecommunications has in recent years begun to flourish and  diversify.  By
              Native American telecommunications, we refer to the  use of computing and
              telecommunications technologies by Indian  people for any purpose related to
              education in the broadest sense  of the term, including the cultural, legal and
              educational  framework within which these technologies are employed.    There
              exist numerous independent, autonomous efforts by Native  Americans and others
              working with them to design and implement  telecommunications systems. 
              Disregarding for a moment the relative  merits of these efforts, and the
              cultural and social barriers to  their success, the fact remains that most of
              these projects are  being carried out in isolation and therefore their creators
              are not  taking full advantage of the power of integrative technologies.   
              This is unfortunate because some of this integration will be very  difficult to
              achieve later or done so only at comparatively great  expense and labor.  In
              addition, the opportunity is lost for  creative and culturally significant
              collaborative efforts, ones  which could promote telecommunications
              technologies as positive  forces with Native American culture.  Finally, in a
              time of more  restrictive national funding, cooperation rather than competition
               will be viewed positively by political leaders.    To bridge some of these
              problems and draw attention to the  potential power resulting from the
              combination of collaboration and  technology, we propose to hold a two-day
              forum on Native American  telecommunications.  Forum participants would include
              recognized  leaders in Native American telecommunications and selected others 
              from the public and private sectors.  The forum would be small, on  the order
              of 25-30, and consist of both informational presentations  and small group
              sessions in which Native communities will share and  hopefully create
              technological partnerships which reflect the  soverei gnty of the tribes and
              other Indian bodies.
