Title       : MIE: Expanding Excellence in SEM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1995   
File        : a9354156

Award Number: 9354156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert L. Bridgewater                   
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phil V. Compton p-compton@tamuk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Perez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mario A. Medina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mauro E. Castro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Univ-Kingsville
	      Campus Box 201
	      Kingsville, TX  783640201    512/595-2111

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 7177,
Abstract    :
              9354156  Compton    Texas A&I University seeks planning grant funding to develop
              a full  proposal under the Model Institution of Excellence (MIE) project.  
              Planning activities will explore, evaluate, and develop programs in  eight
              principal areas.  The fundamental objective will be to  dramatically increase
              the quantity and quality of the SEM graduates  of Texas A&I University, a major
              national producer of BS degrees to  Hispanic Americans.  Our institutional
              mission is to establish  within South Texas a large, first generation of
              college educated  Hispanic professionals in those SEM careers vital to bringing
              our  educational economic infrastructure into parity with the rest of  Texas
              and the nation.  The planning focus will be on a broad-based  institutional
              program of enhancement of the SEM disciplines at  Texas A&I.    Texas A&I
              University President, Dr. Manuel L. Ibanez, named a four  member Council of
              Principal Investigators led by Dr. Phil Compton,  Dean of Engineering, and
              including Dr. Mario Medina, Dr. Mauro  Castro, and Dr. John Perez, to develop
              the Phase I and Phase II MIE  activities.  Four to seven member Focus Groups
              were named to fully  explore the initial directions in eight principal areas,
              including:    1) Center for Innovation and Teaching Excellence.  The CITE will 
              explore SEM curricula integration; collaborative and team learning;  faculty
              incentives, development and rewards; university teaching  and monitoring; and
              undergraduate research; 2) Human Interface  Development.  HID will explore
              programs to bring about fundamental  cultural change in the SEM experience and
              enhance the climate for  the successful recruitment and retention of Hispanics,
              particularly  women, to SEM degree programs; 3) SEM Bridges and Orientations.  
              SEMBO will explore the development and programmatic structure of  three bridge
              programs (Jump-Start SEM, SEM and Parent's Bridge) and  two orientation
              programs (community college and second tier); 4)  Technology Enabled Learning. 
              TEL will explore MIE  needs in  laboratory equipment, student computational
              needs, and  telecommunications and electronic networking; 5) Community College 
              Collaboration.  CCC will explore faculty exchanges, engineering  core
              curriculum development, transfer and colleges; 6) Industry  Participation.
              Broad-based industry participation in the MIE will  be sought; 7) Evaluation,
              Assessment and Cost Effectiveness.   Continuous evaluation, assessment and cost
              effectiveness analysis  will be an integral part of the planning process; and
              8)  Budget  Allocations.  The Council of Principal Investigators in 
              consultation with President Ibanez will determine the final budget  allocations
              during the development of the full proposal based on a  cost effectiveness
              model that will maximize the goal attainment o  increased quantity and quality
              of Hispanic SEM graduates.
