Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Polymer Processing, Modelling and
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9158145

Award Number: 9158145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim A. Osswald tim@neptune.me.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9227,9251,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The project will conduct research in the field of polymer                 
              processing, composites and rheology, specifically modeling and                 
              simulating processes such as injection, compression and resin                  
              transfer molding.  The outcome of this research will aid the                   
              designer in controlling material properties and part quality                   
              through innovative modeling, analysis and process simulation.                  
              Research will be done on the thermomechanical behavior of                      
              composites.  A major problem that arises when designing plastic                
              parts, especially those made of fiber reinforced composites, is                
              the change of the part's shape and dimensions due to shrinkage                 
              and warpage.  A thermomechanical simulation of the molding                     
              process of fiber reinforced composites will result from this                   
              research. Another study will determine the inertial effects                    
              during flow of low viscosity polymers.  This is especially                     
              interesting for the reaction injection molding (RIM) process                   
              where cycle times of only fractions of a second are sought.  It                
              is not possible to predict flow patterns and orientations for                  
              this mold filling process using current simulations, since they                
              are all based on the assumption of negligible inertia terms.  The              
              project will also develop a simulation of the thermoforming                    
              process of sheet materials, specifically, fiber matt preforms                  
              used in the resin transfer molding process and wood flour filled               
              polypropylene sheets used for interior body panels. It is                      
              important to know the filler orientation after forming and to                  
              detect the formation of folds or rips in the sheet which would                 
              make it unacceptable for use.                                                  
                   Understanding the thermomechanical behavior of plastics and               
              being able to predict filling patterns, filler orientation,                    
              shrinkage, warpage and surface waviness before a part is actually              
              molded leads to higher part quality and eliminates some of the                 
              expensive and time consuming tasks done in the early stages of                 
              part and mold design.
