Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Coastal Processes in Large Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9158230

Award Number: 9158230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas R. Leinbach                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Sherman sherman@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard O. Bauer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides support for Dr. Bernard Bauer through the             
              National Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Program.         
              The objective of this program is to provide research support for some          
              of the nation's most outstanding and promising young science and               
              engineering faculty members.  The awards are intended to improve the           
              capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand for          
              highly qualified scientists and engineers for academic and industrial          
              research and teaching.                                                         
                   This award will allow Dr. Bauer to continue his research in               
              geomorphic processes, especially the mechanisms by which fluids sculpt         
              landforms.  The investigator has been a leader in adapting models and          
              analytic techniques originally developed in coastal studies for use in         
              analyses of streams.  He will continue this synthetic research through         
              detailed explorations of the influence of wave-like fluid oscillations         
              within streams on stream banks, expanding on the unidirectional flow           
              models that currently form the basis for most models of channel                
              morphology.  This research will include a series of experimental and           
              empirical analyses that focus on application to stream-channel erosion         
              and deposition of beach-equilibrium models, which include measurements         
              of wave height, steepness, skewness, and orbital velocity.  Time-series        
              analyses of data gathered by electromagnetic current meters and                
              submersible pressure sensors will provide more accurate estimates of           
              the relative significance of oscillatory motions and unidirectional            
              flows on stream-channel erosion and deposition.  In addition to                
              enhancing general understandings of fluid dynamics and channel                 
              morphology, this research will provide practical information for               
              analyses of the differential impacts of alternate discharge regimes            
              when stream flow is regulated by dams or other flow-control structures.
