Title       : Dynamic Similarity or Size Proportionality? Adaptations of a Polar Copepod.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0324539

Award Number: 0324539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50339              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeannette D. Yen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Webster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Weissburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                This project explores the feasibility of applying fluid
              physical analyses to evaluate the importance of viscous forces over
              compensatory temperature adaptations in a polar copepod. The water of the
              Southern Ocean is 20 Celsius colder and nearly twice as viscous as subtropical
              seas, and the increased viscosity has significant implications for swimming
              zooplankton. In each of these warm and cold aquatic environments have evolved
              abundant carnivorous copepods in the family Euchaetidae. In this exploratory
              study, two species from the extremes of the natural temperature range (0 and
              23C) will be compared to test two alternate hypotheses concerning how Antarctic
              plankton adapt to the low temperature-high viscosity realm of the Antarctic and
              to evaluate the importance of viscous forces in the evolution of plankton. How
              do stronger viscous forces and lower temperature affect the behavior of the
              Antarctic species? If the Antarctic congener is dynamically similar to its
              tropical relative, it will operate at the same Reynolds number (Re) as its
              tropical congener. Alternatively, if the adaptations of the Antarctic congener
              are proportional to size, they should occupy a higher Re regime, which suggests
              that the allometry of various processes is not constrained by having to occupy
              a transitional fluid regime. The experiments are designed with clearly defined
              outcomes regarding a number of copepod characteristics, such as swimming speed,
              propulsive force, and size of the sensory field. These characteristics
              determine not only how copepods relate to the physical world, but also
              structure their biological interactions. The results of this study will provide
              insights on major evolutionary forces affecting plankton and provide a means to
              evaluate the importance of the fluid physical conditions relative to
              compensatory measures for temperature. Fluid physical, biomechanical, and
              neurophysiological techniques have not been previously applied to these polar
              plankton. However, these approaches, if productive and feasible, will provide
              ways to explore the sensory ecology of polar plankton and the role of
              small-scale biological-physical-chemical interactions in a polar environment.
              Experimental evidence validating the importance of viscous effects will also
              justify further research using latitudinal comparisons of other congeners along
              a temperature gradient in the world ocean.
