Title       : Postdoctoral Appointments: Roles and Opportunities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0324824

Award Number: 0324824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willie Pearson willie.pearsonjr@hts.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Lichter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1253      OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Pearson				Institution:  Georgia Institute of Technology

With this
              award, the Special Projects Office of the Division of Chemistry and the Office
              of Multidisciplinary Affairs of the Mathematics and Physical Sciences
              Directorate is supporting Dr. Willie Pearson of the Department of History,
              Technology and Society, Georgia Institute of Technology to organize and conduct
              a workshop entitled  "Postdoctoral Appointments: Roles and Opportunities".  Dr.
              Robert Lichter of  Merrimack Consultants, LLC and Dr. Geraldine L. Richmond of
              the University of Oregon are co-PI of the project.  The goal of the workshop is
              to explore the nature and merit of initiating a postdoctoral program in
              chemistry that may serve as a model throughout NSF.  Elements that will be
              considered include: 1) A better understanding of the processes, characteristics
              and outcomes of the postdoctoral appointment.  2) A statement of concepts,
              opportunities and priorities for activities at the postdoctoral level by the
              chemistry division, and the NSF more generally, that will strengthen the human
              resource base necessary to maintain leadership in science, mathematics and
              engineering.  The workshop will be developed by a ten-person steering committee
              that will oversee all phases of planning, development and implementation of the
              workshop, and drafting a final report.  The workshop will be attended by a
              demographically diverse group of approximately 60-70 participants.  Attendees
              will include academic and industrial administrators, representatives from
              national  labs, industrial labs, funding agencies and from undergraduate and
              graduate institutions.  The workshop report will inform the planning process
              for NSF supported activities at the postdoctoral level in the Division of
              Chemistry and the MPS Directorate.  

