Title       : Materials Camp Student Support 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0324678

Award Number: 0324678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Stoebe stoebe@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal is to provide for participant support for high school students
              attending the
Materials Camp program during summer 2003. These camps are
              similar to the Materials
Camp program funded in 2002 by NSF Engineering
              Division. The program provides
hands-on learning in materials science and
              technology for high school students from
across the U.S. In 2003 two Materials
              Camp programs are planned, each for 30 students.
The two programs are to be
              held as follows:
Materials Camp West, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
              July 7 - 13, 2003
Materials Camp East, Materials Park, OH, August 11 - 17,
              2003
The curriculum of the camps includes engineering applications of metals,
              ceramics,
polymers, composites and biomaterials. Students experience learning
              using both set
laboratory experiments and a team project in which they explore
              structure-property-
processing-applications relationships in materials as
              related to engineering systems.
Everyday materials systems are the foundation
              of the program, building to more
advanced applications. Professional society
              volunteers work with each team of five
students to ensure real learning and
              motivation. The camp concludes with project
presentations by the students to a
              professional audience.
The expected outcome of this project are a set of 60
              students who are more
knowledgeable of engineering and engineering
              applications, with specific experience in
the area of materials. Our
              evaluation of previous camps is very positive in convincing
students to
              consider and enroll in engineering in college. Thus our expectation is that
              we
will be able to focus students on the advantages of engineering studies and
              thus increase
engineering enrollments, not just among the students who attend
              but among their peers as
well.
The intellectual merit of this proposal
              relates to the knowledge that these student will
learn. The students who
              attend the camp are generally the better students in a high
school. Most of
              them initially indicate that they are not interested in science
              or
engineering, but rather other areas from art to social science to medicine.
              Using the
focused, hands-on approach of the camp program, our experience shows
              that the
intellectual content of the camp excites them, thus broadening their
              thinking as to a career
and future study.
The broader impact of the program
              provides these bright students with specific
understanding of the potential of
              careers in engineering, provides a potential new set of
students for science
              and enginering study, thus increasing the pool of U.S. students
interested in
              science and engineering. It also serves to broaden student understanding
              of
the field of materials, and demonstrates the centrality of materials to
              engineering and
science.
