Title       : The Madden-Julian Oscillation in General Circulation Models: An Analysis of
               Factors Relevant to Its Initiation, Maintenance, and Suppression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0224559

Award Number: 0224559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Randall randall@redfish.atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charlotte Demott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marat Khairoutdinov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will improve the modeling of intra-seasonal variability in climate
              models.  The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is a key component of
              intra-seasonal variability, and plays a significant role in modulating
              circulation and precipitation variability in the global Tropics and subtropical
              regions.  MJO also influences the Asian-Australian summer monsoons and possibly
              even ENSO variability.  Current climate models are notably deficient in
              simulating MJO variability.  Because of being sandwiched between two notable
              fluctuation time-scales-the shorter time-scale weather and the longer
              time-scale seasonal-to-interannual variability-MJO has not received significant
              research attention until recently.  Drs. Randall, Demott and Khairoutdinov (all
              from Colorado State University) will investigate the initiation and evolution
              of MJO variability in a climate model in which clouds are resolved (and not
              parameterized).  A cloud-resolving scheme will be implemented in the NCAR
              Community Climate System Model (CCSM).  Project tasks will include refining
              this scheme, and ascertaining the sensitivity of MJO simulation to various
              aspects of the implementation.  The PIs will develop a diagnostic analysis
              package targeting MJO variability, and make it available for community use
              through the CCSM web site.
