Title       : GOALI: SPIN ELECTRONICS Collaborative Research: Control and Detection of Spin
               Polarization in Semiconductor Quantum Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0224157

Award Number: 0224157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Altshuler bla@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Lyon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mansour Shayegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the NSF Spin Electronics for the 2fl
              Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
              investigation of techniques to locally induce, control, and detect electron
              spin in semiconductor microstructures by using properly located electrostatic
              gate voltages. Electrostatic gates are easily defined on a submicron scale and
              should provide switching and manipulations of spin currents. A variety of
              approaches to this goal will be pursued, including (i) gate-programmable
              nuclear polarization applied to single and double quantum dots, and the
              transfer of nuclear spin from dot to dot, (ii) gate-controlled
              spin-polarization in high-mobility GaAs/AlAs epitaxial layers; and (iii)
              electron-spin-resonance {ESR) measurements in AlAs.

Combining
              state-of-the-art fabrication technology, careful measurements, and theoretical
              analysis, the proposed research is highly interdisciplinary. It relies on
              expertise of three experimentalists and one theorist in engineering and
              physics. It also entails the full participation of graduate and undergraduate
              students, who will gain invaluable experience and knowledge in cutting edge
              materials science and engineering, with a focus on the emerging and potentially
              rewarding field of spin electronics.

The work will be centered at Princeton
              University with one investigator at Harvard University. Existing facilities at
              Princeton and Harvard will be adequate to carry out all the proposed work. The
              majority of requested funding will be used to support graduate students.
              Workshops at Princeton are planned to insure a focused research effort and to
              enhance interaction among students working on the common research goals.

