Title       : Design of Flexible Reaction Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0224745

Award Number: 0224745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianthi Ierapetritou marianth@sol.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

This research project addresses the problem of modeling simulation
              and optimization of realistic reaction systems involving a large number of
              reaction steps and different species.  The specific objectives are the
              description of complex kinetic networks through reduced reaction systems, the
              determination of the range of validity in terms of the initial conditions of
              the reduced models and the problem of uncertainty propagation through the
              reaction network.  The methodology that is developed will be applied to fossil
              fuels combustion but the techniques developed are applicable to a diverse range
              of chemical processes.

Nitrogen oxides (NOx) in the atmosphere cause
              photochemical smog, the destruction of the ozone layer and global warming. 
              Atmospheric NOx increases have been attributed to the combustion of biomass and
              fossil fuels, systems that are mathematically represented by very complex
              kinetic reaction networks.  Accurate kinetic models could help identify the
              parameters responsible for the production of the pollutant NOx in the
              atmosphere and be used to reduce their formation.  The PI will develop methods
              of kinetic model reduction to reduce the computational complexity associated
              with the consideration of the detailed kinetic mechanisms of such systems.  The
              approach is to develop a comprehensive framework for the analysis of
              uncertainty effects of complex kinetic  models, quantify the range of validity
              of a reduced model, and determine more flexible reduced kinetic models with
              respect to kinetic parameters and initial conditions.  This will be achieved
              through the following steps:
-	The development of an efficient approach to
              quantify the range of validity in terms of initial conditions of a reduced
              kinetic model based on the ideas of uncertainty analysis
-              The
              investigation of various uncertainty propagation techniques to evaluate the
              effects of uncertainty in kinetic model parameters on systems outputs
-	The
              integration of the uncertainty analysis procedure whtin the framework for
              kinetic model reduction that will result in the determination of reduced
              kinetic model with the required range of validity and pre-specified
              flexibility.  

Impact:

Besides the training of undergraduate and graduate
              students at Rutgers, the PI is involved in SUPER (Science for Undergraduates a
              Program for Excellence in Research) at Douglas College for Women.  It is
              expected that one student affiliated with SUPER will work on this project
              during each summer.

