Title       : Planning for a Tallgrass Prairie Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0224825

Award Number: 0224825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison M. Wallace wallacea@mnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna B. Stockrahm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minnesota St Unv Moorhead
	      1104 7th Avenue South
	      Moorhead, MN  56563    218/236-2011

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Minnesota State University Moorhead, under the
              direction of Dr. Alison Wallace, Dr. George Davis and Dr. Donna Stockrahm, to
              conduct a workshop for the purpose of planning the development of a 5,000 acre
              tallgrass prairie biological field station.
The MSUM Regional Science Center's
              Buffalo River site is well positioned to place an increased emphasis on
              ecological monitoring, research, and research training activities. Current
              educational programs are well established. Ecologically unique land has been
              purchased and placed under a management plan. Partnerships have been formed
              with adjacent high quality lands for research and instructional use, including
              property held by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, and the Nature
              Conservancy. The site has a basic facility that currently serves K-12
              populations and the general public, and could easily be improved to handle
              expanded research activities by regional and visiting researchers and students.
              There are critical numbers of interested field researchers in the immediate
              area from three higher education institutions. Most importantly, there is a
              need for a field station that is situated primarily in a northern tallgrass
              prairie ecoregion and contains high quality tallgrass prairie acreage available
              for ecological monitoring
and research.
 
To make this planning effort a
              success, the following objectives will be addressed and met:  1) the
              articulation of an overall vision for the future of the proposed field station,
              2) the elucidation of specific research and education missions of the proposed
              field station, and 3) the formation of a comprehensive plan for administration,
              facility, and program development to ensure a fully functioning field station
              within a five-year time period. These objectives will be met during a three-day
              workshop to be held at the site. An outside panel of field station
              professionals will be invited to join regional researchers and agency
              personnel. Working groups that concentrate on  education, research, or
              administrative and facilities issues will be formed. An outside facilitator
              will help plan and run the workshop, and edit the final report generated by the
              working groups. A successful planning workshop will allow MSUM to proceed with
              the development of a field station in an efficient and effective manner, with
              the full support of partner institutions and agencies. 
 
The proposed field
              station contains a variety of native and restored tallgrass prairie, wetland,
              and riparian woodland areas. However, tallgrass prairie is by far the most
              representative of the site, and this rare ecosystem is not well represented in
              existing field stations, especially in the northern regions of the U.S. In
              order to better monitor and understand our changing ecosystems, research and
              educational efforts need to be put forth in a variety of ecosystems and at a
              variety of latitudes. Thus the proposed field station will be a valuable
              addition to the worldwide network of biological field stations. 



