Title       : Career and Research Exploration for Students and Teachers (CREST) -- (For Track
               1)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0224540

Award Number: 0224540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra H. Harpole sharpole@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darrel W. Schmitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Giselle Thibaudeau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Career and Research Exploration for Students and Teachers (CREST)

Career and
              Research Exploration for Students and Teachers (CREST) provides a
model for
              integrating research and education by enhancing teacher content knowledge in
              the geosciences while providing students with exposure to geosciences and
              environmental research and related careers. During each of two summers, five
              teams, composed of one science teacher and three middle school students per
              team, will spend two weeks working with personnel from Mississippi Lignite Mine
              Company's Red Hills Mine and Mississippi State University scientists. Students
              and teachers learn academic content and research methods relative to
              development and utilization of a lignite coal resource, including resource
              identification, pre-mining, mining, and post-mining. Hands-on research
              accompanied by appropriate lectures in the areas of ecology, geology and
              reclamation gives students and teachers experiences with data collection, data
              analysis and data interpretation. Students and teachers are exposed to issues
              of mining and the environmental impact of the Red Hills Mine by working with
              scientists and participating in on-going research projects at the mine and in
              the local area. Academic year follow-up occurs through electronic communication
              among student-teacher teams, project and mine personnel and scientists. CREST
              has the potential to introduce geosciences and research to underrepresented
              groups. Participants are selected from school districts in counties surrounding
              Red Hills Mine. The middle schools identified for participant recruitment have
              a minority population ranging from 25% to 100%. 

