Title       : Instrumentation for Empirical Studies in the Modeling of Visual Appearance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0224431

Award Number: 0224431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Belhumeur belhumeur@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Kriegman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 0224431
Belhumeur, Peter N.
Kriegman, David J.
Columbia University
              

Title:  CISE RR: Instrumentation for Empirical Studies in the Modeling of
              Visual Appearance 

This project, supporting experimental validation of
              computer vision algorithms for shape modeling and analysis, aims at building
              two independent systems to support computer vision. Methods for shape
              reconstruction and reflectance recovery, termed Helmholtz reciprocity
              stereopsis and light field reconstruction that exploit previously neglected
              physical principles, are able to recover surface shape regardless of the
              object's BRDF. The two special purpose imaging systems will be built at
              Columbia University and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).
              The Columbia rig, composed of sixteen imaging modules that can be arranged in
              different configurations, directly supports research in Helmholtz reciprocity
              stereopsis. The UIUC rig, consisting of two arms that move their endpoints over
              the surface of a sphere, directly supports the light field reconstruction
              method. The two new pieces of hardware will contribute to the following four
              projects:
Helmholtz Stereopsis,
Light Field Reconstruction,
Image-Based
              Modeling and Rendering, and
Texture and Reflectance Estimation from Small
              Datasets.
The first project exploits the symmetries in an object's surface
              reflectance. The Helmholtz stereopsis method can reconstruct surfaces with
              complex reflectance, e.g., highly non-Lambertian. The Helmholtz rig will be
              used to gather datasets of objects in a manner such that they can be processed
              using the Helmholtz stereopsis shape recovery method. The second uses images
              gathered from a double covering of a surface's incident light field to
              reconstruct both the surface shape and an effective bi-directional reflectance
              distribution on a point-by-point basis. The illumination/viewpoint rig will be
              used to gather data in a manner such that it can be processed with the light
              field reconstruction method. The third utilizes the datasets gathered by both
              rigs for image-based and modeling projects to render photorealistic images of
              objects under novel viewpoint and arbitrary illuminations. Datasets of objects,
              with their 3-D shape reconstructed, are collected and their reflectance is
              modeled. These models of shape and reflectance are then used to synthesize
              novel images of the objects and composite them into still pictures and video
              footage. The objects will be catalogued by their visual appearance. The last
              project uses the datasets gathered by the light field rendering rig for
              developing low-dimensional models of texture and reflectance. These models are
              then used to estimate texture and reflectance properties from a small number of
              images. Thus, images characterizing reflectance properties of a wide variety of
              materials will be created and distributed satisfying the following goals to
              
Develop, refine, analyze, and empirically validate the method of Helmholtz
              stereopsis,
Develop, refine, and analyze the light field reconstruction
              method,
Apply the reconstruction methods to image-based rendering,
              and
Develop and refine data-driven low-dimensional non-parametric models for
              surface reflection and textures that vary with viewpoint and lighting.

