Title       : Research Resources: A High-Performance Shared-Purpose Cluster for Computer
               Architectural Simulation and Perceptual Interactive Ray Tracing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0224434

Award Number: 0224434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72802              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Luebke luebke@cs.virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mircea R. Stan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Skadron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-24434
Luebke, David P.
Skadron, Kevin; Stan, Mircea R.
University of
              Virginia 

CISE RR: A High-Performance Shared-Purpose Cluster for Computer
              Architectural Simulation and Perceptual Interactive Ray Tracing 


This
              proposal, building a cluster platform (with high computing and memory
              requirements, and graphics and display hardware) to support research in
              computer graphics and architecture, enables projects studying interactive
              rendering, computer architecture, and temperature-aware computing. A 16-node
              rack-mounted cluster with dual CPUs, large memory (4 GB), gigabit networking,
              and high-end graphics is expected to facilitate the research. Specifically, the
              infrastructure supports the following three research projects:

Perceptually
              Driven Interactive Ray Tracing,

Thermal Simulation of Computer Architecture
              with Graphics Hardware, and

Large-Memory Architectural Simulations.
The
              computer graphics research investigates new scene rendering algorithms
              motivated by models of human perception, and requiring flexible (programmable)
              graphics hardware. This work investigates unconventional rendering techniques
              that exploit the ability to vary sample location, density, and frequency.
              Examples include frameless (replaces double buffering with randomized update of
              pixels), interruptible (unifies spatial and temporal error for a principles
              fidelity/performance tradeoff), and gaze-directed (varies detail and resolution
              according to user's attention) rendering. Thermal modeling is directed towards
              solving heat transfer equations for studying the run-time thermal behavior of
              microprocessors, especially multithreaded (SMT) and single chip (SCC) systems.
              The computer architecture component involves performance of SMT and SCC systems
              and investigation of aggressive branch prediction techniques using distant
              correlations.
The educational aspects involve folding relevant topics into the
              current graduate seminars and students in the research.

