Title       : The Structural and Functional Neuroanatomy of Language Laterality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0224260

Award Number: 0224260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70939              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Eckert eckert@ufbi.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Binder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Structural and Functional Neuroanatomy of Language
              Laterality

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Eckert
              and Binder and colleagues will conduct a two-year investigation of the brain
              specialization for language.  Most people are dependent on brain areas in the
              left hemisphere to process language.  Only rarely is the right hemisphere
              essential for understanding or producing language.  The reasons for this
              left-hemisphere language dominance remain unexplained.  One popular explanation
              suggests that larger left hemisphere language-related areas, compared to the
              right hemisphere, predispose language to organize in the left hemisphere. 
              Superior verbal ability may stem from this structural and functional
              organization.  The present research project tests this explanation for language
              organization, as well as an alternative explanation that proposes that left
              hemisphere language-related areas are not the basis for language dominance, but
              interact with language dominance to predict verbal ability. Functional Magnetic
              Resonance Imaging and the intracarotid anesthetization procedure will be used
              to assess language laterality in normal (functional imaging only) and epilepsy
              subjects.  Anatomical data will be collected from MRI scans.   This study will
              be the first to directly test hypotheses about the relation between language,
              anatomical asymmetries, and cognition.  In addition, this study will increase
              understanding of functional imaging results by examining how individual
              variation in neuroanatomy influences individual variability in functional
              imaging patterns of activation.



