Title       : FRG: Domain Orientation and Anisotropy in Poled Piezoelectrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0224991

Award Number: 0224991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith J. Bowman kbowman@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander H. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elliott B. Slamovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project applies state-of-the-art techniques of materials processing and
              characterization to the study of piezoelectric oxide materials, to establish
              quantitative links between domain orientation and the various mechanisms of
              poling. Monotonic and cyclic poling via electrical, mechanical and
              electromechanical processes are investigated, to determine their effects on the
              polycrystalline texture and domain orientation within the materials.  The
              texture information, in turn, will be correlated to the piezoelectric response
              of the material, providing a fundamental understanding of the
              interrelationships between the processing, structure and properties of these
              materials. We will also study the degradation of the materials under service
              conditions, attempting to mitigate the process of piezoelectric
              fatigue.

Piezoelectric materials are increasingly important as the active
              components of a wide range of devices, including various types of strain
              sensor, linear actuators and non-magnetic electrical microtransformers for
              high-frequency applications such as cell-phones. In all of these applications,
              the performance of the material is strongly linked to the manner in which it is
              processed.  Since most pieozoelectric materials respond to stress (or
              conversely to electric fields) only in a single direction, related to their
              crystallography, it makes sense to design devices in which the desired response
              direction is related to the crystal structure of the material.  If, however,
              the material is comprised of randomly-oriented crystals, with randomly-oriented
              piezoelectric response directions, there is no opportunity to achieve such an
              efficient device design.  We seek, in this program, to find practical, low-cost
              methods of developing crystalline alignment that allows for optimized device
              performance, in applications such as vibration sensors and active vibration
              damping systems.

