Title       : Cataclysms and Catastrophes--The Role of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0224501

Award Number: 0224501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine K. Ellins kellins@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sean S. Gulick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gail L. Christeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Gutierrez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cataclysms and Catastrophes-The Role of Science

This project is developing
              and field-testing curricular materials based on the role of science in causing
              and/or understanding catastrophes.  The goal of the materials is to help high
              school teachers incorporate geoscience into the teaching of physics,
              mathematics, chemistry and biology. This is a collaborative effort involving
              The University of Texas Institute for Geophysics (UTIG), the Bureau of Economic
              Geology (BEG), and 4empowerment, an Austin-based private education company.
              Events that capture the imagination of teachers and students alike-for example,
              the devastation caused by Hurricane Mitch in Honduras, the Chicxulub asteroid
              impact event, and the Oklahoma City bombing-serve as the basis for
              inquiry-based, hands-on learning activities using data collected by UTIG and
              BEG scientists. Activities are expanded to include familiarity with
              technologies such as Lidar (LIght Detection And Ranging), drilling, seismic
              reflection and refraction, geophysical logging, and the Internet. In addition
              to teaching concepts in science and mathematics, the "Cataclysms and
              Catastrophes" theme carries implications for disaster prevention, awareness,
              and decision-making. Using seismology to identify nuclear explosions
              (monitoring nuclear testing worldwide), for example, is important to national
              security. Curricula materials developed for the project are posted to
              4empowement's Web site, Cyberways and Waterways, and promoted through e-letters
              and collaborations with state and national science and mathematics educational
              agencies and organizations. Curricular materials are also available to DLESE
              (Digital Library for Earth System Education) and to the 76 institutional
              members of the National Consortium for Specialized Secondary Schools of
              Mathematics, Science and Technology.  The project builds on the recent success
              of the ongoing TEXTEAMS (Texas Teachers Empowered for Achievement in
              Mathematics and Science) Leadership training program for the Texas high school
              science course, Geology, Meteorology and Oceanography (GMO), developed in 2000
              by UTIG researchers. TEXTEAMS is a certification program of professional
              development and leadership training for K-12 teachers sponsored by the National
              Science Foundation and the Texas Education Agency. The curricular materials
              developed for "Cataclysms and Catastrophes-The Role of Science" will also
              complement the TEXTEAMS GMO offering designed around the theme "From Texas to
              Antarctica".

