Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: Carbon Nanotube Based Spin Electronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0224114

Award Number: 0224114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Alphenaar brucea@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shi-Yu Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chakram S. Jayanthi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              century Initiative Program Solicitation NSF 02-036.  The proposal focuses on
              fabrication and characterization of two prototype carbon nanotube spin
              electronic devices: the nanotube spin transistor and the nano-helix magnetic
              field sensor. For molecular scale spin electronic applications, the carbon
              nanotube has compelling advantages. Carbon nanotubes are quasi-one-dimensional,
              crystalline wires having a low density of spin scattering centers. Therefore,
              current flows through nanotubes with very few electron or spin scattering
              events. This makes carbon nanotubes useful for molecular scale spin
              transmission lines, with spin detection signals remaining high over long
              transmission distances. Spin signals can be amplified or suppressed by gating
              the nanotube to change the electron density. High ballistic current flow also
              produces anomalously large magnetic moments in carbon nanotube circuits. This
              is useful for magnetic memory and switching applications to amplify and sense
              local magnetic fields.

The nanotube spin transistor is a ferromagnetically
              contacted nanotube with a field effect gate. The gate bias modifies the
              transmission of the up and down spin channels, and acts to amplify or suppress
              the spin detection signal. The nano-helix magnetic sensor is an electrically
              contacted carbon nanotube grown into a helical shape. Due to the lack of
              electron scattering, current flow through the helix produces a giant orbital
              spin moment, which interacts strongly with applied magnetic field. This
              dramatically alters the resistance between the two field directions, even for
              low applied fields. Together, these devices display a range of behavior that
              will be useful for advanced spin electronic applications on the molecular
              scale. To accomplish this work, the PIs will combine their collective
              experience in carbon nanotube spin transport, nanotube device fabrication,
              nanotube electrical characterization and nanotube device modeling. They will
              work closely with collaborators within the chemistry departments at Duke
              University and UC Riverside to optimize nanotube growth, distribution of
              nanotubes for electrical characterization, and chemical surface modification of
              nanotubes for spin electronic device applications. As part of their project,
              they will be training two graduate students in the exciting area of spin
              electronics and nanoscale technology. The undergraduate and graduate curriculum
              including Nanoscale fabrication, Device Modeling, and Electrical/ Optical
              Characterization will incorporate their spin electronic research advances.

