Title       : Collaborative Research: Implementation of Tabu Search for the Design of Novel
               Molecules using Parallel Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0224887

Award Number: 0224887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Miller david.c.miller@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

Product design methodology is a mechanism that permits the
              synthesis of new materials with specifically tailored properties.  Two
              challenges in computational molecular design are (1) the ability to predict the
              physical and chemical properties of a given molecule and (2) the ability to
              solve the large optimization problem which arises from the search for the best
              molecule for a given application.  Research in molecular characterization can
              predict many physical and chemical properties to a reasonable accuracy for
              common molecules.  A missing technology is a set of parallel algorithms which
              can efficiently solve the large mixed-integer optimization problems using
              parallel computing hardware.  This project focuses the application of tabu
              search, a stochastic technique for the solution of such optimization problems,
              to the molecular design of novel polymers.

Tabu search uses a neighborhood
              search algorithm which is efficient at searching the entire solution space,
              thus enabling globally optimal solutions to be found within a reasonable time. 
              These algorithms are amenable to parallelization since each member of a
              solution set can be updated independently.  As part of this project, the PIs
              plan to develop a parallel implementation suitable for use on clusters of
              workstations.  The work will focus on the development of improvements to handle
              the types of constraint that occur when predicting the physical properties of
              polymers, and the application of these improvements within a parallel
              implementation for use on clusters of multiprocessor
              workstations.

Impact:

-Tailor-made molecules have huge potential in the
              chemical process industries. 
-This Small Grant for exploratory research will
              permit two young PIs to venture into a totally new research area for them. 
              
-This collaborative project between an undergraduate institution,
              Rose-Hulman, and the University of Kansas, will provide opportunities to
              undergraduates to be involved in research otherwise not open to them.

