Title       : Developing "Suitcase Lessons in Oceanography" for K-6 students in concert with
               the FOSS-based science curriculum currently in use by a tri-county Educational
               Service District
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0224566

Award Number: 0224566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162269             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marta E. Torres mtorres@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly K. Falkner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murray D. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Developing "Suitcase Lessons in Oceanography" in concert with the FOSS-based K-6
              Science Curriculum Currently in Use in a Tri-County Educational
Service
              District

Three counties in Oregon are currently involved in improving
              science education in schools by changing the education paradigm from
              teaching-centered to learning-centered via inquiry-based hands-on curricula. 
              It is based on a Science-Teacher Partnership Program (SEPS), in which Full
              Option Science Systems (FOSS) have been adopted for each grade level from K-6,
              and partnerships have been established to help teachers provide a quality
              science education for all students. The program is advised by a panel composed
              of teachers, scientists and administrators with experience and/or interest in
              hands-on science. The SEPS program has been successful not only in enhancing
              the young students interest and knowledge of science, but has also had a
              positive impact by increasing younger students awareness of opportunities and
              of careers made possible by higher education. However, there is no ocean
              science component in the curriculum. The objective of this project is to
              address that deficiency.  The project will generate and test the concept of
              using "Suitcase Lessons in Oceanography", in concert with ongoing curriculum,
              to infuse ocean science into K-6 science education in the Linn-Benton-Lincoln
              Educational Service District (ESD). A complete portable module ("Suitcase
              Lesson") will be created which will allow any faculty member to introduce
              fundamental science concepts of ocean science to K-6 students. This approach
              aims at directly addressing NSES goals of science literacy for all; real
              understanding of scientific processes; and development of a desire for science
              learning throughout life. In addition it addresses the current need of
              integrating ocean sciences in a life-long educational program aimed at
              promoting a basic understanding of the oceans and their relevance to everyday
              life.

