Title       : Workshop on Global Dynamic Optimization of the Electric Power Grid in Atlanta,
               GA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0224592

Award Number: 0224592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Harley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the next ten years, demand for electric power in the USA is expected to
              increase by about 20% while under the current plans the electric transmission
              capacity will increase only by 4%. In addition, the policy of open access to
              transmission systems that helped create the competitive electricity markets,
              also led to a huge increase in the number of energy transactions over the grid.
              This, together with a shortage of generation in some areas, require optimal
              usage of existing infrastructure and the addition of FACTS devices and
              intelligent controllers. A power system is a dynamic nonlinear time-varying
              multivariable complex process. Any optimization strategies must therefore be
              carried out in real time and adapt to continuously changing conditions. Recent
              developments in optimization techniques, intelligent controllers, power
              electronics and digital hardware offer possible solutions.

Power system
              engineers are aware of the problems and challenges of having some form of
              global optimization of the planning and control of the power system. Control
              engineers on the other hand have developed algorithms for solving control
              problems. Power electronics experts have knowledge of how to design and control
              high power FACTS devices when Inserted into power systems. This proposal is for
              holding a workshop to bring these groups together and to focus on discussions
              leading to fundamental technical solutions to the optimal control of the
              electric power network in view of the current energy crisis and to avoid the
              crisis in the future. Thirty persons from both academia and industry, will meet
              for three days. The program will consist of seven sessions, each of which will
              address salient issues. The outcome will be a report which summarizes the
              discussions, identifies challenges, strengths and weaknesses, and proposes a
              way forward to address the weaknesses. This should lead to more
              interdisciplinary research.


