Title       : Dynamic Game-Theoretic Models of Electric Power Markets and their Vulnerability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0224817

Award Number: 0224817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jong-Shi Pang pang@mts.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Friesz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin F. Hobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Harrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The issues of market power, generation adequacy, and vulnerability
              in
network-constrained electric power markets are of increasing concern
              to
market participants, policy makers, and the general public. 
              Although
price formation and investment are inherently dynamic processes,
              they
are usually studied using static economic and game theoretic
              models.
This disregarding of lags, expectations, and adjustment processes
              may
yield distorted conclusions about the effects of proposed changes
              to
market structure and designs.  To investigate and overcome
              this
distortion, there is a need for (a) realistic models of
              dynamic
interactions among strategically behaved electric power
              market
participants, and (b) the design of efficient computational
methods
              that can handle the high dimensionality of realistic
power systems.

The
              proposed research and pedagogy have four objectives:

a) formulation of
              dynamic game theoretic models of pricing and generation
for
              transmission-constrained electric power markets, for a variety of
competitive
              circumstances and market structures

b) development of efficient algorithms
              for solving the models

c) demonstration and testing of models and algorithms
              using realistic data

d) development of educational curricula integrating
              game theory, 
economics,
and electric power systems.

The project has
              several broader impacts, including contributions to 
education and public
              policy.  We will develop curricular offerings 
in dynamic optimization and
              differential games for the modeling of 
electric power markets.  This material
              will be made available as a 
professional tutorial and distributed to the
              educational community 
via the project website.  Our models hold the potential
              of 
significantly enhancing the capability of regulatory agencies, 
market
              operators, and stakeholders.

