Title       : Expansion of a Seawater Facility for Marine Organisms at the Bermuda Biological
               Station for Research, Inc
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0224742

Award Number: 0224742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry G. Trapido-Rosenthal hank@bbsr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony H. Knap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samia Sarkis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Lomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9145,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for the expansion and improvement of the
              seawater facility at the Bermuda Biological Station for Research, Inc. (BBSR). 
              Funds will be used to construct a new building to house tanks with flowing
              seawater,  and to purchase equipment needed to expand the capacity of the
              seawater system.  The project will enhance the ability of resident and visiting
              students and scientists to engage in research programs and educational
              activities that require the use of a well-controlled, high-quality seawater
              system.  Among the research activities that will benefit from the expanded
              facility are programs designed to: assess human impact on Bermuda's inshore
              marine ecosystem; study the physiological ecology of oceanic plankton
              communities; examine the response of the Sargasso Sea ecosystem to global
              change; and understand the function of tropical marine ecosystems at the
              organismal, cellular and molecular levels.  Among the educational activities
              that will benefit are the BBSR summer courses, the fall semester courses run in
              collaboration with the University of Rhode Island, the spring semester program
              run in collaboration with Duke University, the BBSR's Graduate Intern Program,
              and the Open Ocean and Sub-Tropical Marine Research Experiences for
              Undergraduates program.

