Title       : CISE Research Resources: Instrumentation for Experimental Research in Machine
               Learning, Collaborative Filtering, and Virtual Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0224012

Award Number: 0224012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Dietterich tgd@cs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Metoyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan L. Herlocker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 0224012
Dietterich, Thomas G.
Herlocker, Jonathan L.
Metoyer, Ronald

              Oregon State University 

Title:  CISE RR: Instrumentation for Experimental
              Research in Machine Learning, Collaborative Filtering, and Virtual Environments
              

 This project, upgrading the current cluster for use in large
              pre-computations that enable effective real-time performance, supports
              equipment servicing the following four projects:
Real Time Animation of Human
              Characters for Use in Immersive Training Environments,
Probabilistic
              Recommendation Methods for Collaborative Filtering (CF),
Machine Learning for
              Spatial and Sequential Data, and
Reinforcement Learning for Learning Search
              Control Heuristics with Applications to Protein Structure Determination from
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy and to Real-Time Animation.
The first
              project aims at automatically selecting and ordering short sequences of
              captured motion to drive a character along a trajectory while maintaining
              naturally looking transitions between the sequences. The project exploits
              off-line reinforcement learning (dynamic programming) algorithms to pre-compute
              a policy for moving between any pair of poses under a range of trajectory
              constraints. Real-time control of characters is then permitted without the need
              for large run-time searches. The second project utilizes collaborative
              filtering (CF) systems that can predict a probability distribution over the
              rating of an item. Currently CF, a method by which multiple computer users
              indirectly help each other make decisions and identify solutions to problems,
              provides ratings or votes returning the items with the higher number of votes,
              rather than attaching a probability. The equipment will speed the research
              process by enabling the testing of un-optimized prototype implementations of
              new algorithms, and hence allow the evaluation of proposed algorithms without
              the delay of manual optimization. The third project deals with emerging
              applications of machine learning (e.g., computer intrusion detection,
              information extraction from web pages, remote sensing) involving temporal,
              sequential, or spatial data where nearby data points are typically correlated.
              The PIs have developed a parallel implementation of a sequential analysis
              method for conditional random fields (CRFs) that gives near-linear speedups in
              the computation time, but which is limited in the size of data sets that can be
              processed. The cluster upgrade should yield a faster solution and allow
              consideration of larger data sets. The last project, experiments with two new
              algorithms for reinforcement learning that scale to large search spaces as long
              as the number of reachable states is small enough to fit in main memory. One
              method combines linear programming with support-vector machine techniques; the
              other combines gradient descent search with dynamic programming. These methods,
              requiring an expensive off-line computation, result in an efficient heuristic
              that can be applied to the run-time search. Moreover, the cluster will be used
              by students in a parallel computation course.

