Title       : Linking Geoscience Research and Education in Schools and Museums: A Model for
               Scaling Up Successful Collaborations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0224562

Award Number: 0224562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82093              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Ross rmr16@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Harnik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Barstow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paleontological Res Inst
	      1259 Trumansburg Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    /   -

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Linking Geoscience Research and Education in Schools and Museums: A Model for
              Scaling up Successful Collaborations

Student-scientist partnerships (SSPs)
              facilitate experiences of genuine inquiry while also contributing data to
              larger scientific questions. The Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) and
              TERC propose a collaboration to develop a model for successful, large-scale
              geoscience SSPs.  SSPs have involved relatively small numbers of students in
              localized areas. Evaluations of student data, and learning outcomes, have posed
              a challenge to the few large-scale SSPs. To overcome these challenges,
              scientist-educators at the PRI have developed the Devonian Seas Project. Fourth
              through ninth grade classrooms have participated in classroom pilot-tests
              explicitly designed to meet specific challenges to the large-scale development
              of SSPs, including issues of data accuracy and educational pedagogy. The
              results of these paleontological SSPs have been encouraging: students are
              making important connections to their curricula and student data is
              sufficiently accurate to document paleontological patterns of interest. PRI
              proposes to partner with TERC to develop a model for scaling-up the Devonian
              Seas Project. To increase accessibility and dissemination, educational
              materials will be made available on the PRI Website, and catalogued with the
              Digital Library of Earth Science Education. By developing a model for
              scaling-up successful localized SSPs, PRI and TERC will lay the groundwork for
              other museums and universities interested in creating effective, large-scale
              projects linking research and education.

