Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: III-V/Mn Ferromagnetic Semiconductors for Device Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0224206

Award Number: 0224206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Luo luo@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. McCombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander N. Cartwright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0224206
Luo

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics
              for the 21st Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036.  The proposal
              focuses on growth, characterization and device studies of III-V/Mn materials
              and their heterostructures.  The goal of this program is to develop
              ferromagnetic resonant interband tunneling diodes (FRITD) and polarization
              tunable infrared light emitting diodes.  In order to develop optimized
              materials for these devices, and to demonstrate proof of principle operation,
              device structures will be fabricated and tested in parallel with the materials
              growth to provide direct feedback to the materials effort.  
	
Preliminary
              studies at the University at Buffalo (UB) of structural,
              transport/magneto-transport, optical and magnetic properties of the constituent
              materials for these devices have revealed several interesting problems
              associated with the incorporation of magnetic Mn++ ions at high sheet
              densities. More importantly, it was found that the structural, optical,
              transport and magnetic properties of these materials are closely connected. 
              These studies demonstrate the need for designing materials from the atomic
              level so that electrical transport, optical and magnetic properties are
              simultaneously optimized; this is one of the key tasks of this program.    
              
	
Specifically, to tackle these complex problems, it is proposed to form a
              multidisciplinary research team to carry out comprehensive studies of
              III-V-based ferromagnetic materials/structures, fundamental properties, spin
              injection/interface effects and devices.  In this proposed work, the University
              at Buffalo group will: 1) fabricate systematic sets of samples of GaAs/Mn,
              GaSb/Mn, and InAs/Mn digital alloys, in which submonolayers of Mn are inserted
              in the III-V lattice; 2) explore the magnetic, electrical transport, optical
              properties and structural quality as a function of growth conditions; 3)
              optimize growth conditions to produce the highest Curie temperatures; 4)
              fabricate and test device structures.

The program is formulated to maximize
              student involvement in multidisciplinary research by engaging engineering and
              physics students working together to reach common goals.  It will utilize
              existing infrastructure, both for collaborative research and for student
              interactions, which has been established for the on-going spintronic materials
              development project supported by the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency
              (DARPA) focusing on other materials.  A total of three full-time graduate
              students will be supported in this program, a substantial effort made possible
              by the synergism with the related work. 

The success of this program will
              have immediate impact on the key problems in the area of spintronics, namely,
              improving the Curie temperature and producing materials suitable for practical
              devices and spin injection into semiconductor heterostructures. Combined with
              the other materials currently studied in the DARPA-supported project, the
              materials effort at UB represents one of the strongest in the country. The
              device fabrication and characterization will lead the way in resolving
              bottlenecks in materials research related to spin-injection involving III-V
              materials, and the possibility of electron (rather than hole) spin injection. 
              


