Title       : Mapping Higher Level Visual Areas in Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0224321

Award Number: 0224321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $761583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin I. Sereno sereno@cogsci.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mapping Higher Level Visual Areas in Humans

Abstract

With National Science
              Foundation support, Dr. Sereno and colleagues will conduct a three-year
              investigation aimed at generating comprehensive, high resolution maps of the
              borders and internal organization of intermediate and higher level human visual
              areas in occipital, parietal, temporal, frontal cortex using functional
              magnetic resonance imaging.  The cerebral cortex of each hemisphere in humans
              contains more than one hundred distinct areas.  Many of these areas are
              concerned with vision.  The organization of lower level visual areas is well
              understood; but the location and number of higher level visual areas is much
              less clear and the goal of Dr. Sereno's project to produce insight into these
              areas. These maps he discovers will be made available to other researchers
              interested in determining how these visual areas differ in their functions. 
              

By analogy with the human genome project, this study will be carried out
              with the participation of a small group of 'professional subjects'.  The first
              set of experiments extends traditional methods for mapping visual areas
              (phase-encoded, surface-based analysis using moving, windowed checkerboards,
              and a simple fixation task) by turning to more attentionally captivating
              windowed stimuli (television action programs, videos of moving faces and
              objects, more complex monitoring tasks).  The second set of experiments extends
              the mapping stimulus set to include linguistic visual stimuli (reading short
              stories at systematically varying retinotopic locations).  These two kinds of
              stimuli are better suited to activating higher visual areas, but at the same
              time, are capable of revealing their borders and internal structure.  To
              successfully carry out high resolution mapping studies, it is crucial to
              correct the subtle spatial distortions present in functional scans before the
              data is overlaid onto a cortical surface reconstruction.  Therefore, the third
              main part of the proposal focuses on improving distortion correction methods
              (including pre- and post-hoc corrections for static field inhomogeneities and
              gradient nonlinearities).  The programs implementing these methods will be
              freely distributed to other imaging centers, in a manner similar to the way our
              cortical surface reconstruction programs (FreeSurfer) have been freely
              distributed and maintained.

The findings from this research are expected to
              provide important new understanding into anatomical and functional organization
              of the human brain.  These findings will have significant impact on clinical
              and basic neuroscience.  In addition, several junior researchers will receive
              outstanding research experience. 


