Title       : Empirical and Theoretical Linkages Between the Real and Financial Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0224944

Award Number: 0224944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sydney Ludvigson sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Lettau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project aims to build understanding of the empirical and theoretical links
              between the real economy and asset markets. The project considers a number of
              specific questions related to the aggregate consumption-wealth link, and
              focuses on the importance of macroeconomic indicators for separating permanent
              from transitory movements in stock prices and for documenting the extent to
              which the conditional mean of stock returns is related to its conditional
              volatility. The research also investigates ways in which key asset pricing
              facts can be reconciled with a complete business cycle model that preserves the
              realism of the model's implications for real variables. The methodology is both
              empirical and theoretical. The empirical methodology relies primarily on unit
              root econometric techniques to identify the short-run and long-run relations
              between various measures of real activity and asset markets, using U.S.
              aggregate time-series data. The theoretical methodology builds off of recent
              insights in both finance and macroeconomics to study a dynamic, general
              equilibrium model of the economy. 

Understanding how consumption is related
              to wealth is fundamental for the informed conduct of monetary policy and
              macroeconomic analysis generally, and for modeling, theoretically, how the real
              and financial sectors of the economy are related. As yet, however, there has
              been little formal empirical analysis of these relations. Moreover, we cannot
              hope to understand the volatility and predictability of asset returns without
              understanding the sources of macroeconomic risk that underlie this behavior.
              The empirical and theoretical investigations of this research agenda have the
              potential not only to help expand the state of knowledge about how consumption,
              production, investment and asset prices must be related theoretically, but also
              to facilitate the search for macroeconomic determinants of systematic risk
              factors that must ultimately govern the behavior of asset prices. 

