Title       : Collaborative Research Resources: An Experimental Platform for Humanoid Robotics
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0224419

Award Number: 0224419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica Hodgins jkh@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred A. Rizzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy S. Pollard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martial Hebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher G. Atkeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to build a state of the art humanoid robot
              experimental facility at CMU's Robotics Institute. Developing humanoid robots
              pushes robotics and automation technology forward. Researchers build humanoid
              robots to test and explore their theories about how humans work. Humanoid
              robots are beginning to play an economically important role in the service
              segment of our society. Primarily, humanoid robots inspire. For example Japan
              is publicizing its humanoid robotics research to get more children interested
              in science and engineering, currently a major concern in the U.S.

The PIs
              will purchase an upper body humanoid from Sarcos Research Corporation as well
              as two smaller robots and an advanced interface device. Using the proposed
              equipment, the PIs will undertake a number of projects which fall into four
              broad classes: core robotics and vision research that substantially increases
              the capabilities and skills of robots (Atkeson, Hebert, Rizzi, Pollard),
              authoring tools that will make it easier for people who are not roboticists and
              perhaps even not programmers to develop new applications on robots (Hodgins,
              Hudson, Kuffner), application prototyping and assessment of humanoid robots in
              various application domains (Pausch, Kiesler), and unifying applications, which
              involve a large number of interdisciplinary researchers. In addition to the
              expected robotics researchers, the team includes researchers from HCI and
              sociology to work on how these robots might be made easy to use and how they
              will fit into society. Taken together, these projects will significantly expand
              the ability both to control humanoid robots and to develop applications on
              them. These projects will also increase fundamental understanding of the power
              of the human form in a robot, and our fundamental understanding of human
              motion. The PIs will encourage other researchers at CMU and in the U.S. to use
              the facility, taking advantage of strengths in vision, speech, and reasoning.
              

Finally, the PIs are using humanoid robots to explore computational models
              of how human behavior is generated. Using a humanoid robot as a research tool
              forces the researchers to deal with a complex physical apparatus and complex
              tasks. The knowledge required to recreate human motions will also serve to
              increase our understanding of how people move and may lead to advances in
              physical rehabilitation and sports medicine. In contrast to most biomechanical
              research, the PIs will attempt to refine scientific understanding of both the
              functional components of human motion such as locomotion and grasping and also
              the subtle stylistic components that make it appear normal, humanlike, and
              expressive. Combining these two components should make the models useful for
              analyzing the performance of aspiring athletes as well as diagnosing individual
              problems with locomotion and manipulation.

