Title       : CISE RR: Collaborative Research on Wide-area Network Computing using Virtual
               Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0224449

Award Number: 0224449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Dinda pdinda@cs.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ming-Yang Kao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prithviraj Banerjee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-24449
Dinda, Peter A.
Banerjee, Prithviraj; Kao,
              Ming-Yang
Northwestern University

CISE RR: Collaborative Research on
              Wide-Area Network Computing Using Virtual Machines
This collaborative research
              project (with Fortes at University of Florida, proposal 02-24442), requiring a
              wide-area test bed that enables experimentation with, access to, and running of
              applications on unique resources, requests PC clusters, an IBM server, and
              other ancillary hardware for projects in
1.	Distributed grid computing and
              information processing systems using virtualization technologies
              and
2.	Information grids with real users and research applications requiring
              capabilities enabled by virtual machines (VMs).
Deploying a distributed system
              based on clusters connected by local, metropolitan, and wide area networks, the
              work aims to provide a virtual computing and data storage interface to clients
              that access resources on the underlying "information grid." The test bed
              includes the following defining features.
1.	Virtualization capabilities,
              i.e., the ability to instantiate independent logical machines that can be
              multiplexed on physical processors (or fractions of them), storage and network
              I/O channels, and can use distinct operating systems;
2.	Wide-area
              distribution, i.e., Internet-linked test bed components in
              independently-administered geographically-apart network domains;
3.	Scalable
              capacity for both scientific computing and information processing;
              and
4.	Heterogeneity.
Interrelated projects enabled by the test bed towards
              the goal of developing VM-based middleware for grid computing include
              virtualized end resources, monitoring and prediction, interactive computing,
              virtual file systems, data management, cycle selling, and security. Information
              grids and web portals for use of CAD tools are also enabled by the
              infrastructure for dissemination of collaborative research results and data,
              and for digital government services. From the availability of the portals and
              grid-computing resources benefits are expected in brain-machine interfaces,
              biologically-inspired nanocomputing, auction-based computing, distributed
              knowledge applications, medical imaging and data archiving, light-scattering
              spectroscopy, and mixed non-linear optimization. Collaborations include the
              Sigmicro microarchitecture center, NETCARE and the Purdue-hosted Nanohub
              (enabling users to run tools for computer architecture and parallel computing,
              and nanoelectrnics). The project impacts some minority serving institutions
              such as Chicago State and Florida A& M Universities and enables a testbed for a
              transnational digital government projects involving Carnegie Mellon University,
              University of Belize, University of Colorado, University of Florida, University
              of Massachusetts, and Pontificia Universidad Catolica Madre y Maestra of the
              Dominican Republic.

