Title       : Functional and Pharmacological Characterization of the Cockroach Voltage-Gated
               Sodium Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0224877

Award Number: 0224877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ke Dong dongk@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Voltage-gated sodium channels are essential for generation and propagation of
              electrical impulses in the nervous system and other excitable cells. There are
              at least ten voltage-gated sodium channel genes in mammals, but only one sodium
              channel gene in insects.  How do insects achieve sodium channel diversity
              required for fulfilling different roles in different tissues and cell types?
              Why are some neurotoxins, including pyrethroids (a widely used class of
              insecticides) and insect-selective scorpion toxins, are more toxic to insects
              than to mammals?  The research proposed by Dr. Dong is aimed at answering these
              questions.  Dr. Dong's laboratory has isolated more than twenty naturally
              occurring variants of the German cockroach sodium channel.  The functional
              properties of these sodium channel variants will be characterized in the
              Xenopus oocyte, which is a widely used in vitro functional expression system
              for ion channels.  Based on the preliminary results from Dr. Dong's study, the
              functional diversity of the German cockroach sodium channel appears to be
              achieved by modification of the same sodium channel gene transcript via two
              cellular processes called alternative splicing and RNA editing. Variation in
              alternative splicing and RNA editing can result in changes in the structure and
              function of a gene product.  Dr. Dong will examine the role of these two
              cellular processes in generating functional diversity of the German cockroach
              sodium channel.  They will also determine the exact amino acid residues in the
              German cockroach sodium channel protein that are critical for the selective
              toxicity of neurotoxins to insect and mammalian sodium channels will be
              identified.  Successful completion of this study may yield the first
              comprehensive picture of how alternative splicing and RNA editing enables a
              single gene to generate functionally and pharmacologically diverse sodium
              channels in insects. Elucidation of the structural basis of functional and
              pharmacologically diversity will provide valuable information for our better
              understanding of the structure and function of sodium channels. One
              postdoctoral associate will gain training in molecular biology,
              electrophysiology, and toxin pharmacology.  


