Title       : High-Resolution Imagery and Terrain Model for Collaborative Research of
               Environmental Change at Barrow, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0224071

Award Number: 0224071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Simon Stephenson                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221806             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Manley William.Manley@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig E. Tweedie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Maslanik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5205      ARCTIC RESRCH SUPPRT & LOGISTI
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This projects will create and release of three suites of spatial data products. 
              The first is high-resolution, orthorectified radar imagery (ORRI, with 1.25 m
              grid cell spacing) and a co-registered, high-resolution Digital Elevation Model
              (DEM; 5 m grid cell spacing; 1 m vertical accuracy). The second suite is
              satellite imagery purchased through AeroMap U.S., specifically orthorectified
              panchromatic (0.7 m grid cells) and multispectral (2.8 m grid cells) imagery
              acquired by DigitalGlobe with the new QuickBird satellite.  Third is a
              time-series set of orthorectified air-photo mosaics.  After processing, the DEM
              and imagery would be made available to all NSF-funded researchers through the
              ARCSS Data Coordination Center.

In the vicinity of Barrow, Alaska including
              the Barrow Environmental Observatory (BEO) there are more than 35 currently
              funded NSF research projects.  These multi- and interdisciplinary studies
              primarily address local to global effects of environmental sensitivity and
              climate change. Many of the projects utilize quantitative spatial analysis
              through remote sensing and Geographic Information Systems (GIS).  Others would
              utilize high-resolution spatial datasets if they were available.  On a project
              by project basis, research groups work piecemeal with spatial data for their
              own, small, disconnected field areas. Sharing datasets is difficult due to
              differences in map projection, datum, data format, extent, and distribution
              channels. This new activity will provide the research community high-resolution
              data and images resulting in tangible scientific benefits across numerous
              disciplines, increasing the efficiency and significance of current and future
              research. 

On-going projects that would benefit are research on ecosystem
              dynamics, terrestrial-atmospheric fluxes of greenhouse gases, landscape
              dynamics, coastal flooding and erosion, permafrost melting, other environmental
              responses to unprecedented arctic warming, and other topics. These
              environmentally and societally relevant scientific problems can be addressed in
              new ways and with greater success using digital topography and imagery.  By
              orders of magnitude, the spatial datasets would be more precise, accurate, and
              useful than existing data layers. They would permit state-of-the-art analysis
              for years to come, and would establish a temporal baseline for decades of
              change-detection studies. This vision is shared by this proposal's twelve
              collaborators from eight research institutions. With shared needs for high
              quality spatial information, a modest effort now would leverage results and
              promote interdisciplinary collaboration.
 

