Title       : GOALI/Spin Electronics: Development of ZnO Based Room Temperature Spintronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  2002  
File        : a0224166

Award Number: 0224166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yicheng Lu ylu@ece.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Bartynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9147,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0224166
Lu

This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics
              for the 21st Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036.  The proposal
              focuses on the study and development of metalorganic chemical vapor deposition
              (MOCVD) -grown transition metal (TM) -doped ZnO as a diluted magnetic
              semiconductor (DMS) layer, and explore its application through industrial
              collaborators, as well as government labs. This material offers the possibility
              of highly integrated device architecture along with the ability to manipulate
              carrier spin as well as charge.  Practical application requires that the
              material have a magnetic Curie temperature above room temperature.  While
              theoretical studies have identified GaN and ZnO as the most promising DMS
              materials in this regard, the high solubility of TM ions in ZnO, as well as its
              wide band gap (transparent!)  its multifunctionality, and relatively low growth
              temperature make ZnO an excellent choice of room temperature spintronics
              material.  To achieve their goals, they will focus on: A systematic study to
              develop low-pressure MOCVD technology for growth of TM-doped ZnO films.  The
              most promising doping species are V, Co, Ni, and Mn, and R-Al2O3 is an optimal
              substrate; A coordinated characterization program using both in-house and
              synchrotron radiation based spectroscopic, imaging, and diffractive techniques
              to characterize the chemical, electronic, structural and magnetic properties of
              the MOCVD-grown TM-doped ZnO films; and through the industrial collaboration
              integrate the ZnO spin aligner layers with GaN LEDs to form the spin-polarized
              injection LED operational at room temperature. 

The successful completion of
              the proposed research will have a significant impact on the scientific
              understanding and practical application of diluted magnetic semiconductor
              spintronics.  It is anticipated that new phenomena related to spin-electronic,
              spin-magnetic, and spin-optical integration in wide band gap DMS materials will
              be discovered, leading to fundamentally new devices and applications. 

