Title       : New Modeling Procedure for Indoor/Outdoor Propagation Environments in Micro- and
               Pico-Cell Wireless Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0224904

Award Number: 0224904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Magdy F. Iskander iskander@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0102253
Iskander

With this proposal the PI's respectfully request NSF
              support to develop a detailed, accurate, and
computationally efficient
              propagation model for wireless communications in micro- and pico-cell
              systems.
A new 3D model [or alternatively a 2D model with advanced calculation
              capabilities such as the vertical-plane-launch (VPL) technique] will be
              developed based on integrating three new and innovative
approaches to improve
              calculation accuracy and increase the computational efficiency. This includes
              the
use of the following:

1. A new unstructured triangular grid ray tracing
              method (TGRM) to provide significant savings in
computational time when
              modeling outdoor regions. Preliminary results show that CPU time for the
TGRM
              method is approximately 30% of that of the visibility ray tracing.
2. A space
              division procedure based on a uniform rectangular grid method (URGM) for indoor
              regions
and assuming that the reflection/transmission surfaces coincide with
              the grid lines. Preliminary
results show that the CPU time for the proposed
              uniform grid method for indoor propagation regions
is approximately 14% of
              that of the visibility ray tracing method.
3. An FDTD approach to calculate
              reflection (F ) and transmission (F ) coefficients of composite walls
and
              incorporate these coefficients in the overall ray tracing code. This is
              important for short range
signal prediction where average or effective values
              of materials properties of walls may provide
inaccurate predictions. The
              multigrid Finite Difference Time Domain (multigrid FDTD) code will
also be
              used to calculate diffraction coefficients from indoor and outdoor objects that
              are difficult to
model analytically. Diffraction coefficient results will be
              incorporated with a 3D ray tracing code that
implements the proposed
              procedures described above. Diffraction coefficients will be included as
              part
of the program in the form of a database and look-up tables.
4. The
              development of the 3D version of the proposed ray tracing code will be based on
              using pyramidal
or tetrahedral cells in the TGRM procedure, and solid
              rectangular cells in the URGM method. The
proposed methods do not involve
              search algorithms and hence significant improvement in the
computational
              efficiency is expected.
 
The overall results from the developed new
              propagation model will be validated experimentally on scaled
models in the
              60'x40'x23' indoor antenna range available at the University of Utah. Scaled
              models will be
carefully selected so as to present physical structures of
              interest, on the one hand, and an object that can be
used as a building block
              towards the development of a fully understandable and physics-based
              propagation
model, on the other. With the available experimental facilities
              (HP8510 up to 40 GHz), it will be possible
to use scale factors as large as 20
              to model realistic structures at the higher frequencies (2GHz) presently
being
              used in terrestrial wireless communication systems.

In addition to the
              development of the deterministic EM-based propagation model, the PI's propose
              to use the calculated EM power distribution pattern to determine statistical
              parameters that may be used in the
simulation of wireless communications
              systems. This includes calculations of coverage, delay spread, bit
error rate,
              and angle of arrival. The project will involve two graduate students to work on
              the simulation
part of the project, and one additional graduate student
              together with a team of undergraduate senior
students to work on building the
              scaled models and conducting the experimental verification part of
              the
project.

