Title       : URTD & Environmentally-Threatened Gopher Tortoises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0224953

Award Number: 0224953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2206705            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary B. Brown mbbrown@nersp.nerdc.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Madan K. Oli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 7242,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The gopher tortoise is an environmentally-threatened species that is critically
              important for maintenance of upland habitats, biodiversity, and community
              ecology. Over 360 vertebrate and invertebrate species utilize gopher tortoise
              burrows as a refuge. Gopher tortoises also help maintain habitat diversity by
              dispersal of plant. Both upper respiratory tract disease (URTD) and
              anthropogenic effects such as development, habitat destruction and
              fragmentation are believed to play major roles in population declines. The long
              term goal of this project is to understand the relationship between URTD and
              tortoise population dynamics, with special emphasis on the impact of
              anthropogenic effects such as relocation practices and habitat alteration on
              disease transmission. This project will use an interdisciplinary approach to
              determine the interactive roles of human intervention, habitat quality, and
              bacterial factors on spread of disease in natural populations of gopher
              tortoises. A mathematical model will be developed to predict disease
              transmission.

Lack of knowledge with respect to potential infectious
              diseases present in wild populations and the impact of disease on relocation
              and restocking efforts, population parameters, and long term population
              well-being creates a major dilemma for scientists, wildlife biologists,
              conservationists, and public policy makers. The model developed in this project
              can be used to make more effective, rational, and critical management decisions
              designed to protect gopher tortoise populations and the biological diversity
              that tortoises support in upland habitats. The management practice of
              relocation intended to preserve gopher tortoises may actually resemble natural
              migration patterns of humans. Important new insights into the relationship
              between population movements and transmission dynamics of an infectious chronic
              respiratory disease will be obtained in a natural tortoise population that
              mimics the life history of humans.

