Title       : Understanding Deep-Ocean Circulation during Miocene Climate Transition: Are
               Freshwater Impacts the Key?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0224605

Award Number: 0224605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339327             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Seidov dseidov@essc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernd J. Haupt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Barron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to conduct a multiple stage modeling study to
              investigate the role of freshwater inputs to the oceans and its influence on
              climate. 

Initially, the investigators will carry out fully coupled climate
              modeling experiments to generate a climate "reference state" for the Early and
              Late Miocene.  Next, they will complete a series of ocean model experiments for
              each of the two periods to target the role of high-latitude in affecting ocean
              surface conditions.  This effort will focus on the role of freshwater dynamics
              in altering the deep-ocean thermohaline circulation for differing ocean-land
              configurations.  The results from these experiments will be compared to
              paleoceanographic data to determine which ocean solution best corresponds to
              the paleoceanographic record for these time intervals.  In the last stage of
              modeling, the research team will use best-fit results from the ocean model
              experiments as a foundation for additional coupled model experiments. 

The
              Miocene was a notable step in the transition from global conditions of warm
              equable climates to a climate with persistently cold polar regions.  This was
              accompanied by a fully developed southern cryosphere and the initiation of
              northern hemisphere ice.  It is hypothesized that the initiation of Antarctic
              continental glaciation resulted from tectonic activity during the Miocene. 
              This resulted in a major reorganization of deep ocean circulation that played a
              key role in the evolution of cooling polar climates. 

The main research
              objective of this award is to attempt to mimic the Miocene climate transition
              based on the connections between the freshwater impacts associated with a
              developing southern ocean-based cryosphere and intensification of the Antarctic
              Circumpolar Current (ACC).  As such, the investigators hope to contribute to an
              improved understanding of the dynamics of the Miocene climate transition,
              especially with regards to the role of freshwater input in impacting
              climate.

This research will provide a broader understanding of Earth'
              climate during an important transition in its history when the physical
              features began to appear as they are in the modern world (i.e., continental
              separation, establishment of polar ice caps, circum-Antarctic ocean
              circulation).
