Title       : Improving and Expanding Nutrient Analysis at the Baruch Marine Field Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0224759

Award Number: 0224759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Bushek   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Lewitus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to aid in the purchase of a state-of-the-art nutrient
              autoanalyzer for use by researchers at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory
              (BMFL) in the measurement of nutrients such as ammonium, nitrate, nitrite,
              phosphate, silicate, urea and other chemical compounds found in the sea and in
              freshwater.  Low nutrient concentrations often limit plant growth and
              productivity - the reason for adding fertilizers to crops - while elevated
              concentrations are often harmful to the environment and subsequently to humans.
               At BMFL, several ongoing research projects are examining how some nutrients
              cycle naturally within an ecosystem, and how changes in the types and
              quantities of nutrients influences primary (plant) and secondary (animal)
              production.  Other projects are evaluating how various human activities affect
              nutrient concentrations in the environment.  Nutrient analysis is also an
              integral component of a long-term ecosystem monitoring program at BFML, a
              program that allows investigators to evaluate the impact of climatic events
              such as the current drought, storms or El Nino.  In addition, the importance of
              nutrient cycling to the health of the environment makes nutrient analysis an
              important emphasis in BMFL-sponsored educational activities that include
              undergraduates, graduate students and decision makers (e.g., natural resource
              managers and public officials).  The purchase of a state-of-the-art nutrient
              autoanalyzer will the commitment of the BMFL to support the monitoring and
              experimental research of nutrient status and trends in coastal ecosystems while
              expanding research and education capabilities for visiting investigators and
              students.
