Title       : CISE Research Resources: A Comprehensive Multi-Tier Wireless Network Development
               Platform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0224458

Award Number: 0224458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187244             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Cavallaro cavallar@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy P. Frantz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Behnaam Aazhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward W. Knightly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ashutosh Sabharwal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA - 0224458
Cavallaro, Joseph R.
Aazhang, Behnaam 
Frantz, Jeremy
              P.
Knightly, Edward W.
Sabharwal, Ashutosh

Rice Universiy

Title:  CISE
              RR: A Comprehensive Multi-tier Wireless Network Development Platform 

This
              proposal, developing an infrastructure within the Center for Multimedia
              Communication (CMC)
to enable repeatable fields' experiments in the
              laboratory, aims to develop integration techniques beyond simulations and other
              modeling. Using actual field measurement in its emulation, the infrastructure
              fills a gap to experimentally validate theoretical results under real-world
              conditions promising seamless wireless content delivery (without any service
              disruptions). The equipment, mainly consisting of two channel emulators, a
              logic analyzer, and a spectrum analyzer, benefits three major
              projects.
Reconfigurable Wireless Architectures,
High Data Rate Multiple
              Antenna Communication, and
Opportunistic Multi-Tier Wireless Scheduling.
The
              first project involves the design of new communication architectures that
              reconfigure based on the network availability, channel conditions, and data
              requirements of a handset. The infrastructure will enable a complete suite of
              efficient prototypes, which will simultaneously connect to next generation
              wireless LANs, third generation wireless cellular, and Bluetooth personal area
              networks (PANs), bringing closer the ideal ability of a single device to
              seamlessly maintain its link to the network using whatever connectivity is
              available. The second project develops new communications coding and feedback
              methods for high data rate wireless access by prototyping new algorithms with
              multiple transmit and receive antennae on reconfigurable baseband platform and
              stress tested in different wireless configurations for their robustness,
              performance limits, and power efficiency. The last project involves the design
              of optimal methods for scheduling data using all the resources available by a
              multi-tier network, including other mobile nodes connecting the backbone
              infrastructure. The packet schedulers are being prototyped on a mobile network
              processor platform and will use the multi-tier network interface (mNIC)
              prototype developed within CMC in its field trials.
On the educational side,
              students will continue their research on these projects, and new developments
              captured for new courses. Rice University is quite active with
              under-represented groups.
.



