Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: Spin Manipulation in Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0224163

Award Number: 0224163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan P. Bird bird@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Goodnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dragica Vasileska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
              the application of semiconductor nanostructures in the emerging field of
              spin-based electronics. The program objectives are:

      To explore
              demonstrations of the spintronic applications of nanostructures, including
              nanoscale implementations of the spin filter, the spin valve, and the spin
              transistor

        To undertake experimental investigations of
              spin-polarized transport in semiconductor nanostructures

      To perform
              theoretical studies of the spin-dependent electronic structure of semiconductor
              nanostructures, and of the mechanisms of spin decoherence.

The key outcome
              of this research is expected to be the development of a crucial understanding
              of the manner in which the unique properties of semiconductor nanostructures
              may be exploited in future spintronic devices. An important aspect of this
              program is its coordinated structure. The principal investigators have proven
              track records in the experimental and theoretical study of semiconductor
              nanostructures, and their collaboration is expected to result in a highly
              multidisciplinary interaction. The research program itself explores the
              implementation of complicated spintronic devices, such as the spin valve or the
              spin transistor, by integrating nanoscale implementations of the most basic of
              spin devices, the spin filter. Theoretical modeling explores the spin-resolved
              subband structure in these devices, the mechanisms for spin decoherence, and
              the transport properties of the structures being investigated.

In addition
              to its scientific importance, this program also contributes to the creation of
              a superior environment for graduate and undergraduate education at Arizona
              State University.  Its pedagogic impact is further enhanced by the
              collaborations it promotes with researchers at national laboratories in the US
              (Sandia) and Japan (National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
              Technology, AIST).  Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this
              project benefit greatly from the opportunities provided by these
              collaborations.  A significant component of these collaborations, for example,
              is the opportunities they provide for student internship during this program. 
              At the same time, undergraduate involvement in this program is encouraged by
              coordinating the research with the two-semester senior-design projects, which
              form one of the graduation requirements of the undergraduate program in the
              Electrical Engineering Department.  As we have done in the past, we continue to
              make efforts to involve both underrepresented minorities and women in this
              program.  A valuable opportunity for wider outreach is provided by the Women in
              Science and Engineering (WISE) program, which we have a record of involvement
              in and which actively encourages female high-school students to enter
              engineering programs.  Dissemination of the results of this program is promoted
              through publications in the top peer-review journals, student and faculty
              participation in conferences, and the posting of related material on a central
              web resource that is being developed under an existing NSF-sponsored
              project.


