Title       : Workshop: Planning Activities for the Indiana University Research and Teaching
               Preserve, Indiana University 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0224809

Award Number: 0224809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Clay CLAY@Indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the development of a strategic plan for Indiana University's
               newly established Research and Teaching Preserve (IURTP). The station's
              mission is to provide natural field settings for research, teaching and
              outreach that complement existing on-campus programs and facilities.  The IURTP
              currently consists of two forest parcels that total nearly 200 ha encompassing
              a variety of upland, bottomland and aquatic habitats, and including the largest
              lake in Indiana.  Despite the lack of infrastructure, the IURTP is of great
              value for research and training given its accessibility (the parcels are
              approximately 4, 15 and 35 km from campus), natural conditions, habitat
              diversity and proximity to extensive public lands. It is located within the
              largest forested region in the lower Midwest, and thus has considerable
              regional and national significance from conservation and biodiversity
              perspectives. The strategic plan will be developed with significant input from
              outside experts to help define research priorities, and site improvements that
              reflect these priorities, through two, sequential workshops: one a workshop
              focusing on research, the other focused on development of specific
              recommendations for IURTP infrastructure.  In addition, the award supports
              visits by station staff to comparable field stations and preserves to gather
              information on common problems and solutions.  For the workshops, experts in
              both research and administrative aspects of station use and operation will be
              invited to visit the IURTP, consult with current and potential users, and make
              recommendations on strategic directions that best reflect the combination of
              existing faculty interests and new opportunities at the preserve. 
