Title       : AWARE-Japan, China, Korea, Hong Kong: Materials Science and Engineering Research
               Experiences for Graduate Students, Undergraduate Students & Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0224929

Award Number: 0224929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naresh N. Thadhani naresh.thadhani@mse.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arun M. Gokhale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Summers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5251,5927,9162,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0224929
Thadhani

This award supports a three-year collaborative
              international research experience program for faculty, graduate students,
              undergraduate students and science teachers to conduct research in the
              multi-disciplinary field of materials science and engineering at sites in
              Japan, Korea, China and Hong Kong.  The principal investigator for the project
              is Naresh Thadhani at Georgia Tech in Atlanta.   Five faculty/student/teacher
              groups will be participating each year.  The teachers will be selected from
              Atlanta area high schools.  The program will provide the opportunity for
              students to experience hands-on participation in materials research for up to
              eight weeks during the summer months.  The research projects will be designed
              in a manner that allows promotion of research interactions between faculty from
              both the U.S. and the East Asian countries while ensuring that there are
              specific benefits for each of the team members in addition to their gaining an
              international research experience.  The graduate students will be able to
              enhance the quality and/or scope of their thesis work while also learning to be
              mentors.  The undergraduate students will gain a sense of what graduate
              research is about, and an international perspective to the field of research
              that they may eventually become interested in.  The teacher participants will
              become knowledgeable with the culture of baccalaureate education in East Asian
              countries and also learn about the field of materials science and engineering. 
              

This award is made under NSF's AWARE (American Workforce and Research and
              Education) program.  The challenges of the twenty-first century require a new
              cadre of graduates in science and engineering who are broadly educated and are
              ready to effectively contribute to difficult technological problems requiring a
              multi-disciplinary, teamed, and global approach.  This materials education
              project, with an underlying theme of structure and properties correlation
              across length scales, is of vital importance to users as well as developers of
              materials.  Recent developments in quantitative microstructural
              characterization techniques, approaches for real-time testing of properties,
              and novel methods for synthesizing and processing materials, allowing
              microstructural control, provide a unique opportunity to cost-effectively
              design materials with desired electronic, magnetic, mechanical and optical
              properties.  In addition advancements in computer technology make it possible
              to model and simulate process conditions and allow predictions and simulations
              of structures that are directly linked to properties.  The participants will
              undertake studies of various materials and their applications, focusing on the
              common theme of linking and correlating material properties with structure
              across nano-, meso-, micro- and macro-length scales.  


