Title       : RUI:Stress, Stages of Memory and Event-Related Potentials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0224069

Award Number: 0224069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicole Y. Weekes nweekes@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
RUI: Stress, Stages of Memory, and Event Related
              Potentials

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Weekes
              and colleagues will conduct a three-year investigation into the relationships
              among psychological stressors, stress hormone levels, memory functioning, and
              electrical brain activity.  In one study, they will investigate the effects of
              group differences (high vs. low) in chronic stress hormone secretion on memory
              performance and electrical brain activity during both the encoding and
              retrieval stages of a verbal memory task.  In a second study, they will
              investigate the associations among the acute stress response, memory
              performance and electrical brain activity during both the encoding and
              retrieval stages of a verbal memory task.
These studies explore suggestions
              from various prior studies that concentrations of stress hormones can
              significantly impact memory functioning.  While studies suggest a detrimental
              effect of chronically high levels of stress hormones on memory, there is less
              known about the nature of the relationship between acutely high levels of
              stress hormones and memory.  The strongest effects of chronic and acute levels
              of stress hormones on memory appear to be on verbal memory.  However, it is
              unclear which stage of memory processing may be most sensitive to stress
              hormone levels, with some studies suggesting an effect on encoding or storage,
              and others on retrieval. Further, a number of recent studies have found effects
              of stress hormones on electrical brain activity.  Few studies have questioned
              whether stress-induced changes in memory functioning are related to changes in
              regional electrophysiological activity.  This is a particularly important field
              of inquiry given the evidence that the most significant effects of stress on
              such brain regions as the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex are
              electrophysiological in nature.  The elucidation of these relationships will
              lead to a better understanding and better treatment options for individuals
              suffering from stress- or stress hormone-related memory deficits.  These
              populations include, but are not limited to, individuals with Cushing's
              disease, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, schizophrenia, depression and the
              elderly. 


