Title       : Facility Improvements to Enhance Northern Prairie Research and Instructional
               Efforts at Oak Lake Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2002  
File        : a0224730

Award Number: 0224730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nels H. Troelstrup   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Oak Lake Field Station is a 570 acre teaching and research facility
              operated by South Dakota State University in northeastern Brookings County,
              South Dakota.  Utilization of Oak Lake Field Station for research activity by
              local and visiting faculty and students has increased over 400% over the past
              seven years.  This increase has occurred in response to better advertisement of
              field station facilities and greater local funding for faculty and student
              research.  The station recently underwent a facility review, funded by the
              National Science Foundation.  Visiting reviewers recommended expansion and
              improvement of existing laboratory and classroom facilities to meet future
              needs.  The objective of this effort is to improve research laboratory,
              classroom and computer room facilities at Oak Lake Field Station, South Dakota.
                 

Funds provided by the National Science Foundation will be supplemented
              with matching dollars by local sources to remodel and expand the existing
              classroom and laboratory building of Oak Lake Field Station.  This construction
              will provide a 637 sq. ft. laboratory, 918 sq. ft. classroom and 294 sq. ft.
              office/computer room facility.  Lab space will increase 445%, classroom space
              will increase 266% and office/computer space will increase 188% relative to
              existing facilities.  Overall, building square footage will increase from 1935
              ft2 to 2679 ft2.  Building renovations will include total enclosure of the
              existing field laboratory and classroom, furnace installation to allow
              four-season use, new lab countertops, storage cabinets, chemical shower and
              eyewash station, telecommunications wiring, sinks, accommodations for digital
              projection, classroom to seat 32 students, expanded field library shelving,
              storage area and expanded office/computer room.

Oak Lake Field Station
              provides a unique site to study native tallgrass prairie and  pothole
              environments within the northern plains.  Located within two hours of several
              regional universities, colleges and public schools, this remodeled facility
              will provide a location for field courses, field trips, student field projects,
              graduate and faculty research, symposia, professional meetings and retreats.  
              Field Station staff conservatively estimate a tripling of field station
              instruction and research utilization as a result of this remodeling effort. 
              Instruction and research efforts will now be possible throughout the year. 
              Expanded classroom and laboratory facilities will allow simultaneous use by
              larger groups of students and researchers.  Telecommunications capabilities
              will be improved, allowing more efficient communication of field station
              programs and data to other academic institutions and organizations.  These
              enhancements will greatly improve student learning opportunities and research
              productivity within a modest budget. 

