Title       : Optically Controlled Spin in Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers: "Spin
               Optoelectronics"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0224238

Award Number: 0224238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Kost akost@arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Chow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Axel Schulzgen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9147,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Optically Controlled Spin in Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers: "Spin
              Optoelectonics"

Alan Kost & Axel Schulzgen


Abstract

This proposal
              was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st Century
              initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on the role
              of spin in new types of optoelectronic devices with applications for optical
              data communications. In particular, optically induced spin states and spin
              relaxation in the active layers of semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs) will
              be investigated.

An optical pulse with a fluence of about 1 mJ per cm2 can
              excite electron-hole pairs across the band gap of a semiconductor and saturate
              absorption leading to a transmission increase of an order of magnitude. A
              drawback of resonant optical nonlinearities is their rather slow recovery. An
              optically excited semiconductor returns to its initial state after
              recombination of the excess electron-hole pairs, in about a nanosecond. This
              recovery is much too slow for many high speed applications like switching of
              data at rates of 2.5 Gbits per second. Various techniques have been explored to
              speed material recovery after optical excitation. Ion implantation has been
              used to enhance non-radiative recombination in semiconductors and speed
              recovery to an extent, at the expense of material quality. Electric fields have
              been applied to sweep away excess charge. Among the most promising approaches
              to ultra-fast material response is excitation with polarized light. Light with
              circular polarization is used to excite electrons and holes in definite spin
              states. Absorption saturation occurs and transmission is increased for light of
              similar polarization. The absorption recovers rapidly, in picoseconds or less,
              as dephasing events redistribute the spin. Selective spin excitation in GaAsSb
              quantum wells shows particular promise. These semiconductors have
              sub-picosecond spin relaxation times and they function with light that has a
              wavelength near 1.55 microns - an important wavelength regime for optical
              communications. 

Spin relaxation has not been examined in semiconductor
              optical amplifiers. The plan here is to further the knowledge of spin in
              semiconductors and investigate devices for ultra-fast optical switching by
              studying spin in semiconductor optical amplifiers containing InGaAs and GaAsSb
              quantum wells.

Epi-layers will be grown at HRL laboratories - a pioneer and
              world leader in the growth of novel III-V semiconductor materials. The
              materials, to be grown on InP and GaSb substrates, will also include cladding
              layers for light guiding and doped layers to form a p-n junction. Dr. David
              Chow, a department manager in Microelectronics Laboratory at HRL, will lead the
              growth effort.

The group of Professor Alan Kost at the University of Arizona
              will design and fabricate the semiconductor optical amplifiers. The composition
              and thickness layers in the active region of SOAs will be selected for optical
              gain near 1.55 microns. The composition of optical cladding layers will be
              chosen for optimum wave guiding. Professor Kost's group will process wafers
              from HRL into SOAs in a clean room at the University of Arizona. The clean room
              facility at the Optical Sciences Center at the University has all the equipment
              needed to make SOAs: including photolighographic equipment, a reactive ion
              etcher, metal evaporators for the deposition of electrical contacts and a rapid
              thermal annealer for contact annealing. Professor Kost's group will also
              perform initial optical characterization of the materials including
              photoluminescence and optical transmission measurements.

The group of
              Professor Axel Schulzgen will characterize optical amplifiers using their
              extensive femtosecond laser facility. The semiconductors will be excited using
              circularly polarized light pulses of wavelength near 1.55 microns. Spin
              relaxation will be monitored and time-resolved by measuring the transmission of
              SOAs in a pump-probe configuration. Spin dynamics will be examined as function
              of the inversion in the gain medium by repeating measurements while varying the
              electrical bias to the 

