Title       : FSML: Promoting Biological Research on the Colorado Plateau with the
               Merriam-Powell Research Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0224851

Award Number: 0224851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Wagner mike.wagner@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley D. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Whitham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Swetnam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Merriam-Powell Research Station for
              construction of new housing units at the Centennial Forest, 19,114 hectares of
              land set aside by the State of Arizona for research, educational, and outreach
              on the Colorado Plateau. The construction of the housing and related
              infrastructure is part of a facilities development project for the recently
              established Merriam-Powell Research Station (MPRS), a collaboration of Northern
              Arizona University, Arizona State University, The University of Arizona, and
              The University of Nevada-Las Vegas. The MPRS supports research in the Greater
              Grand Canyon-San Francisco Peaks Ecosystem centered along the 3,000 m elevation
              gradient first characterized by C. Hart Merriam in developing his Life Zone
              Concept.  The Centennial Forest is a primary site within the Southwest
              Ecological Gradient Network, a latitude/climate gradient extending from Tucson,
              Arizona to Las Vegas, Nevada. The Forest includes old growth ponderosa pine,
              pinyon-juniper woodland, and high elevation grasslands. Existing research
              infrastructure includes elevational gradient plots with weather stations, a
              5-year experimental fire history gradient, 20-year regional ponderosa pine
              common gardens, and replicated 50 ha ponderosa pine old growth restoration
              plots.  Although the region has been used extensively for field research, the
              Centennial Forest lacks housing and laboratory facilities.  Eventually MPRS
              expects to have 25 visiting scientist/student housing units, in addition to
              buildings that include wet and dry labs, classrooms and offices, and a
              greenhouse complex. The housing units are designed to resemble the traditional
              Navajo Hogan, and will provide low-cost on-site accommodations for visiting
              scientists and university classes, and thus promote interdisciplinary and
              interagency collaborations for study of the Greater Grand Canyon-San Francisco
              Peaks Ecosystem. 
