Title       : CISE Research Resources: Resources for Software Engineering Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0224368

Award Number: 0224368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Allen edward.allen@computer.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Dampier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Philip  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0224368
Edward B. Allen
David A. Dampier; Thomas Philip
Mississippi State
              University

CISE RR:  Resources for Software Engineering Research

This
              proposal from an EPSCoR state, enhancing capabilities for software-engineering
              research, aims at acquiring a data base server, a configuration management
              system, and workstations to support the following projects:

1.	CAREER:
              Assessment of Open-Source Software for High-Performance Computing,
2.	Using
              Pathfinder Networks to Model Perceptions of Software
              Requirements,
3.	Automating Steps in Software Evolution, and
4.	Integrated
              Information Sifting for Scientific Instruments.

The first project ascertains
              the quality of the software using retrospective case studies by building and
              evaluating models that could have developed during the historical projects or
              releases.  The second provides methods for uncovering divergent perceptions of
              software requirements by stakeholders and developers, thus giving an early
              indication of potential requirements issues in light of conceptual differences
              among groups.  The third, creating automated techniques for semantics-based
              slicing and change-merging that will facilitate the reliable delivery of small
              increments, devises automated methods for incorporating incremental changes
              into software systems as they evolve.  The last project, producing of imagery,
              develops an integrated set of algorithms and tools for analysis of
              scientific-instrument data to support on-line monitoring and process control. 
              The information sifting approach includes artificial neural networks for
              classification of spectral images, statistical methods for rapid comparison of
              spectra, rule-based models of thermal imaging, and fuzzy classification using
              autonomous agents.

