Title       : SGER: Political Economy of Financial Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0224479

Award Number: 0224479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard L. Rosenthal rosentha@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Bolton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Politics structures the regulatory and legal institutions that delimit the
              operation of financial markets.  The political outcomes have major impacts on
              such important matters as the openness of financial markets, the balance
              between investor protection and managerial prerogatives, and the tradeoff
              between creditor and debtor rights.  The need for a research agenda in this
              area led to the organization of a research network in Europe "Understanding
              Financial Architecture: Legal and Political Frameworks and Economic
              Efficiency."  The network was funded by the European Union.  This grant
              supports a small conference on the Political Economy of Financial Markets at
              Princeton University.  The purpose of the conference is to explore the
              development of an international and interdisciplinary community in this area. 
              The potential topics include financial development, corporate governance,
              bankruptcy, debt forgiveness, and credit markets for the poor.  Invitations to
              participate in the conference are extended to scholars, particularly junior
              scholars, from a broad cross-section of Universities in the United States.  The
              conference brings together potential American partners to the European network
              on the political economy of financial institutions.
