Title       : Synthesis, Characterization and Application of AlGaMnN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0224203

Award Number: 0224203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cammy R. Abernathy caber@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
              synthesis of  n-type dilute magnetic semiconductors based on GaMnN and AlMnN,
              and on using the resultant materials to fabricate tunneling magnetoresistance
              (TMR) and spin FET devices.  Materials growth and basic understanding of the
              structural, chemical and electrical properties governing the magnetism will be
              addressed first. A host of characterization tools will be employed to
              characterize and provide guidance for the optimization of the materials growth.
              Quantitative measurements of the magnetization as a function of temperature
              will be made using a SQUID magnetometer.  The degree of magnetic order and the
              magnetic transition temperature will be ascertained from temperature dependence
              of the magnetization and susceptibility together with the application of Arrott
              plots. The roles of the nitrogen/metal ratio, growth rate and growth
              temperature on material properties will be investigated.  In order to determine
              the composition and microstructure, samples will be characterized using powder
              and high resolution XRD, TEM and AES. 
Once the dependence of magnetic
              properties on growth conditions has been established, experiments will be
              performed to determine the role of the Mn both physically and electrically. 
              Bonding information will be obtained from EXAFS and XPS.  This information will
              be correlated with Hall measurement, photoluminescence and photoluminescence
              excitation spectroscopy measurements to determine the position of the Mn
              level(s) in the bandgap. In general, samples with the same Mn concentration but
              different magnetic properties will be compared in order to discern any
              differences chemically, structurally or electrically which can explain the
              variance in magnetic behavior. 
	One of the important objectives of this
              program is to look at the role of co-dopant concentration and carrier
              concentration on the magnetic and electrical behavior of the material. By
              varying the Si concentration in GaMnN and AlMnN with a fixed Mn concentration,
              it may be possible to vary the electron concentration independent of the Mn. 
              This would not only allow independent tailoring of the electrical properties
              and the magnetic properties for device applications, but would also allow
              investigation of the role of the metal insulator transition in the
              ferromagnetic ordering. Through the comparison of GaMnN and AlMnN, it will also
              be possible to test theoretical predictions regarding the relationship between
              lattice constituents and Curie temperature.  Further, because of the DX centers
              formed by the Si, AlMnN:Si may prove useful as a light activated magnetic
              material.  By illuminating AlMnN:Si with below bandgap light, it may be
              possible to alter the magnetic properties.  
	Device applications to be
              pursued in this program include light activated TMR devices using GaMnN spin
              sources and AlMnN:Si barriers, and spinFETS using conventional AlGaN/GaN HEMTs
              in which n-GaMnN layers are used as the source and drain regions.



