Title       : A Seawater System for California Polytechnic State University's Marine Education
               and Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0224860

Award Number: 0224860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Moline   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikki L. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Title: A Seawater System for California Polytechnic State University's
              Marine Education and Research Center (#0224860).

A grant has been awarded to
              California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly) under the
              direction of Drs. M. Moline and N. Adams, to help develop a former petroleum
              transfer pier located 40 km from campus in San Luis Obispo Bay into the new
              Marine Education and Research Center (MERC).  As an integral part of the
              conversion of this unique 1 kilometer-long steel and concrete pier, a 500-gpm
              capacity seawater system will provide life support for the rich fauna and flora
              that exist in immediate area for both undergraduate education and collaborative
              research efforts. 
The work to be performed for this project includes,
              fabrication of the piping system that will carry water to the main platform on
              the pier, fabrication of a primary and secondary pumping system, fabrication of
              a primary and secondary filtration system, integration/fabrication of a series
              of seawater tanks/aquaria, and fabrication of a discharge system.  The seawater
              system will facilitate directed instruction and student research at the MERC. 
              The seawater system will also provide the infrastructure required to conduct
              faculty/student research projects focused on the reproduction, development and
              physiology of marine invertebrates, fish, and algae.  Some specific core areas
              of research include; bioluminescence, fish population genetics, eelgrass and
              algal physiology/ecology, satellite remote sensing as applied to phytoplankton,
              invertebrate larval settling/development and developmental/cell biology in
              purple sea urchins. The seawater system will also meet the requirements for
              in-line instrumentation being installed to monitor change in San Luis Bay over
              a range of time scales, which will provide the temporal environmental context
              for ongoing experimentation at the center.  
The system will provide the
              foundation for formal instruction at the undergraduate/graduate levels to
              approximately 250 students at Cal Poly annually within the departments of
              Biological Sciences, Physics, Engineering and Chemistry. It will allow the
              University to attract visiting scientists and students to participate in
              research and courses and to promote marine sciences nationwide. The location of
              the new facility provides the only marine laboratory facility along 320 km of
              coastline from Santa Barbara to Monterey.  The MERC and a flowing seawater
              system provide a cornerstone for a new program in marine education. There is a
              new emphasis is on marine-related curriculum with the understanding of the
              importance of collaborative research in education at Cal Poly.  With pressures
              on coastal resources, there has been increased scientific interest in studying
              the biological dynamics in the area.  The base of the facility is a pristine
              rocky intertidal habitat with a kelp forest 200m offshore.  The majority of the
              coastline to the north extending to the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary
              is relatively untouched/unstudied and is ideal for the educational/research
              goals of the Center.  One of the primary missions of the MERC is to combine our
              nationally recognized and diverse student body with our "learn-by-doing"
              philosophy on education in marine biology and related marine fields.  By
              exposing every student to active research programs and providing hands on
              experience at the MERC, we are in the unique position to fill the gap that
              exists in marine education targeting undergraduate learning. 

