Title       : Impacts of the Great Lakes on Extreme Weather in the Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0224624

Award Number: 0224624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Sousounis sousou@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent improvements in operational numerical weather prediction (NWP) models,
              including increased resolution and better parameterization of sub-grid scale
              processes, have allowed National Weather Service (NWS) Forecasters across the
              country to enjoy considerably improved mesoscale forecasts.  In the Great Lakes
              region, many of the mesoscale features that develop are, for one reason or
              another, forced by the Great Lakes - either individually or as an aggregate. 
              As a result, marine forecasts over the lakes have benefited little.  Forecasts
              over adjacent land masses, where mesoscale phenomena are likely influenced by
              the proximity of the lakes, have also not been without their challenges.  The
              Great Lakes influence a wide range of extreme weather throughout the year. 
              Lake-effect storms develop in winter when cold arctic air flows over the warm
              lakes.  Thunderstorms develop in summer, when the temperature contrast between
              the cool lakes and the warm land generates strong lake breeze convergence
              zones.  The ways that the lakes influence severe weather are not well known. 
              It is anticipated that the effects can be significant. 

This research
              project is an extension of a previous NSF-funded project that has examined the
              impacts of the Great Lakes on synoptic scale systems in winter.  The prior NSF
              Project involved performing and analyzing several series of numerical
              simulations where all the Great Lakes were included (with-lake or WL), none of
              the lakes were included (no-lake or NL), and select lakes were included
              (individual-lake or group-lake) to examine the effects of the Great Lakes on
              synoptic-scale systems in winter as well as some aspects of lake-effect
              snowstorms. 

The current research will focus on lake aggregate effects on
              additional winter season weather phenomena such as dominant lake-effect snow
              bands.  These bands can dump 20 inches of snow in as little as 3 hours.  Their
              development is not understood very well at all.  Preliminary simulations
              suggest that the lake aggregate play a role in providing moisture and reducing
              wind shear.  Other extreme winter weather phenomena that will be studied
              include freezing rain events.  It is hypothesized that the lake aggregate can
              provide heat and moisture in such a way so as to produce a temperature and
              moisture profile that is conducive for freezing rain.  The aggregate effects on
              severe weather/heavy precipitation in the summer will also be examined.  It is
              hypothesized that the negative surface fluxes of heat and moisture over the
              lakes lead to the generation of high pressure and anticyclonic flow over the
              region, and possibly enhanced surface convergence in areas to the south and
              west of the Great takes region.  Finally, certain marine situations (over the
              lakes themselves) where high winds developed, possibly as a result of
              interaction between the atmosphere and warming lake surfaces, will be
              examined.

A numerical simulation approach that effectively isolates the
              impacts of the lakes and which has been used successfully in past projects will
              be taken.  Six case studies are planned in the current proposed study (e.g.
              Phase I).  Each case study will involve several numerical simulations including
              with-lake, no-lake, selected individual- or group-lake simulations, and
              lake-surface temperature sensitivity simulations.  Additional analyses will
              examine the impacts of the lakes on sea-level pressure, surface winds, surface
              convergence boundaries, thermal and vorticity advection patterns aloft, as well
              as wind and temperature profiles - to which severe weather is extremely
              sensitive.

Information obtained from the study will be incorporated into
              forecast procedures that are currently being used at regional NWS Offices.

