Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: Infrastructure for Power-Aware Server Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0224428

Award Number: 0224428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo Bianchini Ricardob@cs.Rutgers.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich Kremer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-24428
Bianchini, Ricard
Kremer, Ulrich
Rutgers University  New
              Brunswick 

Title:  CISE RR: Infrastructure for Power-Aware Server Clusters
              


This proposal, investigating the power, energy, performance, and
              functionality issues and trade-offs involved in cluster environments, aims at
              acquiring equipment for research on power aware clusters of servers. The bulk
              of the infrastructure consists of a cluster of "blade" servers.  Since blade
              servers consume less power and allow finer control of power states than
              traditional servers, they are considered ideal for power and energy
              conservation research. The infrastructure supports two research studies
              in:
Strategies for conserving power and energy in cluster-based Internet
              servers, such as high-capacity WWW, database, or file servers
Computation and
              data servers in the context of a tamper-resistant and fault-tolerant sensor
              network.
The former project involves servers that support most WWW
              data/hosting centers, Internet companies, and a large number of teaching and
              research institutions, but consume significant amounts of power and energy.
              Conserving these resources is critical to reduce the installation and operation
              costs of these clusters. Conserving power and energy without degrading
              performance (or at least without degrading excessively) constitutes the
              challenge. The cluster blades proposed enable designs and experiments with
              techniques that can schedule the demand for resources, permitting transitioning
              from active to low-power model without relevant performance penalty. The
              project experiments with heterogeneous servers comprising combination of blades
              and traditional, power-hungry servers. The latter project designs the sensor
              network to identify, monitor, and track objects or subjects within a physical
              space. This overall space is divided into subspaces, where each subspace has
              its own server (or small cluster of servers), and all servers are connected via
              a network. The design allows local and global processing and evaluation of
              sensor data. Again, energy efficiency becomes crucial in this context because
              the servers need to be able to survive power failures for extended periods of
              time and still provide critical services. The cluster of blades enables the
              study of energy behavior of the critical server tasks in this environment, as
              well as experiment with techniques that can reduce the energy consumption of
              these tasks without noticeably degrading their performance and
              functionality.
On the educational side, the blades and the systems will be
              exploited developing operating systems, distributed computing, and compiler
              courses. Power and energy consumption, as well as performance, design,
              implementation, and evaluation guidelines will be promoted. 


