Title       : Construction of a New Accommodation Building and Teaching Room at the Rutgers
               Pinelands Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0224709

Award Number: 0224709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99545              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Dighton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The National Science Foundation has awarded $ 99, 545 to the Rutgers
              University under the direction of Dr. John Dighton for the construction of an
              accommodation building and classroom to its Pinelands Field Station. Due to
              recent growth in use of this field station in the New Jersey pine barrens,
              Rutgers University has sought to improve the facilities at the station to be
              able to host short-term residential courses offered by the university and to
              provide those facilities to other universities and colleges who are also
              seeking to teach their own courses in the unique ecosystem. The research
              station was formerly mainly a research facility. As such, interest in the
              ecology and forestry of the area has attracted many researchers who wish to use
              the laboratory facilities on a short-term basis or to set up long-term
              monitoring programs. The lack of adequate accommodation to support visiting
              researchers has been acute in recent years and has limited its use by non-local
              institutions.

The proposed new building will provide accommodation for up to
              20 people in both dormitory and individual rooms, thus accommodating both
              student classes and visiting researchers. In addition, the building will
              provide a classroom for educational use and meetings. An existing building will
              be converted into a teaching laboratory. 

In addition to serving the Rutgers
              University community, the facility will be available to other universities and
              teaching institutes who have expressed a desire to teach courses in the field.
              In partnership with the Pinelands Preservation Alliance and the New Jersey
              State Aquarium at Camden, the new facilities will provide a venue for field
              experiential education for inner city school children and, particularly, their
              educators.   

