Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: Varied Synthetic Approaches to the Development of
               Room-Temperature Ferromagnetic and Semiconducting Oxide Nanostructures for
               Silicon Based Spintronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0224138

Award Number: 0224138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kannan Krishnan kannanmk@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel R. Gamelin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie A. Olmstead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
              the synthesis, characterization and optimization of Cobalt-doped transition
              metal oxide nanostructures for spin-electronics applications. The proposed work
              is based on our recent demonstration of robust ferromagnetic and semiconducting
              behavior at room temperature in Co-doped anatase thin films. The proposed
              research will establish interrelationships among the structural, optical,
              electronic, and magnetic properties of ferromagnetic, semiconducting
              CoxTi-1-x02 fabricated by a variety of physical and chemical synthesis routes,
              including oxygen plasma assisted molecular beam epitaxy, reactive ion-beam
              sputter deposition, and solution-based hydrothermal, sol-gel, and aqueous
              co-precipitation methods. Different synthetic routes should lead to different
              morphologies and dimensionalities, including single-crystal films (2D),
              nanoparticles (OD), and planar arrays of nanostructures. They also have
              different prognoses and costs for scaling from laboratory to commercial
              operation. Spin-dependent transport and magnetic behavior of these materials as
              a function of dimensionality and structure will be investigated. Detailed
              evaluation of the band structure of the films, combined with proprietary
              technology involving SrTiO3 buffer layers, will be used to integrate these
              films on silicon substrates. The ultimate goal will not only be to engineer
              these materials at the nanometer length scales, but to develop a broad set of
              criteria that will serve as the framework to explore the viability of other
              doped-oxides for spintronics applications. Finally, the project has a broad
              education component that will add new dimensions to the research experience and
              training of graduate students participating in the nanotechnology IGERT program
              on the UW campus.

This proposal is being co-funded by the Divisions of Civil
              and Mechanical Systems, Chemical and Transport Systems and Electrical and
              Communication Systems in the Directorate of Engineering of the National Science
              Foundation.

