Title       : A comparative fMRI study of evolutionary precursors to written language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0224240

Award Number: 0224240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $665386             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Joseph jjoseph@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Hardy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh S. Bhatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhiming Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anders H. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A Comparative fMRI study of the Evolutionary Precursors to Written
              Language

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Josephs
              and colleagues will conduct a three-year investigation into whether humans have
              a specialized brain region for letter recognition, or whether letter
              recognition is accomplished with the same brain regions used for recognizing
              other categories, like everyday objects. To test this, the researchers will use
              fMRI to examine brain activation patterns in human adults as they process
              letters or pictures of everyday objects. We hypothesize that humans recognize
              individual letters using the same brain regions used for object recognition,
              rather than using a specialized brain region dedicated solely to letter
              recognition. The capacity for language is often thought to set humans apart
              from other primates, and some scientists have suggested that the human brain
              has special adaptations to support language. The second goal of this project is
              to ask the same question about rhesus monkeys' brains. Because letters are
              meaningless and unfamiliar to untrained monkeys, special adaptations for letter
              recognition should not be detected in monkeys' brains. However, if
              letter-specialized regions are detected in monkeys' brains, this specialization
              is not likely driven by language capacity, but may instead reflect the novelty
              of letters to monkeys. The present proposal looks in more depth at this
              controversial idea of brain specialization for language by using functional
              magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare brain activation patterns in
              humans and rhesus monkeys.

One challenge of this research is to determine
              whether monkeys are paying attention to and processing letters or objects. Like
              human infants, monkeys cannot express themselves through language or follow
              spoken or written instructions. However, both infants and monkeys will look
              longer at stimuli that are new, and looking time will decrease as a stimulus
              becomes more familiar. Therefore, by recording looking times in rhesus monkeys
              during fMRI scanning, Dr. Josephs and colleagues can monitor whether rhesus
              monkeys are paying attention to the stimuli and can distinguish different
              letters or objects from each other.  This novel application of the looking time
              procedure to an fMRI environment makes comparative studies of humans and other
              species more feasible than currently available techniques that require months
              of monkey training.  In addition, recording looking time minimizes the need for
              spoken communication or motor responses while in the MRI scanner. Therefore,
              this approach may be more widely applied to other special populations that
              cannot speak or move due to brain damage or developmental disability.

The
              findings from this research are expected to provide important new understanding
              into evolution and functional organization of the human brain.  In addition,
              several junior researchers will receive outstanding training in research
              experience.

