Title       : Perfusion fMRI for Cognitive Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0224007

Award Number: 0224007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $754020             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Detre detre@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Perfusion fMRI for Cognitive Neuroscience

Abstract

With National Science
              Foundation support, Dr. Detre and colleagues will conduct a three-year
              investigation aimed at developing perfusion functional magnetic resonance
              imaging (fMRI) for use in studies of cognitive brain function.  The sensitivity
              of perfusion fMRI will be increased by adapting the methods to higher magnetic
              field strengths.  Image quality will be improved by using imaging strategies
              that are not sensitive to degradation by variations in adjacent tissue types. 
              In addition to optimizing image acquisition parameters, image analysis
              procedures will also be developed that are specifically optimized for perfusion
              fMRI.  These acquisition and analysis methods will be disseminated to other
              scientists through publications, web-sites, and integration into currently
              available software packages.  

The larger goal of this project is to
              validate perfusion fMRI for use in cognitive brain mapping in experiments on
              face recognition and risk-taking.  As is commonly known, MRI methods provide
              detailed pictures of brain anatomy. However, the methods can also be used to
              see how brain function changes with cognitive tasks such as learning, memory,
              language, and emotion.  This is possible because blood flow increases in a
              brain region that is being used to perform a specific task.  Most MRI methods
              used for mapping brain function only detect such regional blood flow changes
              indirectly.  Over the past decade, Dr. Detre and others have been developing
              noninvasive perfusion MRI methods to directly measure cerebral blood flow. 
              These methods can quantify blood flow both at rest and with cognitive tasks. 
              Because the measurement is direct and quantitative, the results are more stable
              over space and time than with indirect and non-quantitative methods.  They will
              be particularly useful for examining behavioral state changes, learning, and
              responses to pharmacological manipulation.  Perfusion MRI can also measure
              changes in certain brain regions that are difficult to visualize with other
              methods due to the presence of adjacent tissues with differing effects in a
              magnetic field.  It is anticipated that perfusion fMRI will contribute
              significantly to our understanding of cognitive brain function over the next
              decade.









