Title       : CISE Research Resources: Being There: Mobile Devices for Community and Commerce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0224392

Award Number: 0224392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren Terveen terveen@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Riedl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Konstan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shashi Shekhar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               EIA 0224392
 Terveen, Loren
 Konstan, Joseph A.
 Riedl, John
Shekhar,
              Shashi
 University of Minnesota  Twin Cities 

Title:  CISE RR: Being There:
              Mobile Devices for Community and Commerce 

This project, building a mobile
              computing system, provides a set of mobile, connected, location-aware computing
              units consisting of Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) and wearable displays
              with some input ability to allow experimentation to affect deployment on the
              types of interfaces, applications, and technologies needed as these devices
              become commonplace. Devices will carry out a wide range of experimentation,
              from tightly controlled experiments to broad field studies, from previously
              planned extensions of existing research to last-minute ideas created by student
              projects, and from small pilot studies to large deployment studies. The
              infrastructure supports research projects in human computer interaction (HCI),
              recommender systems, and spatial data management for environments where users
              are mobile; specifically, 
Ubiquitous Peripheral Social Interaction (UPSI),
              
Location-Aware Recommender Systems, and
Spatial Data Management for Location
              Aware Mobile Computing.
The first project presumes availability of several
              wireless communication channels. Information, at the periphery of users'
              attention, is constantly streamed to the device and displayed as a scrolling
              "ticker." A user carries a pocket computer and wears a Networked Wrist Device
              linked by Bluetooth. This approach presents challenges in populating and
              managing the information model driving the interaction, designing the interface
              for the networked wrist display, coupling the wrist computer and PDA, and
              identifying the types of tasks for which this interaction paradigm is suitable.
              Using algorithmic and interface research, pilot tests, real-world experiments,
              and metrics, the second project looks into suitable applications among wired,
              disconnected, and wireless connected recommenders. Given local and temporal
              patterns of users, this project examines when it is appropriate to interrupt
              its user with a recommendation, how to present recommendations most effectively
              across multi-device interfaces, and how to compute recommendations when the
              user is disconnected from the network. The last project looks into the
              requirements of spatial data management systems for applications like mobile
              location based recommendation systems. The project gathers a trace-based
              workload from location aware recommendation systems to evaluate solutions for
              critical design decisions such as algorithms for map compression and predictive
              pre-fetching strategies to cache relevant segments of maps based on past
              spatial queries, scheduled meetings locations, and related information. The
              educational plan includes integration of the platform into courses and student
              involvement in summer internships.

