Title       : EPNES: Security of Supply & Strategic Learning in Restructured Power Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0224747

Award Number: 0224747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfredo Garcia agarcia@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ennio Stacchetti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the first part of our proposal, we study the long run reliability (or
              security of supply) of electricity markets under price caps. This (and other
              forms or market intervention) cast doubts on the market ability to provide new
              capacity in a socially efficient manner (scale, technology and timing). We
              propose to develop a dynamic game model of investment. A full characterization
              of equilibrium investment will shed light on a number of contentious issues in
              the restructuring debate. Examples include; the possibility of "boom and bust"
              cycles in equilibrium, a potential technology bias with harmful effects on the
              environment, and the need to incorporate capacity markets.

In the second
              part of our proposal we study learning algorithms as potentially powerful
              computational tools for electricity markets. The complexity of electricity
              markets calls for the incorporation of some form of bounded rationality in the
              modeling efforts. However, when players use simple, adaptive (possibly
              sub-optimal) rules, repeated interaction may induce equilibrium outcomes in the
              long run. Although, many "agent based" simulation models have been advocated
              for analyzing electricity markets, they lack solid theoretical support on
              issues such as convergence and/or the nature of equilibrium. In this proposal
              we will represent competition in electricity markets under certain congestion
              management protocols, as games with a special structure, i.e. "potential
              games'. For this class of games, the class of "fictitious play" learning
              algorithms has been proven to converge with probability one. Computational
              tests a large-scale model will serve to validate and assess the practicality of
              the class of strategic learning models proposed.

