Title       : SGER: Bio-doped Electronic Ceramics for Use in Microsensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0224642

Award Number: 0224642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pelagia Gouma pgouma@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 7209,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the incorporation of enzymes or antibodies in sol-gel
              processed transition metal oxides with the purpose of producing advanced
              biosensor components for the detection of harmful chemical and biological
              species. The proposed approach primarily addresses the material-related issues
              for creating controlled porous structures in which the biomolecules may easily
              "fit" and function. Environmental transmission electron microscopy will be
              employed to assess the nature of bio-molecule-sol-gel matrix interactions. A
              prototype of a functional biosensor will be delivered at the end of the
              program. The operating principle of this device is based on the release of
              gaseous ammonia as a result of biochemical reactions occurring between the
              biological component and the analyte. The bio-doped ceramics to be developed in
              this program are expected to find uses beyond the fields of bio-sensing and
              medical diagnostics.

The ability to detect the presence and monitor the
              concentration of harmful gaseous species and biological agents is important in
              any setting where humans live and work. This work proposes a novel way to "mix"
              ceramic and biological materials together in order to produce novel composites
              for use as sensing elements in miniaturized and possibly implantable,
              biosensors (such as a urea detector). These novel materials are expected to
              allow for faster and more efficient detection of contaminants and dangerous
              species. The students working on this project will learn new materials
              processing and characterization techniques and will obtain valuable skills on
              biosensor development that will be very useful for their professional
              development.

This proposal was submitted in response to the Dear Colleague
              Letter: Next Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems
              [nsf 02-112].



