Title       : fMRI Analysis of Emotion Regulation and its Developmental Trajectory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0224342

Award Number: 0224342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $776080             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Gabrieli gabrieli@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              FMRI Analysis of Emotion Regulation and Its Developmental
              Trajectory

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support, Dr.
              Gabrieli and colleagues will conduct a three-year investigation of the
              maturation of the brain systems that support emotion regulation using
              functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a noninvasive technique that can
              identify brain regions recruited for specific emotion and cognition processes. 
              Children and young adults, ages 8 to 30, will participate in two experiments
              that examine how they regulate an initial emotional response to either highly
              negative or highly positive photos.  These studies will identify what brain
              regions initially respond to negative or positive emotional experiences, and
              what brain regions then support cognitive regulation of those emotional
              responses.  Of greatest interest is how these brain responses mature, or
              change, from late childhood through early adulthood.

Emotion regulation, the
              subject of this research, is a fundamental aspect of human experience and
              behavior, and the interaction between thoughts (cognition) and feelings
              (emotions) that guides how people evaluate and act on what is going on around
              them.  Successful emotion regulation makes people resilient to difficult
              circumstances, and thus can help people avoid distress or psychiatric diseases
              such as major depression.  Successful regulation also promotes prosocial
              behaviors, such as not behaving violently in response to feelings of anger.  It
              is generally thought that children and adolescents have emotions as strongly
              felt as do adults, but that the cognitive regulation of emotion matures slowly
              as children and adolescents learn how to regulate their feelings in ways that
              promote positive social interaction and long-term mental health.  Risky
              behaviors that pose severe health threats for adolescents may reflect the
              faster maturation of emotion than cognitive aspects of emotion regulation. 
              Although emotion regulation is thus important for health and for social
              functioning, little is known about its underlying cognitive and neural
              mechanisms. For example, it is unknown whether people use the same brain
              systems to regulate negative and positive emotions.  Further, nothing is known
              about how these mechanisms support the normal maturation of emotion regulation
              in childhood and adolescents.  The findings from this research may also
              illuminate the roots of mental diseases that reflect a disadvantageous
              development of emotion regulation pathways of the human brain.

 

