Title       : Twin Valleys Outdoor Education Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0224711

Award Number: 0224711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Ehmann Bill.ehmann@plattsburgh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Plattsburgh
	      
	      Plattsburgh, NY  12901    518/564-2000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Plattsburgh State University, under the direction of
              Dr. William J. Ehmann, Assistant to the Vice-President for Academic Affairs, to
              assess the educational and scientific potential of a university-affiliated
              property in Essex County, New York.  The site, known locally as "Twin Valleys",
              lies within Adirondack Park and consists of a 660-acre forest with a lodge,
              cabins, and classrooms.  Twin Valleys was used for summer science camps in the
              1960s and 1970s, but the facilities have degraded and the site is currently
              under-utilized.  Special natural features of the site include mature white pine
              forest, wetlands, and other habitats for migratory birds, mammals, salamanders,
              and at least 14 species of native plants listed as "vulnerable" in New York
              State.  With this grant, Plattsburgh State will be able to carefully
              re-evaluate the property, with specific attention to its suitability for
              further development as a biological field station.

A team of six experts
              associated with the Organization of Biological Field Stations (OBFS) will visit
              Twin Valleys with PSU faculty and staff and representatives of College
              Auxiliary Services, Inc., (the not-for-profit corporation that owns the
              property) in December 2002 and May 2003.  Through site visits, interviews, and
              workshops, OBFS experts will help assess the scientific merits of the property,
              prioritize needed upgrades in facilities, and suggest academic programs that
              could use the site to best advantage. A Team Leader will coordinate production
              of a written report and will make an on-campus presentation in September 2004. 
              The recommendations are expected to provide a basis for requesting more funds
              to implement the vision, through funding agencies such as the National Science
              Foundation, private foundations, and institutional donors.

Eleven biological
              field stations in New York focused on terrestrial systems are currently listed
              with the Organization of Biological Field Stations, but the closest is 85 miles
              from Plattsburgh, which significantly reduces access for our teaching and
              research and that of other area educational institutions.  PSU is interested in
              1) furthering existing partnerships with North Country high school students and
              teachers and community colleges, 2) supporting field components of a proposed
              undergraduate major in ecology as well as current majors in Biology and
              Environmental Science, and 3) creating new research affiliations.  Twin Valleys
              also has the potential to attract audiences from large urban areas such as
              Boston and New York City (both within a half-day's drive) to Adirondack Park, a
              6 million-acre forest conservation area and model of public-private
              partnership.


