Title       : EPNES: Decentralized Resources and Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0224837

Award Number: 0224837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399641             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lester B. Lave ll01@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex Farrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarosh N. Talukdar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Granger Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0224837
Lave

The PIs study distributed resources (DR) in nine areas
              involving large electricity networks. Our approach is interdisciplinary,
              involving electrical engineering, economics, and policy analysis.  They will
              apply their research to improve undergraduate and graduate education, as well
              as provide training for working professionals.  The research areas
              are:
Distributed Decision-Making: Use economic theory and autonomous agents to
              decentralize decision making in complex systems, such as transmission grids and
              micro-grids, to increase efficiency and reliability.
Engineering-Economics of
              DR: Study engineering design, operation, and economics of DR to understand how
              to optimize power system configuration for efficiency and
              survivability.
Reliability & Security: Examine the reliability and security
              implications of introducing DR into current and advanced electric power systems
              with advanced computer modeling methods. 
Air Quality & Life Cycle Analysis of
              DR: Quantify the implications of DR for local and regional air quality and
              examine the environmental implications of DR over its life cycle.
DG &
              Microgrids: Examine the technical difficulties of establishing microgrids
              powered by DG on total energy use, reliability, cost, and
              security.
Interconnect Standards: Examine DR interconnection issues, e.g.,
              implications for conventional systems and profitability.  
General Regulatory
              Environment: Study how the actions of regulators expedite or impede the
              introduction and operation of DR, e.g., microgrids.
Other Applications of the
              Technology: Examine the implications of DR for small-scale systems, e.g., power
              systems on ships.
Benchmarking Test Systems: Test the research in IEEE-PES
              testbeds and utility systems.
Education: Design new courses and teaching
              modules for graduate & undergraduate course and develop new material for
              disseminating this research to practitioners.


