Title       : Expansion of the Housing Facilities for Guest Researchers at The University of
               Oklahoma Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0224635

Award Number: 0224635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Weider   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Wellborn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl D. Hambright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of Oklahoma Biological Station
              (UOBS), under the direction of Dr. Lawrence J. Weider, to construct a triplex
              housing facility to expand and enhance housing accommodations for guest
              researchers and students.  UOBS is located on the north-shore of Lake Texoma,
              an approximately 88,000 surface acre reservoir on the Oklahoma-Texas border. 
              The UOBS faculty has both a national and international reputation in the field
              of aquatic (freshwater) ecology.  Since the founding of UOBS in 1949, thousands
              of guest researchers, students, and conference participants have visited and
              stayed at the Biological Station for various lengths of time.  Nearly 1100
              publications, 150+ theses, and nearly 1100 undergraduate research projects have
              been completed at UOBS during its history.  However, one long-term problem at
              UOBS, relates to the inadequate housing facilities for long-term guest
              researchers (e.g. sabbatical visitors, post-docs) and accompanying family
              members.  

A 2,800 square-foot, fully-furnished, triplex guest researcher
              housing facility will be constructed at UOBS near Willis, Oklahoma.  Each of
              the three fully-furnished apartments will consist of two-bedrooms, two
              bathrooms, a fully-functioning kitchen and living/dining area.  (One of the
              units will be handicapped-accessible.)  The triplex unit will be constructed on
              a recently purchased 7.3 acre tract of land, adjacent to the main UOBS campus. 
               This three-apartment unit will greatly enhance the ability of UOBS to host
              longer-term guest researcher teams (between 1-6 persons per apartment) or guest
              researchers and accompanying family members, and will complement present
              housing facilities that serve the needs of short-term guests (i.e. students,
              conference participants).  

UOBS is one of the largest field stations in the
              south-central U.S., and its year-round faculty/staff conduct research related
              to important issues in aquatic ecology ranging from exotic species invasions to
              ecosystem studies of water resources.  Nationally and
              internationally-recognized researchers collaborate with UOBS scientists.  The
              benefits from constructing such a housing unit will be seen via increased guest
              researcher use, allowing more researchers to access unique habitats and
              features of the region surrounding UOBS, and tackle some of the key ecological
              and environmental issues related to aquatic resources.  With an increased
              researcher-base, other programs at the station such as on-site undergraduate
              and graduate training, as well as public education programs (i.e. K-12
              outreach) will benefit from enhancement of the intellectual/scholarly climate
              at UOBS.  


