Title       : The Big Sky Institute: Accessing and Understanding the Greater Yellowstone
               Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2002    
File        : a0224826

Award Number: 0224826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17216              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Graumlich lisa@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
This award supports the development of a strategic plan for the Big Sky
              Institute, a newly formed interdisciplinary research and education organization
              located at a site near Yellowstone National Park.  Over the past decade
              researchers at Montana State University and other institutions have made great
              strides in understanding the diversity and dynamics of the Greater Yellowstone
              Ecosystem (GYE), especially in respect to three important aspects: processes
              that govern biological diversity, especially as it relates to ecosystem
              management; adaptations that permit life in the diverse thermal features of
              GYE; and, variations in the local climate over the last thousand-plus years as
              judged by proxy records of such variability and of ecosystem response.  At
              present, efforts to build on this progress are limited in scope and integration
              by lack of modern laboratory and educational facilities at or near field sites
              in the GYE.  Using the funds provided through this award, BSI will engage in an
              institutional planning process that will lead to development of a new,
              multi-user research and education facility.  The development of BSI as a
              research and education facility will increase access to the GYE for field
              research and teaching in the areas of  biodiversity, thermal biology, and
              climate change. The improved infrastructure will allow increased public
              participation in, and improve public understanding of federally-supported
              research activities while forging a unique partnership between the private
              sector tourist industry and a land grant university in a rural area.

