Title       : CISE Research Resources: Collaborative Research Resources: Collaborative Data
               Analysis and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0224424

Award Number: 0224424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Woodward paul@lcse.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Du  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon B. Weissman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest F. Retzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ted J. Wetherbee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0224424
Paul R. Woodward
David H. Du; Ernest F. Retzel; Jon B. Weissman;
              Ted J. Wetherbee
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities

CISE RR: 
              Collaborative Data Analysis and Visualization

This project, creating a
              high-speed network that will enable coupling a large number of PCs and
              Macintoshes to tackle computationally-intensive problems during idle times,
              enhances the collaboration between the University of Minnesota Laboratory for
              Computational Science and Engineering (LCSE), Center for Computational Genomics
              and Bioinformatics (CCGB), Academic Distributed Computing Services (ADCS), the
              computer science research group, and Fon du Lac Tribal and Community College. 
              The facility will be used as a platform to perform off-line batch jobs related
              to visualization and data mining.  Augmenting network, storage, and graphics
              rendering capacity for a pre-existing student lab, the project will link
              together approximately 100 workstations at UMN via a Gigabit Ethernet network
              to service an interdisciplinary group or researchers.  UMN collaborating teams,
              with on exception, will move the new Digital Technology Center (DTC) into a
              common location at the heart of the campus.  This common location creates a
              special opportunity to exploit the workstations as a powerful data analysis and
              visualization engine for the genomics and scientific visualization applications
              of CCGB and the LCSE.  The use of workstations during the time of low student
              utilization is expected to provide five-to ten-fold increases in data storage
              capacity and bandwidth, data mining processing power, and image rendering
              power.  The collaboration with computer scientists, on distributed computing
              techniques and networked storage technology, plays a vital role in realizing
              the benefits.  The project, involving two students from Fond du Lac Tribal
              College, provides platforms for research in cluster network design,
              cost-effective commodity-based storage area network design and operation,
              distributed computing, and distributed visualization.  A fully connected
              Gigabit Ethernet network will be built by the collaborating team.  This
              network-switching fabric will interconnect the machines of the ADCS lab and the
              machine and network attached storage of the CCGB and LCSE.  A gigabit Ethernet
              link to UMN OC-12 Internet-2 connection will enable large amounts of data to be
              brought into the combined environment (e.g., NSF TeraGrid).  The project
              leverages resources and expertise to create a combined capacity for data
              analysis and visualization far greater than existed in any one of the
              participating labs before the collaboration.

