Title       : Renewal of the IRI/CIMS R&D Innovation and The Competitive Performance of Large
               U.S. Industrial Firms Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0224451

Award Number: 0224451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: RAYMOND M WOLFE                         
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 31,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20902              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alden S. Bean a.s.bean@worldnet.att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 8802      RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT STATIST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The existing Industrial Research Institute/Center for Innovation Management
              Studies (IRI/CIMS) Annual R&D Survey, which supports research on management of
              technological innovation, will continue to be performed.  The survey instrument
              will be augmented so that data can be collected on variables that are uniquely
              relevant to firms and business units operating in dynamic and technology
              intensive business sectors such as software, defense/aerospace, and
              telecommunications.  Coverage will be increased to seek answers to important
              questions about the contribution of R&D to innovation outcomes, such as product
              and process cost reductions and revenue enhancements.  Finally, the breadth of
              the Annual Survey sample will be expanded to include firms that may not be
              members of the Industrial Research Institute (IRI), but whose R&D activities
              are of significant economic interest and importance.  In addition, the
              Management Practices Survey (MPS), which was last conducted in 1996, will be
              repeated.  The MPS contributes greatly to the database by providing information
              about changes in the structure of R&D organizations and laboratories that occur
              over time, shifts in the business goals supported by R&D, and changes in R&D
              program planning and project selection emphasis.  Such information has
              strengthened researchers' ability to interpret trends that have appeared in the
              Annual Survey data.
