Title       : CISE RR: Collaborative Research on Wide-Area Network Computing Using Virtual
               Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0224442

Award Number: 0224442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose A. Fortes fortes@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Y. Su  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan D. George  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jose C. Principe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-24442
Fortes, Jose A.
Figueiredo, Renato; George, Alan D.; Principe,
              Jose C.; Su, Stanley Y.
University of Florida 

CISE RR: Collaborative
              Research on Wide-Area Network Computing Using Virtual Machines

This
              collaborative research project (with Dinda at Northwestern University, proposal
              02-24449), requiring a wide-area test bed that enables experimentation with,
              access to, and running of applications on unique resources, requests PC
              clusters, an IBM server, and other ancillary hardware for projects
              in
1.	Distributed grid computing and information processing systems using
              virtualization technologies and
2.	Information grids with real users and
              research applications requiring capabilities enabled by virtual machines
              (VMs).
Deploying a distributed system based on clusters connected by local,
              metropolitan, and wide area networks, the work aims to provide a virtual
              computing and data storage interface to clients that access resources on the
              underlying "information grid." The test bed includes the following defining
              features.
1.	Virtualization capabilities, i.e., the ability to instantiate
              independent logical machines that can be multiplexed on physical processors (or
              fractions of them), storage and network I/O channels, and can use distinct
              operating systems;
2.	Wide-area distribution, i.e., Internet-linked test bed
              components in independently-administered geographically-apart network
              domains;
3.	Scalable capacity for both scientific computing and information
              processing; and
4.	Heterogeneity.
Interrelated projects enabled by the test
              bed towards the goal of developing VM-based middleware for grid computing
              include virtualized end resources, monitoring and prediction, interactive
              computing, virtual file systems, data management, cycle selling, and security.
              Information grids and web portals for use of CAD tools are also enabled by the
              infrastructure for dissemination of collaborative research results and data,
              and for digital government services. From the availability of the portals and
              grid-computing resources benefits are expected in brain-machine interfaces,
              biologically-inspired nanocomputing, auction-based computing, distributed
              knowledge applications, medical imaging and data archiving, light-scattering
              spectroscopy, and mixed non-linear optimization. Collaborations include the
              Sigmicro microarchitecture center, NETCARE and the Purdue-hosted Nanohub
              (enabling users to run tools for computer architecture and parallel computing,
              and nanoelectrnics). The project impacts some minority serving institutions
              such as Chicago State and Florida A& M Universities and enables a testbed for a
              transnational digital government projects involving Carnegie Mellon University,
              University of Belize, University of Colorado, University of Florida, University
              of Massachusetts, and Pontificia Universidad Catolica Madre y Maestra of the
              Dominican Republic.

