Title       : CISE Research Resources: R4: Rescue Robots for Research and Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0224401

Award Number: 0224401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $823269             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin R. Murphy murphy@csee.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 0224401
Murphy, Robin R.
University of South Florida 

Title:  CISE RR:
              R4: Rescue Robots for Research and Response 

This project, developing and
              maintaining robotics kits for nationwide research, aims at facilitating
              research into robot-assisted urban search and rescue (USAR) by providing
              resources to overcome barriers presenting research involvement (lack of access
              to domain experts and meaningful sites combined with the need for expensive
              specialized equipment), while at the same time increasing the availability of
              mobile robots for an emergency response. This work supports the
Expansion of
              existing caches of robots suitable for USAR research in two different
              regions,
Training on these robots, data collection, and access to these robots
              and data sets via the Internet,
Field data collection exercises with fire
              rescue professionals at USAR sites, and
 Loan of robots to individual
              researchers. 
The work facilitates groups, without rescue robots or access to
              domain experts, to have access to data and/or work directly with USAR robots
              and rescue experts in the field. 

Rescue robotics is a complex domain in
              need of fundamental breakthroughs in distributed computing, networking and
              communications, software engineering and interoperability, real-time
              multi-threaded control, user interfaces and human-robot interaction, robotics,
              sensors, and artificial intelligence (AI). Hence, the Computing Research
              Association declared this research area a "grand challenge." Four types of
              research equipment, micro-robots, mini-robots, image processing and video
              capturing equipment, and sensors, enable researchers to collect the data and
              evaluate their work in the cited areas. In addition to integrating existing
              technology and eliciting effective cooperation between professionals and
              researchers in the case of an emergency, the project provides education in
              robotics for homeland defense, and the potential to safeguard lives of rescue
              workers and locate victims.

