Title       : EPNES: Intelligent Power Routers for Distributed Coordination in Electric Energy
               Processing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0224743

Award Number: 0224743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499849             (Estimated)
Investigator: Agustin A. Irizarry agustin@ece.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose Cedeño  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miguel Velez-Reyes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bienvenido Velez-Rivera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Summary
Intelligent Power Routers for Distributed Coordination in Electric
              Energy Processing Networks
Proposal No:  0224743

	We propose to develop a
              model for the next generation power network using a distributed concept based
              on scalable coordination by an Intelligent Power Router (IPR). Our goal is to
              show that by distributing network intelligence and control functions using the
              IPR, we will be capable of achieving improved survivability, security,
              reliability, and re-configurability. Our approach builds on our knowledge from
              power engineering, systems, control, distributed computing, and computer
              networks.

	Each IPR has embedded intelligence into them allowing the IPR to
              switch power lines, shed load and receive/broadcast local state variable
              information to and from other routers.  The information exchange capability of
              the routers provides coordination among themselves to reconfigure the network,
              even when the designated principal control center of the system has collapsed
              due to a natural or man-made disaster. The IPRs may achieve their task using
              direct monitoring, area-limited on-line security assessment and adaptive
              controls to establish a coordinated and local set of control actions to either
              apply preventive countermeasures against high risk operating conditions prior
              to a potential disturbance or corrective countermeasures following a
              disturbance.

	Our proposed approach borrows from computer networks, where
              data is moved over geographically distant nodes via data routers. In the event
              of a component or system failure, the IPRs will make local decisions and
              coordinate with other routers to bringing the system, or part of it, back into
              an operational state.  Each IPR will operate on a Peer-to-Peer system (P2P) or
              a mesh hierarchy making irrelevant whether its inputs come from power producers
              or other IPRs, 

Research and education will be integrated through
              undergraduate research (UR) and adapting research results for class examples,
              seminars and demonstrations.  The structure of UR will be improved by using the
              affinity research group model [31], a model that integrates the knowledge and
              skills required for research to those required for cooperative work.


