Title       : Third International Conference on Numerical Solution of Volterra and Delay
               Equations; Tempe, Arizona, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0224848

Award Number: 0224848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zdzislaw Jackiewicz jackiewi@math.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Feldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0224848
PI: 			Jackiewicz,
              Zdzislaw
Institution: 		Arizona State University 
Program: 		Applied
              Mathematics
Program Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: The Numerical
              Solution of Volterra and Delay Equations

The purpose of this project is to
              organize the Third International Conference on the Numerical Solution of
              Volterra and Delay Equations. It will bring together leading world class
              experts in the newest numerical methods for delay equations, in the most recent
              aspects of high performance supercomputers, and in the most important
              applications (especially biological) that lead to Volterra problems.  It will,
              for the first time, emphasize research and applications in the newly developing
              vast area of delay and Volterra partial differential and integral equations. 
              The subject of Volterra equations includes functional differential equations
              (delay, advanced, and neutral) as well as delay and Volterra partial
              differential equations.  

Volterra equations have have important and crucial
              applications as models in diverse areas of science and engineering; e.g.
              biomathematics and medical science, population dynamics, control theory,
              electrodynamics, neutron transport theory, oscillation theory, and
              viscoelasticity.  These applications arise in a variety of critical areas such
              as modeling of the spread of infectious diseases and biological agents like
              anthrax and smallpox, the design of nuclear reactors and weapons, aerospace
              technology, the guidance of drone weapons and intelligence vehicles, and even
              the design of super computers themselves.  Since the solution of Volterra and
              delay equations can almost never be obtained in closed form, computational
              techniques must be used.  By their nature, Volterra problems create enormous
              demands on computing resources (both on computer speed and memory) and
              therefore require the use of extremely high performance super computers. This
              conference will bring together the experts in these areas and will help to
              stimulate various research efforts.

Date: June 25, 2002

