Title       : FSML: Improvements in Computer Connectivity and Auxiliary Power at the Bigelow
               Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2002  
File        : a0224695

Award Number: 0224695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74205              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Phinney DPhinney@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for improvements in the electrical systems
              and communications infrastructure at The Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences,
              an independent, non-profit oceanographic institution and marine laboratory. 
              The improvements include installation of fiber optic cabling that will provide
              high-speed digital connections between the administration building and the five
              outlying buildings at the Laboratory's site on McKown Point. Currently, a
              majority of the research staff does not benefit from the speed of the
              laboratory's T1 connection due to the lack of fiber-optic connections between
              the various outbuildings and the hub in the administration building. The
              integrity of the Laboratory's power system will be protected from power outages
              by the addition of a new 100kW auxiliary power generator that will augment
              limited back-up power currently provided by an existing 37kW generator. This
              addition will provide a reliable supply of electricity needed to maintain
              instrumentation, computers and large numbers of sensitive living, refrigerated
              and frozen materials stored at the Laboratory.  Major activities that will
              benefit from both improvements include the Provasoli-Guillard National Center
              for the Culture of Marine Phytoplankton, an NSF-supported collection of marine
              algae, and the J.J. MacIsaac Facility for Flow and Imaging Cytometry, which
              serves users at other institutions as well as those at The Bigelow Laboratory. 
              The improvements in communications is also expected to facilitate educational
              use of the laboratory's facilities, which has increased significantly in recent
              years. 
