Title       : CISE Research Resources: Matching Advanced Visualization and Intelligent Data
               Mining to High-Performance Experimental Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0224306

Award Number: 0224306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $850000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. DeFanti tom@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oliver Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jason Leigh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Grossman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-24306
DeFanti, Thomas A.
Grossman, Robert L.; Leigh, Jason; Nelson,
              Peter C.; Yu, Oliver
University of Illinois  Chicago 

CISE RR: Matching
              Advanced Visualization and Intelligent Data Mining to High-Performance
              Experimental Networks 

This project, developing techniques for advanced grid
              computing with focus on visualization and data-mining applications, aims at
              setting up a high-performance, high-bandwidth Grid matched with Visualization
              and Data Mining Research. The Grid is made up of Lambdas (clusters of PCs) that
              are connected by high-bandwidths connections to other clusters. Software and
              toolkits to enable high-performance applications will be built with the goal of
              attaining a high-speed optical metropolitan-area network to be used in the data
              mining and visualization applications. The project expands grid technology to
              infrastructure, protocols, network memory and distributed control, and
              applications in constraint logic programming. Since optical networking
              technology is rapidly migrating from ultra-expensive long-haul carrier
              implementations to affordable regional- and metro-area community networks, this
              project explores inherent flexibilities in these new technologies to support
              large-scale data, visualization, and collaboration-intensive applications with
              very advanced real-time demands. Thus, application-aware software and
              middleware will be created to help interconnect tomorrow's terascale-class
              machines with distributed petabyte data stores, remote sensors, instrumentation
              and visualization over gigabit/sec to terabit/sec networks. LambdaNodes,
              defined as PC clusters with storage and visualization coupled to like clusters
              by numerous wavelengths (called lambdas), will be used connected by lambda
              networks to create a prototype metropolitan-scale LambdaGrid. With the goal of
              optimally matching data mining and visualization to high-performance optical
              networks with e-Science and homeland security model applications as expected
              drivers (achieving a 10x or greater end-to-end improvement over today), the
              equipment and support enables the following:
1.	Matching data-mining and
              visualization capabilities on clusters to emerging wavelength-rich
              networks,
2.	Distributing parallel computation and rendering for
              high-resolution volume visualization,
3.	Providing applications signaling and
              control of both electronically and optically switched lambdas,
4.	Measuring
              and monitoring multi-gigabit circuits over multiple wavelengths,
5.	Providing
              users with networks that have known and knowable bandwidth and
              latency,
6.	Investigating high-availability/uninterrupted cluster computing to
              support time-critical collaborations,
7.	Addressing real-time applications in
              security domain, and, eventually, security of the data as well,
8.	Integrating
              metropolitan-scale LambdaGrids with the emerging Global Grid and the National
              TeraGrid, and
9.	Incorporating distributed data mining and visualization into
              undergraduate African-American-centered coursework and research through the
              Virtual Harlem Project.

