Title       : Partial Oxidation of Alkanes in a Dual Bed Membrane Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0224435

Award Number: 0224435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo E. Wolf wolf.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Eduardo E. Wolf 
Institution:  University of Notre
              Dame
Proposal Number: 0224435

Research:

The short term objective of this
              work is to study the direct partial oxidation of propane to acrolein, a
              chemical intermediary, using a dual membrane reactor.  This reactor has unique
              characteristics that can increase product yield, which is typically low for the
              propane to acrolein reaction when carried out in a conventional fixed bed
              reactor.  The use of alkanes, such as propane, for the direct conversion by
              partial oxidation to acrolein is more attractive than the current process that
              uses propylene, a more expensive feedstock.

The long term objective is to
              study, evaluate and optimize the capabilities of the dual bed membrane reactor.
               The reactor consists of an inert membrane, placed concentrically to the
              reactor tube wall.  Catalyst is located between the membrane and the reactor
              wall and the membrane acts as a barrier between the oxidant (air/oxygen) and
              the reducing feed (propane) thus reducing the danger of flammability
              encountered in reactors with premixed feeds.  What makes the dual bed membrane
              reactor unique is that it has two catalyst beds fed separately so that reaction
              conditions can be independently controlled in each bed.  This is different from
              two reactors in series in that in the dual bed membrane reactor the two
              catalyst beds are connected.  The gas phase intermediates emerging from the
              first bed are utilized in the second bed.  It thus allows the independent
              control of temperature, catalysts, gas phase intermediates, and residence time
              in a single reactor.


Impact:

If the results are successful, the
              technology could be extended to other alkane functionalization reactions to
              provide a less energy intensive technology for the environmentally clean
              production of oxygenate intermediates for the chemical industry.  The project
              will integrate research and teaching both at the graduate and undergraduate
              level.

