Title       : Improvement to Facilities at CMU Biological Station on Beaver Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0224795

Award Number: 0224795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163887             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Gillingham james.gillingham@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

     
	A grant has been awarded to Central Michigan University,
              under the direction of Dr. James Gillingham, to improve the facilities at
              Central Michigan University Biological Station (CMUBS) on Beaver Island in
              Northern Lake Michigan.   CMUBS has been in operation as an academic arm of CMU
              since 1966 and annually offers facilities for research and education to
              students and faculty from all over North America and beyond. Enrollments in
              undergraduate and graduate courses offered at CMUBS have grown steadily over
              the past two decades, and CMU has shown support for this growth through the
              periodic upgrade of the academic facilities at CMUBS.  The addition of faculty,
              staff and student residence units, remodeling and upgrading existing service
              facilities and the planned construction of a media center reflect this support.
                Since 1966 and up to a little more than a decade ago, research was conducted
              at CMUBS on an intermittent basis.  In spite of the attractive and easily
              accessible pristine habitat on this island and the wealth of biological
              problems that could be answered involving the surrounding ten-island
              archipelago, research activity was historically limited to a few faculty within
              the Department of Biology at CMU. In 1989, in an attempt to stimulate the
              development of an active and on-going research program at CMUBS, the first
              building devoted totally to research was constructed.  Although this provided
              adequate laboratory space for several years, by the mid 1990s this research
              building reached its capacity.   A recent and rapid increase in interest in
              undergraduate, graduate and faculty research at CMUBS not only created a
              significant shortage of research space, but brought into focus the need for
              basic research equipment that would allow field-gathered aquatic and
              terrestrial data to be processed and analyzed on site at CMUBS.
  
 	This
              grant will be used to 1) construct an addition to the existing research
              building and 2) purchase several basic, but essential, equipment items.  The
              research building addition will be constructed and functionally attached to the
              existing facility and will effectively double its size.  A water still with
              storage tank and an automatic autoclave sterilizer will replace existing but
              inadequate similar pieces of equipment and an ultra-low temperature freezer and
              computerized weather station will provide equipment items never before
              available at CMUBS.

 These improvements will not only indirectly give
              further support to the long-standing quality teaching program at CMUBS, but
              will significantly augment its research program in such a way as to allow such
              new avenues of research to be pursued such as microbial ecology, molecular
              ecology and geographical biodiversity.  These improved facilities will allow
              CMUBS to more effectively attract both faculty and graduate student researchers
              from other universities thus providing them with opportunities to study at a
              field station strategically located in northern Lake Michigan and would provide
              CMU faculty and students (undergraduate and graduate) a unique opportunity to
              gain experience from well-know researchers.

