Title       : The Eigenvalue Problem in Geometry and Combinatorial Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0224966

Award Number: 0224966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shanghua Teng steng@cs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the study of the eigenvalue problem in geometry,
              combinatorial optimization, and information organization. As part of this
              research, efficient algorithms will be developed for computing and
              approximating eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a large class of matrices that
              arise in graph theory, computational geometry, scientific computing, and
              Internet applications. The following topics will be investiagated.
              

Eigenvalues/eigenvectors for graph partitioning: The main theoretical and
              algorithmic questions are: how to properly use eigenvalues/eigenvectors to find
              the best possible partition in a graph, and what is a tight 
upper bound on
              the eigenvalue for graphs such as meshes, planar graphs, bounded genus graphs
              and 
N-body graphs. Constructive answers to these questions can be used to
              design efficient algorithms and software for graph partitioning.

Geometric
              methods for eigenvector approximation: The primary goal is to understand
              whether geometry methods can be developed and used to speed up the
              approximation of eigenvectors. Many graphs such as planar graphs, finite
              element meshes, and nearest neighborhood graphs come with a geometric
              characterization. One can use their geometric structures in the solution and
              approximation of the eigenvalue problem.

Applications of the eigenvalue
              problem to data clustering and information organization: The objective is to
              relate the work on spectral graph partitioning to the singular value
              decomposition based method for data clustering, such as the Latent Semantic
              Indexing (LSI). These spectral techniques for term-document matrices has
              enjoyed empirical success, but had heretofore been without rigorous
              mathematical explanation. The project is expected, by extending our techniques
              for spectral partitioning, to provide 
a mathematically sound framework and
              efficient software for these important problems in information retrieval.

