Title       : CISE Research Resources: Teams of Miniature Mobile Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0224363

Award Number: 0224363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos npapas@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria L. Gini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Boley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley J. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Durfee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0224363
Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos
Daniel L. Boley; William K. Durfeet;
              Maria L. Gini; Bradley J. Nelson
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities

CISE
              RR (Collaborative):  Teams of Miniature Mobile Robots

This project,
              redesigning and manufacturing a team of Scout-Ranger robots, improvises on the
              current scout design through novel design schemes, software development,
              sensory fabrication, and processing sensory data in real time.  The research
              extends work based on a previous generation of Scouts.  The institution
              developed a heterogeneous robotic team emphasizing the "Scout" robot, launched
              and controlled by a larger platform, the "Ranger."  After deployment, Scouts
              have a unique combination of mobility modes including rolling and hopping,
              multiple sensing capabilities for navigation (e.g., cameras, microphones), full
              communications for data and instructions (controlled by cellular phones), and
              onboard computational resources.  Their functionality is increased by actuated
              wheels and miniature grappling hooks and can serve applications such as
              reconnaissance, earthquake rescue operations, homeland security space
              exploration, fire rescue missions, hostage release operations, etc.  Their
              design requires a compromise in power, sensor types, locomotion, and size. 
              However, rather than concentrating on size, this work focuses primarily on
              communications, sensor fabrication, and sensor placement.  Solutions to
              research problems are sought in areas of miniature-robot design, communication
              for distributed robotics (especially in low-bandwidth situations), and resource
              allocation for distributed robotics.  Specifically:
1.  Designs of miniature
              robots: modifying original scout design, giving special care to
              image-processing
2.  Software support for Robot Teams: sharing resources
              leading to decision making and planning
3.  Tradeoffs between sharing
              communication channels and performance in motion detection
4.  Sensor
              fabrication in the micro fabrication lab
5.  Analysis of sensory data (images)
              of the team of robots; seeking optical positioning of the sensor to maximize
              coverage/redundancy
6.  Analysis of traffic patterns (of humans) in a
              building
7.  Detection of anomalies on those patterns, or detection of unusual
              situations (i.e. smoke): using method of Principal Direction Divisive
              Partitioning
8.   Innovative uses of Scouts: tele-rehabilitation, dynamic
              hopping devices, etc.
The educational plan includes the incorporation and
              mentoring of women and minority students.  The robots will be used not only in
              Computer Vision and Robotics classes, also, in Algorithms, Data Structures,
              Operating Systems, and Artificial Intelligence.  Outreach activities, proposed
              for K-12, along with public outreach complement the research agendas.

