Title       : CISE-RR: Instrumentation for Research on Energy Aware Multimedia Information
               Terminals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0224387

Award Number: 0224387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dariusz Czarkowski dcz@pl.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yao Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elza Erkip  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Karri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 0224387
Czarkowski, Dariusz
 Erkip, Elza 
Goodman, Davis J.
Karri,
              Ramesh.
Wang, Yao
Polytechnic University of New York 

Title:  CISE RR:
              Instrumentation for Research on Energy Aware Multimedia Information Terminals
              

This project, performing studies related to minimizing the energy consumed
              by mobile cellular and wireless networking hardware, builds a framework to
              understand, model and measure power consumption, as well as dynamic allocation
              of resources to affect power consumption in portable multimedia communication
              devices. Three platforms constitute the focus for implementing signal
              processing algorithms (general microprocessors, e.g., Pentium and ARM), digital
              signal processors (DSP), and reconfigurable hardwarefine grain field
              programmable gate arrays (FPGA) and coarse grain Application Specific
              Programmable Processors (ASPP). The work considers two communications systems
              that will carry the majority of traffic in wireless Internets: cellular
              networks and wireless local area networks (WLAN). Because battery life depends
              not only on total energy drain but also on the voltages employed in the
              terminal and the temporal profile of energy consumption, the research includes
              experiments with lithium batteries to determine the effects on battery life of
              continuous discharge and pulsed discharge with various peak-to-average ratios.
              The results of these experiments are then merged with the results of signal
              processing and communications studies in an energy-management testbed that
              verifies predictions and demonstrates the effects of the new adaptation
              techniques. Hence, the following four components form the research plan:
              
Theoretical and simulation studies exploring power allocation among source
              coding, channel coding, encryption, and transmission in a multimedia, multiuser
              setting 
Measurement and design study examining the power and energy
              requirements of signal processing algorithms and producing a software library
              of software modules, FPGA configurations, and ASPPs that can be dynamically
              selected by a portable device 
Measurement and design study creating an
              intelligent power supply system that takes into account effects of battery
              discharge characteristics and demands of algorithms implemented on
              microprocessors, DSPs, FPGAs, and ASPPs.
Creation of experimental testbed
              running in the WLAN network from the results of the first three studies 
The
              experimental testbed addresses three areas of research: 
Power allocation
              among different components of the processing pipeline (source coding, channel
              coding, encryption, transmission); 
Power and energy requirements of signal
              processing algorithms, producing a library of various granularity modules
              (software, FPGA, ASPP) to be selected dynamically; and
Power supply system
              that takes into account both battery characteristics and algorithms needs.
On
              the educational side, specific plans involve undergraduate students hands-on
              work, organization of workshop, and summer school. Industrial partners and
              international collaboration also form part of the research.


