Title       : Researcher and Student Housing at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0224092

Award Number: 0224092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian C. Billick ibillick@rmbl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Inouye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Irwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for Proposal #0224092, "Researcher and student housing at the Rocky
              Mountain Biological
Laboratory
A grant has been awarded to Rocky Mountain
              Biological Laboratory (RMBL), under the direction
of Dr. Ian Billick, to build
              researcher and student housing at the RMBL. The RMBL is a biological
              field
station that was established in 1928 to promote research and education
              in the biological sciences.
Unaffiliated with any university, scientists from
              numerous institutions throughout the United States visit
the RMBL to conduct
              research and teach classes. Because students and researchers come from around
              the
world, the RMBL provides housing in cabins onsite. Many of these cabins
              were constructed by miners in
the 1880s or biologists in the early 1930s. This
              grant will allow the RMBL to provide safe, clean living
facilities in order
              for scientists to conduct their work and for students to take classes.
This
              grant will pay for the construction of three cabins, one noncooking cabin and
              two cooking
cabins. The noncooking cabin will house six students in a
              two-story building. Each student will have a
private bedroom and there will be
              a shared living area. The cabin will be of basic wood construction with
gas
              heating. The two cooking cabins will each house either a researcher family or
              four graduate students.
There will be two bedrooms upstairs with a cooking and
              living area downstairs.
The RMBL has been an important center for biological
              research and training. Scientists at the
RMBL have published approximately
              1000 papers in peer reviewed journals. In addition to basic research
conducted
              at the Lab on diverse areas such as butterfly physiology, stream ecology, and
              marmot behavior,
science at the RMBL has been used to shape the revision of
              the Clean Air Act and has documented how
climate change will affect montane
              ecosystems. Scientists who have trained or worked at the Lab have
been
              influential in identifying the problem of human population growth as well as
              founding the academic
disciplines of Conservation and Restoration Biology to
              provide solutions to real world problems. By
providing funding to renovate
              housing, the National Science Foundation will help ensure that scientists
              at
the RMBL can continue to provide information policy makers need in making
              decisions concerning the
environment.
