Title       : Community Integrated GIS Pilot Project: Sharing Scientific and Local Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0224513

Award Number: 0224513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93492              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Brehme cbrehme@islandinstitute.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan Michaud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Island Institute
	      386 Main Street
	      Rockland, ME  048410648    207/594-9209

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1733,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Community Integrated GIS Pilot Project: Sharing Scientific Knowledge

This
              project develops a  Regional Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Resource
              Center that will be part of a small but expandable GIS-based network for the
              dissemination and exchange of scientific data. The pilot structure initially
              consists of three community GIS workstations (separately- funded) on the Maine
              islands of Vinalhaven, Islesboro and Peaks, which will be integrated with and
              supported by the regional center at the Island Institute's facility in
              Rockland, Maine. The project is supported by other community-oriented research
              agencies, including: The Lobster Conservancy (Friendship, Maine), The Fisheries
              Atlas (MIT/Rutgers), the Maine Office of GIS, the Maine State Planning Office,
              the Gulf of Maine Information Exchange (GOMINFOEX) and the National Mapping
              Project (USGS).  GIS, while increasingly a common medium for the management and
              exchange of data between the science community and the lay audience, has great,
              and largely unexplored, potential as an educational and spatial decision
              support tool in small communities. However, training and capacity-building are
              needed on the ground in order to forge an effective and lasting link between
              communities and scientists, and to increase the practical use of scientific
              data locally. Two of the primary assumptions of this proposal are that 1) small
              towns have unique strengths which often are not maximized in the current
              education and information management paradigms; and 2) that new technologies
              like GIS create new opportunities to reconsider these paradigms. This project
              explores ways in which communities can be uniquely empowered through linkage to
              locally relevant scientific data.  The aim is to create a truly integrated
              capacity to access, process, create, and share scientific data through GIS in
              small communities and to facilitate the connection between this local
              information and the broader world of science and research.  The local GIS
              workstations will be common-format repositories for locally relevant
              geospatial
information - a valuable resource for formal and informal
              place-based education, research activities, and community-based resource
              management. 

