Title       : BE: MUSES: Modeling Eco-Industrial Symbiosis: Greening of Regional Industrial
               Materials Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0224014

Award Number: 0224014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansour Rahimi mrahimi@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maged M. Dessouky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Muhammad Sahimi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1794      BE-Mat Use:Science,Eng&Society
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1689,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE) for: Materials Use: Science,
              Engineering, and Society (MUSES) study aims to develop new tools to assess and
              optimize industrial networks in world city-regions. World city-regions are
              enormous digesters of material, water and energy, functioning as intermediate
              nodes in linear systems of material consumption and waste discharge.  An
              ongoing transition from linear to looped systems in industrial regions holds
              great promise for reducing adverse human impacts of production and service
              industries on the environment.   The tool to be developed through the proposed
              research will facilitate the design of alternative regional industrial networks
              with the objective of achieving an eco-industrial symbiosis.  The overarching
              field of endeavor is industrial ecology with collaborations from industrial
              geographers, regional econometricians, reverse logistics and eco-industrial
              park development.  The team will attempt integration of models and data sets
              from these fields and will develop an operational model of waste and by-product
              flows in a regional industrial network.  The results will be ground-truthed
              through a series of discussions with a number of representative firms in a
              major urban infrastructure.

This work will function as a proof of concept
              research, clarifying additional expertise needed to carry out a full-scale
              modeling and analysis.  USC's NSF Integrated Graduate Education Research and
              Training (IGERT), "Sustainable Cities Program" (SCP) will coordinate the
              efforts among the multiple disciplines.  The Program already funds several
              undergraduate and graduate students from a variety of fields related to
              sustainable development.  The proposed project presents new opportunities for
              the SCP to train and educate undergraduate students and doctoral fellows in
              theoretical and applied industrial ecology.
