Title       : EPNES: Designing an Efficient and Secure Power System Using an Interdisciplinary
               Research and Education Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0224873

Award Number: 0224873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $592754             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Johnson jj@scs.howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The national need for improving the security of the electric power networks and
              efficiently has been articulated by several government policies including
              President Bush's energy policy that calls for the creation of a national energy
              grid, and the elimination of regulatory provisions that limit investment in
              transmission and curtail power generation.

This requires a new dynamic
              architecture that can sustain vulnerabilities under different perturbations to
              the system while remaining stable, secure and cost-effective. The Center for
              Energy Systems and Controls at Howard University (CESaC) will develop a
              multidisciplinary perspective, to attain an integrated sustainable scalable and
              survivable power system in the context of a deregulated US market system. A
              multi-layered network inculcating system technology, financial network within
              the context of various market structures and environmental soundness will
              employ modem control and optimization techniques. It will also invoke risk
              assessment strategies in constructing, the architecture thereby generating and
              delivering power efficiently at minimum cost without sacrificing environmental
              and reliability standards.

Proposed research and educational activities will
              increase the participation of under represented groups across disciplines as a
              workforce and intellectual leaders to address the complex secured networks of
              the future. A system simulator will be designed and developed to study various
              test beds based on the Navy challenge problem and civilian test bed system
              provided by utility companies that CESaC has worked with in the past.
Results
              of the education pedagogy, including the assessment of the learning outcomes
              will be disseminated via cdrom, and distance learning information system
              technologies.
