Title       : Spin Electronics Novel Optical Probe of Carrier Spin Coherence in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0224154

Award Number: 0224154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Cundiff cundiffs@jila.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              century initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
              novel optical techniques for measuring carrier spin coherence on
              semiconductors. Spin based electronics promise to provide increased processing
              speed, increased integration density and decreased power consumption as
              compared to traditional microelectronic devices. In addition, electronic spins
              in semiconductors are attractive for implementation of quantum information
              processing. These advances require a firm understanding of electronic spin
              coherence in semiconductors and the development of techniques to probe spin
              coherence. Previous work has shown that n-doped GaAs has a remarkably long spin
              coherence time, which has prompted further investigation. Semimagnetic
              semiconductors display much shorter spin coherences, however the stronger
              carrier-ion interaction makes them better candidate materials for fabrication
              of spin filters and related devices.

The techniques developed in this
              project will complement the predominant technique of Faraday rotation and
              provide information that is not available using Faraday rotation. Of specific
              interest is why the Faraday rotation signal saturates for high optical
              excitation density. The techniques are based on transient four-wave-mixing.
              Specifically, by using a three pulse excitation scheme, it is possible to probe
              the spin coherence and generate a signal in a background free direction. A
              modification of this that uses the fifth order nonlinear optical response can
              generate a Raman-spin echo, which will remove the effects of inhomogeneous spin
              precession rates due, for example, to a variation in the g-factor with
              k-vector. The experiments will be performed on n-doped GaAs and semimagnetic
              semiconductors such as CdMnTe and ZnMnTe. The former samples are commercially
              available wafers, while the latter will be provided by collaborators at the
              University of Dortmund, Germany. In the latter case, initial experiments to
              probe the optical coherence (as opposed to spin coherence) will be performed
              because it is not well understood and provides important insight into
              carrier-ion spin scattering, which is crucial for electronically controlled
              ferromagnetism. Preliminary Faraday-rotation experiments will be performed on
              both the GaAs and semimagnetic semiconductor samples to provide a connection to
              experimental results from other groups. During this grant, both spin-coherence
              and Raman-spin echo experiments will be performed on n-doped GaAs. For the
              semimagnetic semiconductors, optical coherence and spin coherence experiments
              will be performed. 

