Title       : The Wisconsin Vertebrate Fossil Project: Engaging High School Students and
               Teachers in Field-based Exploration and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0224554

Award Number: 0224554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Slaughter rich@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph L. Skulan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Wisconsin Vertebrate Fossil Project

The Wisconsin Vertebrate Fossil
              Project (WVFP) is a two-year pilot to be operated by the University of
              Wisconsin Geology Museum. WVFP will engage Wisconsin high school teachers and
              students in the discovery and study of vertebrate fossils, primarily from
              Wisconsin caves. WVFP totally integrates field experiences and inquiry-based
              classroom activities with original and important scientific research. The
              educational and scientific aspects of this project are united by a common goal:
              the production of high-quality scientific data by high school students. These
              data will be of far-reaching and contemporary scientific importance. As
              production of these data can be accomplished only by students with the
              knowledge and enthusiasm required to complete scientific research projects, the
              scientific success of the project hinges on its success in educating students.
              WVFP begins with a one-week summer workshop in which participants will conduct
              field work in Wyalusing State Park, located in the southwestern quarter of
              Wisconsin. Student and teacher participants will discover, collect, and learn
              to identify fossils of small vertebrates such as amphibians and reptiles. 
              Following the workshop, participants return to their schools. Under the
              supervision of project staff during frequent follow-up visits, they will
              process and identify raw fossil samples loaned to them by the Geology Museum.
              Processed fossils, along with student identifications, will be returned to the
              Geology Museum.

