Title       : Collaborative Research: DOT -- Distributed Optical Testbed to Facilitate the
               Development of Techniques for Efficient Execution of Distributed Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0224427

Award Number: 0224427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie E. Taylor taylor@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Dinda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alok Choudhary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel J. Mambretti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA- 0224427
Taylor, Valerie
Choudhary, Alok; 
Dinda, Peter A.; 
Mambretti,
              Joel J.
Northwestern University 

Title:  CISE RR: (Collaborative)
              DOT--Distributed Optical Testbed to Facilitate the Development of Techniques
              for Efficient Execution of Distributed Applications 

This collaborative
              proposal with Illinois Institute of Technology (Sun, 02-24377) and the
              University of Chicago (Foster, 02-24187), acquiring data nodes and compute
              nodes at five sites, contributes to build a Distributed Optical Testbed (DOT).
              The DOT system, a product of the paradigm shift from large-scale applications
              running on large parallel systems at single sites to those running on
              distributed systems, has come about by the availability of high-speed optical
              networks (E.g., Starlight, TeraGrid 40 Gb/s network, the PacificRail 10 Gb/s
              network). This shift necessitates techniques that allow applications to
              efficiently utilize distributed systems. In contrast to parallel systems, these
              systems must exploit two characteristics:
Heterogeneity of resources
              (processors and networks) and 
Dynamic changes in performance of shared
              resources, especially wide area networks. 
The system, consisting of Linux
              clusters at six geographically different sites interconnected via two existing
              research DWDM networks, I-WIRE and OMNInet, involves the following sites:
              Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT),
              National Center for Supercomputer Applications (NCSA), Northwester University
              Chicago Campus (NU-C), Northwestern University Evanston Campus (NU-E), and the
              University of Chicago (UC). DOT will facilitate the following research
              activities in the area of distributed applications:
Dynamic Load Balancing
              (Taylor)
Performance Monitoring and Prediction (Dinda, Sun, Taylor)
Data
              Management (Choudhary, Foster)
The first activity develops techniques
              utilizing network performance predictions that take into consideration the
              heterogeneity of the processors and networks of distributed systems to
              dynamically balance the load during execution. The second extends performance
              monitoring, modeling and prediction techniques that have been focused on
              parallel systems and broadband network to distributed systems with optical
              networks and different topologies. The last develops techniques that manage the
              distributed data such that the actual data location is transparent and the data
              is accessed efficiently. These research activities are driven by three
              applications that have been parallelized using MPI, such that the applications
              can be easily ported to DOT:
ENZO, an adaptive cosmological
              application,
Cactus, an open framework used to solve Einstein's equations,
              and
AudioVoice, a virtualized distributed audio application with physical
              simulations that have real-time deadlines and varying computational
              demands.
Each application presents challenges, which include adaptivity,
              flexible framework, and simulations with real-time deadlines.
 

