Title       : CISE Research Resources: Reconfigurable Multi-Node Wireless Communication
               Testbed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0224410

Award Number: 0224410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tan F. Wong twong@ece.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yuguang Fang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               EIA 0224410
PI(s):  Wong, Tan F.
                        Fang, Yuguang; Shea,
              John M.
Institution:   University of Florida 

Title:  CISE RR:
              Reconfigurable Multi-Node Wireless Communication Testbed 

This proposal,
              developing a real-time wireless communication testbed of six reconfigurable
              transceiver nodes that operate in the 900MHz or 2.4GHz ISM band, enables
              conducting experiments on network protocols and communications techniques.
              Performing real-time experiments over real-life wireless communication
              channels, the infrastructure enables three projects.

Collaborative
              Communications,
Wireless Medium Access Control Protocol Design and
              Experiments, and
Reliability-Based Hybrid ARQ.

The first project concerns
              collaborative transmission and reception among multiple nodes in a wireless
              network. Techniques of distributed space-time coding and distributed and
              iterative decoding will be employed respectively to achieve transmit and
              receive diversity. The second project uses the test-bed to test new medium
              access control (MAC) protocols that employ a set of back-off algorithms
              designed to avoid potential "future" collisions and reduce the percentage of
              idle slots. These MAC protocols have the advantage of fast collision resolution
              and hence give much higher throughput. The last project develops and
              investigates a new hybrid automatic repeat request (ARQ) scheme that can take
              advantage of reliability estimates generated by soft-input, soft-output (SISO)
              decoders. This ARQ scheme transmits additional information for the unreliable
              bits, and this information is used to do additional decoding. The test-bed will
              be utilized to perform real-time experiments on a real-life channel to examine
              the throughput and delay performance of this ARQ scheme, which can be evaluated
              via simulations otherwise.
On the educational side, the platform provides
              integrated design training to undergraduate students. Conducting simulation
              studies on algorithms developed on the research projects, students will employ
              the test-bed to perform off-line experiments over a real communication channel
              to identify possible weaknesses of the algorithms developed based on
              theoretical models and then fine tune the algorithms to produce a real-time
              FPGA implementation.



