Title       : Development of a field-based geochemistry course in the Dallas-Fort Worth
               Metroplex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0224551

Award Number: 0224551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Leybourne mleybo@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Development of a Field-Based Geochemistry Course in the Dallas-Fort Worth
              Metroplex

This project develops a national model for a field and laboratory
              based course
in geochemistry at the undergraduate (and graduate) levels.
              Geosciences majors at the University of Texas at Dallas enrolled in
              Geochemistry (a required course for B.Sc.
majors) will spend a total of 10
              days in the field working from a pontoon boat on Lake
Texoma, a large
              impoundment north of the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) metroplex. During
the field
              exercises students will collect data and samples for analysis in the ICP
              analytical
facility (inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer and optical
              emission spectrometer
instruments). The purpose of the field and laboratory
              work is to incorporate Problem-Based Learning (PBL) methods into geochemistry
              instruction. The incorporation of the
field work into the geochemistry course
              work is intended to stimulate students interest in
geochemistry, provide
              hands-on experience with state-of-the-art sampling and
              analytical
methodologies, and mesh research with learning to foster student
              understanding of real
world problems. The study area, Lake Texoma receives
              input from two major river systems, the Red River and the Washita River. The
              Red River drains west Texas and Oklahoma and as a result typically has elevated
              salinity (typically 1200 - 2000 mg/L total dissolved solids, TDS, where it
              enters the lake and > 12,000 mg/L TDS in some of the headwater reaches), making
              the Red River one of the saltiest major rivers in the world. In contrast, the
              Washita River drains west-central Oklahoma and is much fresher (typically < 500
              mg/L TDS). Mixing between these two rivers results in horizontal chemical
              gradients in addition to vertical chemical gradients that occur during
              development of a summer thermocline. Large deltas are forming where both the
              Red and Washita rivers enter Lake Texoma, as a result of elevated suspended
              loads. This dynamic geochemical and sedimentological system is therefore ideal
              for students to develop hypotheses, collect the necessary data to test those
              hypotheses and then communicate the results as term papers and oral
              presentations. Following the semester-length course, a graduate student and two
              undergraduates will be involved in sampling the lake through the summer to
              track geochemical changes as the thermocline develops. After year one of the
              project, the course will be assessed by two external experts in geology and
              pedagogy. Their recommendations will be incorporated to improve the course for
              year two.

