Title       : Spin Electronics: Optical Studies of Spin Injection in
               Semiconductor/Semiconductor and Metal/Semiconductor Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0224225

Award Number: 0224225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Athos Petrou petrou@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. McCombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Dzyubenko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              century Initiative, Program solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
              the study of spin injection phenomena in a variety of spin Light Emitting
              Diodes (spin-LEDs).   The proposed work has an experimental as well as a
              theoretical component.   All the devices that will be used in the experimental
              part of  this proposal have an AlGaAs(n)/GaAs/AlGAs(p) light emitting diode at
              their core.  The circular polarization of the diode emission is used to
              determine the relative spin population of carriers confined in the GaAs layer. 
              In ZnMnSe based spin-LEDs the ZnMnSe contact layer is the source of spin
              polarized electrons.  In this well studied system we will explore the effects
              of resonant heating of the electrons and holes at various components of the
              device using far infrared (FIR) monochromatic light.  Choice of FIR wavelength
              and of the externally applied magnetic field allows  the study of the effects
              of heating  on the diode output of a particular carrier (electron or hole) in a
              specific component of the device  (GaAs, AlGaAs or ZnMnSe  layer) .  In
              addition we will be using specially designed, n-type modulation doped ZnMnSe
              spin LEDs  to  study the population statistics of electrons confined in the
              GaAs quantum well of each diode and  occupying a number of Landau levels.  The
              second type of spin-LED will use a ferromagnetic layer as  spin polarized
              electron source with the easy magnetization axis perpendicular to the  layer
              axis.  Such a device is expected to require only a few hundred Gauss to
              operate, as opposed to a few tesla required by the recently developed Fe-based
              spin LEDs in which the easy magnetization axis lies in the Fe layer plane.  
              Finally we plan to explore AlGaMnAs as a potential spin polarized hole
              injector.  

In the theoretical component of this proposal we describe
              investigations of several important phenomena that take place in spin injection
              LEDs and affect the operation and efficiency of these devices.  We propose to
              investigate the capture process of the carrier in the GaAs wells and the
              subsequent energy relaxation to the lowest confinement subbands  e1 and h1. 
              The role of phonon emission and the associated spin-flip processes will be
              explored.     

A very close and synergistic relationship between the
              experimental and the theoretical components of the proposed work is expected to
              contribute to the success of the project.

An educational aspect of the
              proposed work will involve two undergraduate students in the program (from
              Physics and/or EE) working closely with graduate students and the
              co-investigators.  Support for the undergraduate students will be requested
              from the REU program

