Title       : EPNES: Integrated MEMS and Advanced Technologies for the Next Generation Power
               Distribution System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0224228

Award Number: 0224228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald T. Heydt heydt@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esma S. Gel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce C. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norma F. Hubele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George G. Karady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project relates to electric power distribution: the delivery of
              electric power from a generation and transmission system to a point of
              utilization. An important power system component is the circuit breaker,
              essentially a switch, used to isolate and separate parts of the system under
              fault and certain other operating conditions. In this project, a radical
              departure from mechanical circuit breakers is planned: microelectrornechanical
              (MEMS) switches shall be operated at very high speed to effectuate rapid system
              operating configuration changes. The use of MEMS switches will allow the
              application of advanced optimal operating strategies to permit rapid
              disconnection of faulted components; rerouting of power from faulted segments
              to unfaulted segments; utilization of DC distribution in naval applications;
              and minimization of system losses. The economic aspect of the project shall
              relate to the optimization of the cost to benefit ratio of innovative
              distribution system designs.

An important element of the project is
              education over a range of individuals including industrial and electrical
              engineers, students and industry engineers, researchers and practitioners. The
              premise of the educational component is the value of cross-fertilization in
              engineering education. The objective is to utilize cross-disciplinary topics
              for motivation as well as education -- at the undergraduate, graduate, and
              continuing education levels. The intent is to expose industrial engineers to
              electrical engineering topics; engineering students of all disciplines to MEMS
              technologies; and electrical engineers to optimization and uncertainty
              (especially from an IE point of view).

