Title       : SGER: The Response of Marine Phytoplankton to Climate Change: Characterization
               of Rubisco Activase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0224078

Award Number: 0224078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rose Ann Cattolico racat@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Inorganic carbon plays a crucial role in regulating marine productivity and
              species composition in phytoplankton communities. Therefore understanding the
              mechanisms underlying inorganic carbon fixation by different phytoplankton
              assemblages is critical if we are to understand the response of phytoplankt on
              photosynthesis to global climate change, and to develop realistic models of
              biogeochernical carbon flux in the ocean.

Rubisco is a keystone enzyme that
              drives Calvin cycle function. However, it is now well documented that
              terrestrial plant Rubisco is catalytically non?functional without the
              co?operative interplay of Rubisco activase. To date, no information exists in
              the literature concerning the function of Rubisco activase for gLny
              chromophytic alga. In fact, except for Heterosigma akashiwo and two
              Cylindrotheca species, no data exists on Rubisco catalytic function for any
              other representative of this assemblage that is so critical in global carbon
              processing.

The Goals of this project are to: a) Isolate and characterize
              Rubisco activase using Heterosigma as model chromophytic algal species;  and,
              in particular, to b) Extend Rubisco activase studies to include diatoms since
              they rank as primary contributors in C02 management.

The study is feasible
              because: a) The cloned, putative Heterosigma activase gene has now been
              over?expressed in E. coli; b) Extensive analysis of Heterosigma Rubisco has
              been accomplished; c) Patterns of Rubisco mRNA production in response to light
              cues have been documented; d) Heterosigma and diatom Rubisco antibodies have
              been shown to cross react; e) Flow cytometric measurements of antibody?tagged
              Rubisco have been made.

While the effort in understanding the regulation of
              Rubisco by Rubisco activase in phytoplankton may be risky, this study will
              establish a primary database for chromophytic algae wherein the biochemistry of
              inorganic carbon processing via Rubisco/Rubisco activase interaction is
              deciphered. The long?term benefit this study is highly significant when
              considered in terms of predicting photosynthetic performance in response to
              climate change.

