Title       : CISE Research Resources: A National Logistical Networking Testbed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0224441

Award Number: 0224441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Micah D. Beck mbeck@cs.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Plank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miron Livny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack J. Dongarra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Wolski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-24441
Beck, Micah D.
Dongarra, Jack J.; Livny, Miron; Plank, James S.;
              Wolski, Richard
University of Tennessee - Knoxville 

CISE RR: A National
              Logistical Networking Testbed 

This project, investigating a distributed
              network storage architecture based on the Internet Backplane Protocol (IBP) and
              the external node (exNode) data structure, explores an approach to
              communication infrastructure, called Logistical Networking. This approach
              applies the Internet model of community resource sharing to network storage to
              infuse the network itself with storage resources that can be shared, scaled up,
              and exposed for external scheduling just like IP datagram delivery. A resource
              fabric that unifies the co-management of scheduling of data transport and data
              storage results, creating conditions for interoperable state management among
              distributed applications. The resources of the National Logistical Networking
              Testbed (NLNT) proposed attract the kind of diverse and heavy usage necessary
              to carry out critical research and testing on this technology under real world
              conditions. NLNT, an experimental communication fabric, places large "depots"
              of sharable storage on the nation's high performance network for the unbrokered
              use of the research community. These depots support the exploration and testing
              of Logistical Networking technology under meaningful loads by diverse
              middleware and application research groups. Its leading characteristics follow.
              NLNT
1.	Storage: scalably sharable. To help maximize the share use of
              time-limited lightweight allocations of network storage resources, NLNT uses a
              network storage technology, Internet Backplane Protocol (IBP). IBP closely
              models IP datagram service and follows Internet design principles for scalable
              sharing to create shared storage service that can scale globally.
2.	Target
              capacity: 1 Petabyte. Planned project funding and contributions from industrial
              partners support NLNT capacity of 100TB in year three. As the technology shows
              value, capacity grows.
3.	Deployment: aims for ubiquity. To provide high
              performance access and support heavy use, NLNT locates massive "depots" at two
              major Gigapops with direct access to the national backbone. High value of
              well-provisioned local depots encourages ubiquitous provisioning of
              storage.
The growth of the fully realized NLNT will be seeded by three storage
              depots: an advanced 11.68TB Storage Area Network system donated by Yotta Yotta;
              a special purpose 16GB RAM-only storage depot to be used for middleware
              research on high performance overlay networks; and a third storage cluster
              planned as a 88TB system attached to the network via a fast, non-blocking
              switch. The units will be placed at Gigapops in Chicago (Starlight) and near
              Washington D.C. (MAX). NLNT software foundation, IBP, has already been
              implemented and tested. Basic software components (xNode toolset for
              aggregating distributed storage allocations, the Network Weather Service (NWS)
              for monitoring and forecasting the performance of distributed resources, and
              the Logistical Backbone (L-Bone) for NLNT resource discovery) support NLNT
              middleware research, including scheduling with dynamic network topology, tools
              and methodologies to provide runtime support for key storage functions (e.g.,
              replication, caching, etc.), and high performance overlay network technology.
              The research involves collaborators from the Universities of California-Santa
              Barbara (Wolski) and Wisconsin-Madison (Livny).

