Title       : Conference Proposal in Support of Young Investigators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0224962

Award Number: 0224962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Harbourne bharbour@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues study problems in the overlap
of algebraic
              geometry and commutative algebra. A major goal
is to understand the structure
              of minimal free resolutions
of homogeneous ideals, particularly those defining
              
zero dimensional schemes. Ideals of interest range from ideals 
of fat
              points (motivated by their intimate connections to questions 
about linear
              systems on projective varieties),
to ideals of generic forms (work on which is
              closely connected to
work on the Weak and Strong Lefschetz properties 
for
              Artinian algebras, and, via Matlis duality, to work on 
fat points), to ideals
              whose quotients are Gorenstein rings (and 
hence involve problems on
              arithmetically Gorenstein subschemes 
of projective space, and Gorenstein
              liaison). This broad range of 
methods and motivations is a significant hurdle
              that young and 
future researchers must overcome to do productive work
in
              this area. This grant aims to advance the training and career 
development of
              young investigators and graduate students by providing
travel support to
              attend and interact with leaders in the field at 
an international conference
              addressing the research cited above.

Computational issues underlie much of
              this research, and machine 
computation is both an important tool in the
              research described 
above and the object of some of this research. However,
              work in this 
area can easily outrun the capability of any conceivable
              computer, so 
theoretical studies are essential not only for understanding the
              results 
of machine computations, but to achieve results beyond the reach of
              brute 
force computation. This is, for example, a significant issue for
              applications 
of the research described here to interpolation. Large data sets
              are a
common feature of modern life, whether in science, technology or
              business.
Such data sets often involve functional relationships among
              various
variables. Among the most tractable functions are the polynomials.
If
              one wants to model relationships with polynomials it is helpful to know
              
theoretically how complicated the worst case such polynomial might be
(as
              measured, say, by degree), whereas it might be expensive or impossible
              to
determine this directly. Such theoretical results about polynomials
are
              what researchers aim for in studying minimal free resolutions
of homogeneous
              ideals. 


