Title       : Spin Electronics: A new Spin for the Nitrides: Can Room Temperature
               Ferromagnetism be obtained in (Ga,Mn)N?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0224266

Award Number: 0224266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian T. Ferguson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              
Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses
              
on the development of a room temperature ferromagnetic compound
              
semiconductor material, Ga1-xMnxN, for spintronic devices based on the spin
              
property of electrons.  Many advances have been made in developing the
              
materials and devices for III-V compound semiconductor materials doped with
              
manganese (Mn), with Ga1-xMnxAs showing the most promise.  However, the low
              
Curie temperatures (Tc) for these materials require potential devices to be
              
operated at temperatures below 77K.  There is a need to produce a new class
              
of materials that can operate at, or near, room temperature to facilitate
              
the ease of measurement and the eventual commercialization of this
              
technology.  The III-Nitrides will be excellent for this application
              
because recent theoretical predictions show that Ga1-xMnxN could have Tc
              
higher than room temperature.  The Ga1-xMnxN can also be integrated into
              
existing base of microelectronics or optoelectronics existing for GaN-based
              
devices.
In this work it is proposed to produce Ga1-xMnxN by Metalorganic
              Chemical 
Vapor Deposition, the growth technique of choice for GaN based
              
devices.  There are no published reports of the growth of Ga1-xMnxN by this
              
growth technique at this time.  A systematic study of the growth of
              
Ga1-xMnxN will be completed.  Detailed characterization of the physical
              
properties Ga1-xMnxN will be investigated using x-ray analysis, Hall
              
measurements, time resolved photoluminescence, and other techniques.  A
              
novel Ga1-xMnxN/Ga1-xAlxN/Ga1-xInxN LED structure will be grown so that
              
spin injection can easily be investigated at room temperature.
The broader
              impact of this work is clear:  Spintronic devices that can be 
operated at or
              near room temperature will be required if quantum computing 
based on compound
              semiconductor materials is going to have a commercial 
viability in the
              future.

