Title       : Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology: Connectivity Enhancements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0224734

Award Number: 0224734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo-Ann C. Leong joannleo@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of Hawaii's Institute of Marine
              Biology (HIMB), under the direction of Dr. Jo-Ann Leong, to improve the HIMB's
              linkage to the internet, and therefore the larger research community.   Because
              of its location on a small island off Oahu, HIMB must negotiate daily with
              issues of transportation and communication.  Communication links with other
              members of the research community both on the main campuses at the University
              of Hawaii in Manoa and Hilo as well as our collaborators on the mainland United
              States and the international community are critical to the success of the
              institute, its faculty and students. 

	This grant will help to improve HIMB
              data management and communication systems and provide vastly improved
              electronic communications. Gigabit microwave dishes, provided by the
              manufacturer, will soon connect HIMB to the University of Hawaii communications
              system via Windward Community College.  This grant will provide high speed
              switches and routers on HIMB and allow the institute to take full advantage of
              the new high speed microwave connection to the internet.  A new server will
              enhance HIMB's data management and reduce software costs.

	The upgraded
              communications system will not only enhance HIMB's ability to communicate with
              colleague and collaborators the world over, but it will allow the high speed
              data transfer which is necessary for bioinformatics and the broadband
              communication needed for real time transmission of video.   This NSF grant will
              HIMB to take full advantage of the opportunity created by the donation of the
              high speed microwave radios.

