Title       : Development of a Geophysical Field Research and Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0224522

Award Number: 0224522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Cook                              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caesar R. Jackson cjackson@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guoqing Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dominic P. Clemence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1697      OPPORT FOR ENHANCING DIVERSITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Geophysical Field Research and Training Program

The proposed Geophysical
              Field Research and Training Program has two complementary objectives. The first
              is to broaden the geophysical science training facility to include
              field
equipment for geophysical surveying. Students will participate in design
              and
acquisition of geophysical surveys using sophisticated equipment, and in
              the collection of field data using a variety of geophysical methods. The
              purchase of geophysical equipment will strengthen the University's research and
              educational infrastructure in geosciences, and help faculty secure future
              funding for both academic and research projects. Geophysical field research and
              training will produce data and analysis that can be used as resources for both
              research and innovative course/curriculum development, hence having potential
              of improving faculty research productivity and providing students with a
              responsive learning environment. The second objective is  the complete
              geophysical characterization of a selected field site that will serve as a test
              case for seismic physical modeling and for computational modeling. It is
              anticipated that students coming through the proposed summer geophysical field
              research training program will be well equipped with knowledge and skills to
              conduct near-surface geophysical surveys using a variety of geophysical
              methods, hence broadening career paths for persons from underrepresented groups
              in the environmental, geotechnical, and engineering fields.

