Title       : Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0224700

Award Number: 0224700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keri Moore khmoore@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0224700
PI:Keri Moore
Institution:National Academy of
              Sciences
Title:"Committee on Geological and Geotechnical  Engineering"        
                                                                                 On November
              6, 2001, the U.S. National Committee for Rock Mechanics was reconstituted as
              the Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering (COGGE) through
              discussions with sponsors (particularly based on input from the National
              Science Foundation), members of industry, and the national and international
              research communities.  This transition is intended to improve the committee's
              responsiveness and to expand the scope and breadth of its activities.
The
              newly formed COGGE operates as a standing committee under the auspices of the
              National Research Council's Board on Earth Sciences and Resources and addresses
              scientific, technical, and public-policy issues pertaining to the engineering
              applications of Earth sciences. The committee's scope encompasses Earth
              processes and materials, including the mechanics of rock and soil, and focuses
              on safe and responsible human development, risk assessment, and mitigation of
              natural and anthropogenic hazards. The Committee's objectives are as
              follows:
1.	To identify, investigate, and report on questions relating to
              geological and geotechnical engineering to government, industry, academia, and
              the public;
2.	To promote the acquisition and dissemination of
              knowledge;
3.	To identify new technologies and potential applications;
4.	To
              improve public policy on geological and geotechnical engineering issues;
5.	To
              provide a forum for discussion among academic and professional groups,
              government agencies,                 and private industry; and
6.	To enhance
              national and international cooperation and exchange of information by acting as
              the U.S.                 representative for the International Society of Rock
              Mechanics and related organizations.
Research and engineering developments in
              geological and geotechnical engineering are driven by concerns for the natural
              and built environment (including radioactive and hazardous waste isolation,
              remediation, and mitigation), mitigation of natural hazards such as earthquakes
              and landslides, environmentally sound recovery of natural resources, and
              interest in defense structures in rock.  The technological, economic, social,
              and political impact of these issues engage the attention of many government
              agencies, business corporations, and public interest groups and posits the need
              for the COGGE.

The expertise, judgment, and strategic perspective of the
              COGGE serves to define and help initiate sponsored studies and other activities
              with respect to major areas of national interest or concern in which rock
              mechanics problems represent critical or limiting factors. In this regard, the
              committee offers a forum for meetings with federal agency liaison
              representative and other interested organizations to exchange ideas and
              information on important topics that may merit inquiry through the National
              Research Council.

