Title       : Infrastructure Improvement to the Palo Verde Biological Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0224726

Award Number: 0224726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Hartshorn ghartsho@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A grant has been awarded to the Organization for Tropical Studies
              (OTS) at Duke University, under the direction of PI Dr. Gary Hartshorn to
              improve the research facilities at OTS' Palo Verde Biological Station in Costa
              Rica.  OTS is a nonprofit consortium of 65 universities and research
              institutions from the United States, Latin America, Australia, Canada and South
              Africa. Founded in 1963, OTS' mission is to provide leadership in education,
              research and the responsible use of natural resources in the tropics.  OTS has
              operated the Palo Verde Biological station since 1971.

Located in lowland,
              monsoonally dry forest of Guanacaste Province, Costa Rica, OTS' Palo Verde
              station is in the heart of Palo Verde National Park that protects one of the
              largest remnants of tropical dry forest in Mesoamerica.  At Palo Verde, OTS
              works in cooperation with governmental and partner-organizations on scientific
              issues of training, conservation, environmental education, wetlands restoration
              and natural resources management.  Over the past decade the demand to use Palo
              Verde by OTS and non-OTS education groups has almost doubled, while research
              use continues to increase.  The facilities at Palo Verde are inadequate to meet
              the physical needs for student and researcher uses, such as laboratory and
              lecture space, offices and housing.  OTS will use NSF funds to build a new
              facility to house the station director and staff; construct a four?unit cabin
              to house up to eight researchers; construct a new boardwalk into the marsh; and
              purchase a new generator to provide a back-up power source.

The broad goals
              of this project are to:

Achieve OTS' long-term strategic goal of developing
              the Palo Verde Biological Station as a center of excellence in tropical dry
              forest ecology and wetlands management. 

Modernize the Palo Verde Biological
              Station to improve its education, research and conservation biology
              capabilities.

To stimulate and support the development and dissemination of
              research in tropical dry forest ecology. 

The full implementation of this
              project will enable OTS to continue to build its education program at Palo
              Verde, assist scientists in achieving the region's vast research potential, and
              work with researchers on wetlands protection at a time when agricultural growth
              in the lower Tempisque river basin is having a major impact on Palo Verde
              National Park.


