Title       : FSML Planning Grant for a Major New Land Addition at Archbold Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0224774

Award Number: 0224774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilary M. Swain hswain@archbold-station.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Archbold Biological Statn
	      P.O.Box 2057
	      Lake Placid, FL  338522057    813/465-2571

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports strategic planning for Archbold Biological Station which has
              recently expanded its land holdings through a significant private donation.
              Archbold was established in 1941 as a not-for-profit research institution
              dedicated to long-term ecological research. Staff, visiting investigators, and
              students conduct research focused on the environments of the Lake Wales Ridge,
              central Florida. Areas of research strength are population and conservation
              biology, emphasizing ecological changes over local and regional scales, and
              demographic shifts in local species.  In addition to research use, Archbold is
              used heavily for education by visiting classes and has its own active K-12
              program.  As the result of a large private donation, the area of the station
              will increase by 70%. The new land addition, which includes scrub habitat and
              extensive improved pasture, should allow the station to initiate new research
              programs in areas such as long-term studies in restoration ecology. With the
              funds provided through this award, the station will develop a long-term plan
              for future research, land management and education use of the new acquisition. 
              As part of this effort, existing information will be collected, and placed in a
              geographic information system containing both current and historical site
              information. Three planning workshops will be held: a Research and Land
              Management Workshop, an Education Workshop, and a separate Financial Plan
              workshop. The PI will compile workshop results into a Research and Land
              Management, Education and Financial Plans for the Reserve including 2, 5 and
              10-20 yr goals, objectives, measures of success, and a 5-year implementation
              timetable. Besides being used for management of the station, the plans will be
              made available to the public using the web and other distribution means.

