Title       : ME: Quantifying and Manipulating Seed Metabolic Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0224655

Award Number: 0224655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429062             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ohlrogge ohlrogge@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Pollard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yair Shachar-Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1063,1141,1168,1491,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant seeds are the world's most important agricultural product and the lowest
              cost biological source of carbohydrates, oils and proteins. An important goal
              of plant metabolic engineering is to develop chemical and nutritional
              production systems in seeds that are amenable to rational genetic engineering. 
              To reach this goal, a quantitative understanding of fluxes through biochemical
              pathways is needed for seeds. This project will begin to provide such an
              understanding through analysis and engineering of the accumulation of storage
              oils in Brassica napus seeds.

Three central questions about oilseed
              metabolism will be addressed:  How do seeds cope with the CO2 generated during
              oil synthesis? By what pathways does carbon flow from sucrose to oil and
              storage proteins and how are these pathways influenced by availability of
              light? What is the source of reductant for fatty acid biosynthesis? These
              problems are interlinked by shared metabolic intermediates and pathways and the
              processes they represent must be coordinately regulated during seed
              development.  

This project will lead to a quantitative description of
              metabolic networks in a major agricultural production system, and to improved
              strategies for engineering changes in metabolism. The resulting progress in
              understanding, modeling and engineering seed metabolism and the
              interdisciplinary training of students and postdocs will help move plant
              metabolic engineering from the current hit and miss state toward a framework of
              rational design and analysis.  This information will be crucial to expanding
              the use of plants as green factories that provide renewable and sustainable
              alternatives to petroleum and also aid nutritional improvements in the seeds
              that provide most of the world's food. 

 

