Title       : SGER: Development of Constant Tracer Infusion Techniques to Measure Fuel
               Substrate Flux in Flying Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0224954

Award Number: 0224954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99402              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher G. Guglielmo cgugliel@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1155,9150,9179,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Migratory birds are widely recognized as superb animal athletes.  When flying,
              birds exercise at twice the maximum rate of oxygen consumption attained by
              running mammals, and migrants can maintain this high intensity exercise for
              three or more days without water, food or rest.  Most notably, birds are able
              to use stored fat as the primary metabolic fuel for migratory flight - a
              capacity unexplained by models of fuel selection developed in running mammals. 
              Extensive study of mammals shows that fatty acids stored in adipose tissue
              should contribute minimally (10 %) to exercise as intense as flight, suggesting
              that birds must have a much enhanced ability to utilize lipids.  In spite of
              its many interesting characteristics, surprisingly little is known about avian
              exercise physiology because of the technical difficulties of conducting
              physiological studies of birds in flight.  The immediate objectives of this
              research are: (1) to determine the surgical techniques and experimental
              protocols necessary to apply constant tracer infusion and indirect calorimetry
              to birds flying under controlled conditions in a wind tunnel, and (2) to make
              the first direct, real-time measurements of fuel substrate (e.g. glucose and
              fatty acids) utilization during endurance flight.  Over the long term, this new
              experimental system will be used by the investigator to study how factors like
              diet nutrient composition, obesity and migratory season affect fuel selection
              in various bird species.  Ruff sandpipers (Philomachus pugnatus) will be
              trained to fly continuously for up to four hours in a wind tunnel while fitted
              with a respirometry mask to measure oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide
              production.  Minute quantities of isotopically labelled tracers (e.g. glucose
              or fatty acids) will be infused through a catheter into the circulation at a
              known rate.  Blood will be sampled periodically through a second catheter and
              expired carbon dioxide samples will be collected.  Metabolic fuel transport and
              oxidation will be calculated from the rate of tracer infusion, the relative
              concentration of labelled substrate in the blood and the rate of production of
              isotopically labelled carbon dioxide.  Successful completion of this study will
              mark a major advance in the basic understanding of avian exercise physiology. 
              Equally important, this research will catalyze a wide variety of future
              investigations by the development of a new experimental model.  Physiologists
              will for the first time be able to study processes like fuel metabolism, kidney
              function and gas exchange during flight, and to infuse hormones and
              pharmacological agents to examine the metabolic regulation of exercise in
              birds.  Birds have a nearly unparalleled ability among vertebrates to
              metabolize fats and they may provide insight into human obesity and its
              treatment.
