Title       : CISE Research Resources: Programming Environments and Applications for Clusters
               and Grids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0224453

Award Number: 0224453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarita V. Adve sadve@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Padua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wen-mei Hwu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjay J. Patel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laxmikant V. Kale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA- 0224453
Adve, Sarita V.
Hwu, Wen-mei;
Kale, Laxmicant V.; 
Padua, David
              A.; 
Patel, Sanjay J.
University of Illinois - Urbana/Champaign 

CISE RR:
              Programming Environments and Applications for Clusters and Grids 

This
              proposal, building a cluster platform connected by gigabit Ethernet, enables
              the "grid" to be used in the following four research projects:

Advanced
              Programming Environments for Cluster and Grids,
Parallel Applications for
              Clusters and Grids,
Dynamic Sequential Code Optimization, and

Architectures
              for Multimedia and Communications Applications.

The configuration permits
              experimentation on diverse subsystems with varying degrees of heterogeneity, up
              to three levels of parallelism, and a range of system sizes. The facility will
              be used in three ways: as an experimental test-bed for systems research on
              clusters and grids; as a prototype for the development of parallel and
              distributed applications for clusters and grids; and as a cost-effective
              production compute server for research in architecture, compilers, and machine
              learning. The shared facility addresses problems critical to computational
              infrastructure spanning architecture, compiler, and runtime research on systems
              ranging from single nodes to grids, covering various application domains.

