Title       : Micro-Ball Bearing Technology for Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0224361

Award Number: 0224361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reza Ghodssi ghodssi@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) are not yet reliable and efficient
              enough for electrical and mechanical power demands in Microsystems. Ball
              bearing mechanisms are expected to increase long-term reliability and
              efficiency in micro-machines through minimizing friction and wear, and to
              provide robustness and stability for moving parts while avoiding fabrication
              complexities. Therefore, "micro-ball bearing technology" is expected to have a
              pivotal impact on micro-machinery applications such as micro-generators,
              micro-pumps, and micro-coolers.

Our research program investigates the use of
              micro-ball bearing technology for MEMS and micro-machinery applications. This
              goal is addressed by developing a MEMS-based electrostatically actuated
              micro-motor integrated with silicon micromachined bearings which house
              stainless-steel micro-balls as support mechanism between rotor and stator. The
              micro-motor is based on a novel scheme as a 6-phase, bottom-drive linear
              variable-capacitance micro-motor supported on micro-ball bearings. The proposed
              research activity focuses on (1) design, modeling, and dynamic simulation to
              realize an optimized structure and geometry for the device, (2) technology
              development to improve precision fabrication in conventional processing methods
              while minimizing stress-inducing processes and carefully characterizing each
              unit step, and (3) long-term reliability study to investigate (i) the operation
              of the electrical components, such as the electrical rotor and stator under
              controlled environment, and (ii) the dynamic behavior of the micro-ball
              bearings and their effect on the performance of the device. 

The educational
              objectives in this program are based on an interactive learning environment
              structured to incorporate research objectives into both undergraduate and
              graduate level courses in MEMS and Microsystems at the University of
              Maryland.

