Title       : Renovation and Improvement of Research, Meeting and Instructional Facilities at
               the University of Guam Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0224676

Award Number: 0224676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Richmond richmond@uog9.uog.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven S. Amesbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Guam
	      UOG Station
	      Agana, GU  96910    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for the improvement of facilities at the University
              of Guam Marine Laboratory (UOGML).  The lab is a research unit that serves the
              U.S.-affiliated islands of Micronesia, including The Territory of Guam, the
              Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, The Federated States of
              Micronesia (Yap, Chuuk, Kosrae, and Pohnpei), the Republic of Belau, and the
              Republic of the Marshall Islands.  The lab is the only U.S. marine research
              station in the tropical western Pacific that includes a modern research
              laboratory.  Funds provided by the award will permit the improvement of a
              multi-purpose room used for lectures, meetings and conferences, and various
              research purposes.  Improvements include replacement of research benches and
              related furnishings, purchase of a new audio/visual system, replacement of
              aging windows and doors, and purchase of microscopes for general and
              research-oriented courses, including a microscope system with display features
              for instructional purposes.  Due to its location in the Pacific Islands, the
              UOGML has an important service component that includes providing data and
              research services to a broad group of users.  These improvements in the lab's
              infrastructure will enhance both the research capabilities of the Marine
              Laboratory and its ability to disseminate the results of research to potential
              users who range from traditional leaders, chiefs' councils and community-based
              organizations to territorial, state and federal agencies.

