Title       : Unified Power and Communication Infrastructures for High Security Electricity
               Supply
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0224701

Award Number: 0224701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun G. Phadke aphadke@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yilu Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lamine Mili  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amitabh Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modern innovations in computer based monitoring, protection and control of
              electric power supply systems, coupled with the availability of wide-band high
              speed communication channels have made it possible to bring about the
              development of very highly secure electric supply networks.  The ability to
              bring about such a supply network requires a multi-disciplinary team of
              students and faculty members who are established researchers in the fields of
              electric power engineering, communication systems, and new sensor developments.
               The present proposal is offered by such a team consisting of Virginia Tech and
              Arizona State University personnel, along with a plan of work which will make
              significant progress in achieving these goals.

At the same time, the
              research team recognizes the importance of the electric supply system to the
              social and economic well-being of modern societies.  These issues are also
              addressed in the proposal.  An important part of the proposal is the
              development of a metric to measure the societal and economic dependence on
              electricity supply, as well as the cost of insecurity of the supply system to
              the society.  The research team is convinced that disseminating the results of
              their research to students - and particularly to minority and under-represented
              groups - is a very important societal responsibility.  To this end, the
              research plan contains a significant effort towards creating educational
              modules which can be broadcast on the internet, and with a special emphasis on
              reaching the minority and under-represented communities.

