Title       : Education Aquanauts: Exploration-Based Interdisciplinary Science Skills
               Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0224533

Award Number: 0224533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen Aguilar aguilar@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall Ryder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell L. Cuhel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Education Aquanauts: Exploration-Based Interdisciplinary Science Skills
              Enhancement

During the last decade, more than half a dozen animal species
              have invaded the upper Great Lakes, some of them causing unequivocal and
              perhaps cataclysmic alterations in large lake ecosystems.  All have established
              themselves in terms of having reproductively successful populations, but they
              are recent enough in some cases to have as-yet limited ranges. While both
              ecologically- and economically massive alterations in local and global habitats
              are occurring, the younger K-12 and even undergraduate population of the region
              is only slowly becoming aware of large water bodies including Lake Michigan.
              This program provides immersion science learning for teachers of primarily
              middle school students produces curriculum modules for use in  in-school
              hands-on learning activities. The focus of the effort is the biological
              community of Green Can Reef, a local spawning reef at the heart (e.g., zebra
              mussels, perch recruitment) and also the edge (e.g., goby, amphipod decline) of
              invasive species influences. Specific objectives are to (1) expand teacher
              awareness of exotic species occurrence and activities in local waters; (2)
              engage teachers in short, intense hands-on workshops using modern-day tools
              including Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs) and analytical instrumentation to
              test specific, tractable hypotheses; (3) provide educators with resources to
              access current environmental research activities and results in their own
              region; and (4) develop educator-produced, scientist-assisted curriculum
              modules offering experimental, hypothesis-testing, hands-on research activities
              for students and public learners using locally-relevant subjects.  The entire
              sequence is  repeated such that observations span a period of systematic
              change, for example during spring bloom conditions or across thermal
              (de)stratification regimes. At the conclusion of the effort, each teacher will
              develop a single class-period activity that incorporates some aspect of their
              experience (data, concepts, underwater video), nurtured by active research
              scientists experienced in teacher enhancement programs.

