Title       : 13th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research; June 28 - July 2, 2002,
               Seville, Spain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0224881

Award Number: 0224881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Richards richards@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to help junior U.S. scientists attend the Thirteenth
              International Conference on Arabidopsis Research to be held in Seville, Spain,
              June 28 to July 2, 2002. The aim is to provide an opportunity for these young
              researchers to exchange ideas with colleagues from around the world on all
              aspects of research concerning the model plant Arabidopsis. The conference will
              include sessions on genomics, metabolic regulation, responses to the
              environment (biotic and abiotic), hormones and signal transduction, genetic
              mechanisms and epigenetics, natural variation and evolution, cell biology,
              developmental phase transitions, embryogenesis and vegetative development,
              reproductive development, and light signaling and circadian regulation.
              Arabidopsis is an excellent model for crop plant development and physiology,
              and many of the findings made in Arabidopsis are readily applicable to crop
              plants. An important component of the meeting is that approximately thirty of
              those who submitted abstracts of their work will be invited to present that
              work in short talks. The conference will maximize participation of young
              scientists by inviting graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior
              P.I.'s to present many of the talks. 

Because this is the premier
              international forum for exchange of the latest results and approaches in
              Arabidopsis research, it is imperative that young scientists from the US have
              the opportunity to attend this conference. The  funds from this award will
              provide travel fellowships for approximately thirty junior US scientists. First
              priority will be given to those junior scientists who have been selected by the
              meeting organizers to give oral presentations and to junior scientists from
              underrepresented groups. The  fellowships, which will cover approximately half
              to two thirds of the expected travel and meeting costs, will be administered by
              the North American Arabidopsis Steering Committee, whose members are elected by
              electronic ballot by North American subscribers to the Arabidopsis electronic
              bulletin board (arab-gen@net.bio.net,
              http://www.bio.net/hypermail/ARABIDOPSIS/).

