Title       : EPNES: Modeling the Interaction between the Technical, Social, Economic and
               Environmental Components of Large Scale Electric Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0224810

Award Number: 0224810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Tomsovic tomsovic@eecs.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anjan Bose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ken Casavant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren A. Lutzenhiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The deregulation of the electric power system has been plagued by missteps and
              finger pointing. It has been impossible to clearly and systematically delineate
              the issues so that meaningful policy decisions can be made. Missing from most
              discussions is the interplay between the economic, technical, social and
              environmental factors that influence the production, transmission and
              consumption of electric energy. This work will study these interactions and
              develop computer models suitable for use by both policy makers and researchers.
              The main effort will be focused on the development of simulation models, which
              extend beyond traditional disciplinary boundaries.  For example, we will model
              consumer behavior, which affects efficiency and hence electricity demand, which
              in turn affects the prices on generation and the operation of the transmission
              grid. Such models will enable us to simulate short-term behavior such as
              electricity prices and congestion in the near term.  The models will also be
              used to look at long-term behavior such as investment in new generation and
              transmission. These models will be tested with data from the Western power grid
              as the Benchmark Test System. The project will conclude with the preparation of
              several instructional modules using interactive simulation of the benchmark
              system. The modules will be designed for integration into syllabi for
              senior/graduate level courses in sociology, economics, environmental science
              and engineering, the home departments for the research team. The modular
              approach will engage students from multiple disciplines in discussions and
              interactive simulations.  
 


