Title       : Workshop: Assisting and Encouraging Student Opportunities for Post-undergraduate
               Study (AESOPS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0224683

Award Number: 0224683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37416              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Aarne Vesilind vesilind@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0224683
PI:		P. Aarne Vesilind
Institution:	Bucknell
              University
Title:		"Assisting and Encouraging Student Opportunities for
              Post-undergraduate Study (AESOPS)"

Abstract:
  
Engineering schools at
              research universities have for many years relied on non-residents to fill the
              ranks of its graduate students because most qualified American engineering
              graduates choose not to go to graduate school.  Even with a large influx of
              international students, many engineering faculty have difficulty recruiting
              qualified graduate students to assist with NSF-sponsored research.  Recently,
              international tensions and security concerns have created increased
              difficulties in recruiting non-residents to American graduate schools.  This
              workshop is directed toward increasing the number of qualified US citizens and
              residents who chose to pursue graduate studies.  Specifically the workshop
              discussion will concern students who attend engineering schools which do not
              have a Ph.D. program.

Excellent students graduating from non-PhD-granting
              engineering colleges often do not
consider graduate school because there is no
              "presence" of a research program and no (or few) graduate students at their
              institution.   These engineering graduates are often not aware of the graduate
              school option, and they are often discouraged from going on to graduate school.
               These students appear to be an untapped resource of advanced-level engineering
              manpower.

This workshop comprises Phase I of a project to encourage and
              assist engineering graduates from non-PhD-granting engineering schools to apply
              to and enroll in graduate programs in research universities.  The workshop
              participants will be drawn from both Ph.D. granting and non-Ph.D. granting
              Institutions and will include engineering researchers, administrators and
              teachers.  The participants will identify the sources of the problem and
              recommend several methods of addressing these problems.   The end product of
              this workshop will be a report disseminated to engineering deans.  A formal
              proposal to the National Science Foundation for initiating a prototype study
              (Phase II) incorporating some or all of the workshop recommendations will
              follow.

