Title       : EPNES: Foreward Contracts, Multisettlement Equilibrium and Risk Management in
               Competitive Electricity Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0224779

Award Number: 0224779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shmuel S. Oren oren@ieor.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ilan Adler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheldon M. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Forward contracts arid financial risk management instruments are essential
              elements of competitive electricity markets. They mitigate market power,
              suppress price volatility and ensure system reliability through market
              mechanisms. The design and study of such mechanisms in the context of
              electricity requires an interdisciplinary approach that capitalizes on
              developments in economics, operations research, and financial engineering while
              adapting and extending the existing knowledge in these areas to match the
              physical realities of electricity systems. This research project will develop
              such an interdisciplinary approach by bringing together a research team with
              expertise in power economics, optimization and financial mathematics. The
              project consist of three main technical components: Analysis of two settlement
              electricity markets through sequential Nash equilibrium models on DC power
              networks; Development of computational methods for calculating realistic two
              settlement equilibrium models as simultaneous optimization problems subject to
              equilibrium constraints; and Development of pricing methodologies for specific
              forward contracts and options under stochastic price movements. This research
              will help address technical and policy issues prompted by the restructuring of
              the electricity industry and will train graduate students participating in the
              research to cope with the multidisciplinary challenges facing that industry.
              The computational techniques developed under this project will be tested on
              realistic commercial models of the California market. New knowledge resulting
              from this project will be integrated through teaching modules into a broad
              spectrum of graduate and undergraduate courses offered to industrial
              engineering and to electrical engineering students.
