Title       : fMRI of Hormonal Variation in Cognitive-Affective Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0224221

Award Number: 0224221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $638658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Turhan Canli turhan.canli@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Canli and colleagues will conduct
              a three-year investigation into how changes in hormonal state affect brain
              activation patterns during cognitive and emotion-related psychological
              processes. Specifically, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) will be
              used to record brain activation patterns in response to cognitive and emotional
              stimuli in two groups of women.  One group will consist of women who will be
              scanned at different times in the naturally occurring menstrual cycle.  The
              other group will consist of post-menopausal women who will be scanned during a
              three-week period of estrogen/progesterone or placebo (sugar pill)
              administration.  The results of these studies will illuminate our understanding
              of hormonal regulation of mood and the neural structures that underlie these
              states.  Very little is known about some fundamental aspects of brain function
              as a function of gender, as suggested by a call by the National Academy of
              Sciences to devote more biomedical research to sex differences.  This work will
              not only fill a knowledge gap in basic neuroscience, but may also guide future
              clinical studies to understand the striking sex differences in the incidence of
              mood disorders such as depression, which strikes as many as four times as many
              women than men.  Furthermore, the proposed work may be of benefit for
              postmenopausal women weighing the consequences of hormone replacement therapy
              on brain function.  Such decisions will likely be contemplated by large
              segments of the population, as it is estimated that the average woman will
              spend at least half her adult life with decreased levels of circulating
              estrogen.
