Title       : The Modeling and Identification of Dynamically Uncertain Systems: Theory and
               Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9634498

Award Number: 9634498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy Smith roy@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634498  Smith    The focus of this work is the development of methodologies for
               the modeling and identification of dynamically uncertain systems  in a
              closed-loop control configuration.  The work has a strong  experimental
              component, in addition to the theoretical work  required to develop the
              framework.  The experiments serve as  testbeds for the theoretical and
              algorithmic work, and addition,  contribute to the development of feedback
              control technology  within each of their application areas.  A chemical vapor 
              deposition system for semiconductor (GaAs/InP) growth is used as  a closed-loop
              control and modeling testbed.  The issues raised by  this experiment include:
              uncertain flow dynamics; process  nonlinearities; highly uncertain reaction
              dynamics; and model  based sensing using optical measurements.  A magnetic
              bearing  experiment is also studied.  A rotor shaft is levitated at each  end
              by magnetic bearings.  This is a particularly difficult  identification and
              control problem and the relevant issues  include: closed-loop identification of
              a multiple-input,  multiple-output, unstable system; uncertain resonant modes
              in the  rotor shaft; and rotor rotation dependent coupling between  control
              loops.  The third experiment is a radiant thermal  processing system,
              consisting of an array of lamps for the  heating of a plate.  The issues
              involved here are: modeling of an  infinite dimensional system; variable
              interaction between lamps;  and significant uncertainty in the plate
              characteristics  (emissivity, thermal coefficients).  The theoretical side of
              the  project is based on a robust control modeling framework.  Uncertainty in
              the system dynamics is modeled by bounded  perturbations to a nominal model. 
              Prior work in the area of  model validation has developed computationally
              tractable  techniques for assessing the minimum size of the perturbations 
              required to adequately describe an experimental observation.  We  propose
              extending the approach to develop methodologies for the  experimental 
              identification of model parameters for perturbed  models.  ***
