Title       : Program to Assist EPSCoR Participants in Enhancing Their Research
               Competitiveness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9634545

Award Number: 9634545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2865982            (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert H. Teich ateich@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9634545  Teich    In 1993, the American Association for the Advancement of
              Science  (AAAS) initiated an effort to assist NSF and the state EPSCoR 
              programs in developing a clearer understanding of the concept of a  state's
              competitiveness in research, developing criteria for  assessing competitiveness
              and its progress over time, and  identifying strategies to enhance
              competitiveness.  This effort has  yielded important results which have
              improved the understanding of  what makes states, institutions, and individuals
              competitive in  research.  The results are in a book published by AAAS early in
               1996 entitled, Competitiveness in Academic Research (Albert H.  Teich,
              editor).  The present proposal seeks support to build on  this intellectual
              base and use AAAS's resources to build closer  ties between the EPSCoR program
              participants and the broader  science and technology community.    The proposed
              project will have three elements: (1) A leadership  development program to
              assist EPSCoR states in developing and  nurturing ties to the broader
              scientific community.  This element  will include a series of regional meetings
              for EPSCoR personnel  aimed at giving them the opportunity to think
              systematically about  the conceptual and practical issues surrounding their
              programs; (2)  A technical assistance extension service to work with EPSCoR
              states  in shaping their science and technology development plans and 
              integrating those plans into broader economic and social  development
              strategies.  Under this project element, a team of  world-class experts will be
              developed and made available to state  EPSCoR programs to assist them in their
              planning and proposal  development efforts; (3) An effort to enrich the
              intellectual  framework of the EPSCoR program through an examination of the 
              nature of competitiveness in research and the relative efficacy of  various
              strategies aimed at achieving it, extending and exploiting  the work begun
              under the initial AAAS EPSCoR project and gaining  additional value from i t.  
                  A distinguished advisory committee constituted by the AAAS  Committee on
              Science, Engineering, and Public Policy (COSEPP) and  including members of
              COSEPP, state EPSCOR project directors, and  others with relevant perspectives
              and expertise, will oversee all  aspects of the project.  The project is
              planned to run for three  years.
