Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics of Elastic Systems With Liquid Sloshing Pressure Impacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9634223

Award Number: 9634223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raouf A. Ibrahim ibrahim@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valery Pilipchuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Liquid free surface sloshing in moving containers can occur  in the form of one
              of three possible regimes: linear planar  motion, weakly nonlinear non-planar
              motion, or strongly  nonlinear motion characterized by hydrodynamic impacts.
              The  interaction of the second or third regime with the dynamics  of the
              supporting elastic structure has direct impact on the  roll stability and
              safety of liquid tankers and automotive  vehicles carrying gasoline tanks. The
              main objective of this  research project is to develop analytical, numerical,
              and  experimental tools to examine the stability and dynamic  characteristic of
              these systems in order to improve their  rollover stability. To accomplish this
              objective, analytical  models are developed which are capable of describing
              liquid  pressure impacts in moving partially filled tankers. The  liquid
              pressure impact model is formulated based on  representing the impact forces by
              a visco-elastic high power  nonlinear damper. The resulting equations of motion
              are  analyzed using nonlinear `non-smooth` generating solutions  rather than
              trigonometric functions commonly used for weakly  nonlinear systems. For weakly
              nonlinear regime, a unified  approach combining the method of normal form and
              the theory  of Lie groups is used to study the liquid-structure  interaction in
              the presence of internal resonance. The  validity of analytical results are
              verified by numerical  simulation and experimental tests. The numerical
              simulations  estimate the system response for both liquid sloshing  regimes.
              The stability and characterization of the response  are examined by numerically
              estimating the Lyapunov  exponents and embedding dimensions. The experimental
              tests  provide additional safety study regarding the favorable  locations of
              baffles, to be inserted in liquid containers,  which enhances the roll
              stability of liquid tankers. Another  contribution of this research is to
              develop realistic models  describing liquid sloshing impacts which can be used
              for  vehicle dynamic simulation, and also that can be introduced  in multibody
              dynamics codes.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
