Title       : Application-Driven Network Performance Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9634197

Award Number: 9634197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234496             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chita R. Das das@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 2891,9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Prior research on multiprocessor interconnection networks has primarily focused 
              on the network topology, switching mechanism, and message routing algorithm to 
               maximize network performance. Very little work has been done to study the
              impact  of the communication properties of parallel applications. 
              Communication pattern,  message generation frequency, and  message size are the
              three attributes to  quantify any communication. The proposed research is aimed
              at characterizing  these communication workloads and analyzing their impact on
              multiprocessor  performance.    The research has two major phases. In the first
              phase, traffic profiling of a  wide range of parallel applications will be
              conducted by collecting execution  traces from parallel machines and also from
              an execution-driven simulator. The  communication traces will be analyzed to
              determine  different types of traffic  patterns, rate of communication, and 
              volume of communication. The second phase  of the project will use these
              realistic traffic properties for the performance  analysis of interconnection
              networks via simulation and analytic models. In-depth  simulation of known
              unicast and collective  routing algorithms on various  topologies  will be
              performed with these workloads. Analytical models capturing  wormhole 
              switching, virtual channel flow control, routing mechanism and the   realistic
              workloads will be developed. The main contribution of the project is 
              characterizing application workloads to be used for different architectural and
               algorithmic research. For example, evaluation with these workloads will
              quantify  the actual performance advantages of adaptive  routing algorithms,
              will identify  the potential bottlenecks of existing communication mechanisms,
              and will provide  insight for developing application-specific routing
              algorithms.  Next, the new  mathematical tools will be more accurate in
              predicting the realistic  communication traffic. The techniques and tools
              developed in this research can  be used in understandi ng and evaluating the
              interplay between parallel  architectures and algorithms to maximize the
              performance of existing machines and  to design better machines in the future.
