Title       : Viruses in Marine Food Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9634028

Award Number: 9634028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340374             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed A. Fuhrman fuhrman@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9634028  FUHRMAN  Although viruses are now thought to be major players in 
              marine food webs, we know very little about what happens to  viral "biomass" in
              these food webs. The subject is important  because a significant fraction, on
              the order of 10s of %, of  total marine primary productivity passes through the
              viral  "compartment." While it has been assumed that this matter is  utilized
              by bacteria, there have been no studies of the  actual fates of this material
              nor of the rates with which it  is transformed or decomposed. This project will
              use a  combination of laboratory and field studies to determine the  fates of
              viral matter and cell debris released when viruses  lyse an organism, and the
              rates by which this matter travels  through different routes in the microbial
              food web. A major  method to be used is radiolabelling of the products of viral
               infection, purification of the products, and then addition  to fresh seawater.
              The project will examine the interactions  with bacteria, phytoplankton, and
              other protists. Of  particular interest is the variability of these processes, 
              within communities and between different times and places.  It is also proposed
              to develop an approach to label natural  viruses with colloidal gold and then
              use an electron  microscopy-based analysis analogous to "isotope dilution" to 
              estimate simultaneously the production and loss rates of  each labelled viral
              morphological type. The information  should improve our ability to form
              conceptual and numerical  models of marine microbial food webs. It also should
              prove  useful in the more general study of the turnover of marine  dissolved
              organic matter (to which viruses operationally  belong), which now appears to
              be of considerable  significance in global geochemical cycles.  ***
