Title       : CRI: Navigation and the Hippocampus: Computational Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9634339

Award Number: 9634339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92481              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Wilson wilson@ai.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Dayan  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1054,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN:  9634339  PI:  Dayan        Animals such as rats that manipulate space in
              sophisticated ways have   the capacity to acquire substantial information about
              the layout and   contents of their environments, based on a large variety of
              cues from   different modalities. They also plan their actions to optimise the
              use   of these environments, based on their changing goals. These tasks are  
              far beyond current robot technology.  The neural basis underlying   these
              abilities of rats is starting to be understood. The hippocampus   of a rat, a
              structure whose anatomy and physiology have long been   studied, is known to
              contain cells that report reliably on its   location in a familiar environment.
               Simultaneous recordings from   multiple cells in the hippocampus are starting
              to show how these maps   are formed during experience. We will combine three
              key approaches   used in brain science - animal behavior, neural recording of
              brain   activity in the hippocampus, and computer modeling to understand the  
              adaptive optimising control strategies that rats use to build models   of their
              environments and to construct optimal plans.    Navigation is a key problem for
              autonomous agents. The result of this   work will be models of brain function
              which exploit the capacities of   the biological structures involved in
              learning, memory and control in   spatial tasks. These models will be capable
              of integrating   poly-sensory information and implementing optimising control. 
              Similar   approaches based on theories of animal behavior are already finding  
              wide application in a variety of difficult combinatorial problems,   such as
              scheduling. The reinforcement learning methods we will adopt   to understand
              natural navigation should have direct engineering   application in the
              development of intelligent robotic systems.
