Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Global Change Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9634300

Award Number: 9634300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Lempert Robert Lempert@rand.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rand Corporation
	      1700 Main Street
	      Santa Monica, CA  904013208    213/393-0411

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634300  Lempert     Although technology issues appear vital to climate-change
              policy, the Integrated   Assessment community currently lacks a suitable
              framework for considering the   implications of new technology for policy
              choices. The fundamental problem is the   unpredictability of the evolution of
              technology over the time spans of relevance. Currently   available
              decision-analysis tools are predicated on the ability to craft some credible
              best-  estimate prediction of the future. However, policy problems such as
              climate change face   extreme uncertainties for which it is not possible to
              construct well-characterized best   estimates. In such cases, prediction-based
              policy analysis is often unable to resolve   acrimonious debate among
              stakeholders who believe in different best estimates, and often   results in
              constrained thinking about possible policy options. In their recent work the  
              investigators have demonstrated an alternative framework for policy analysis
              that does not   depend on making best-estimate predictions of the future. The
              approach is based on two   concepts called adaptive strategies and exploratory
              modeling. Exploratory modeling treats   problems having massive uncertainty by
              conducting a large number of computer simulation-  experiments on many
              plausible formulations of the problem, rather than using computer   resources
              to increase the resolution of a single best-estimate model. Adaptive-decision  
              strategies focus on modeling environmental policies where decision-makers can
              make   midcourse corrections based on observations of the relevant
              environmental and economic   systems. In this research project the
              investigators will use the exploratory modeling/adaptive   strategies framework
              to examine how the potential of new technology should affect near-  term
              climate change policy choices. The research has two specific goals: 1)
              demonstrate and   advance the capabilities of the exploratory modeling/
              adaptive strategies framework, and 2)   examine a central climate-change po
              licy question -- under what conditions should society   pursue
              technology-specific policies (e.g., tax credits, subsidies, or government  
              procurements) in addition to carbon taxes?    Policy-makers must often make
              decisions whose ultimate success depends on factors that   cannot be predicted
              at the time the decision is made. However, currently available decision- 
              analysis tools used to help policy-makers compare alternative policies are
              predicated on the   ability to craft some credible best-estimate prediction of
              the future.  Under conditions of   extreme uncertainty, prediction-based policy
              analysis is often unable to resolve acrimonious   debate among stakeholders who
              believe in different best estimates, and often results in   constrained
              thinking about possible policy options. Climate change provides an important  
              example. Future technology developments could have profound impacts on
              climate-change   policy, but no one can accurately predict the impacts of
              technology on the future costs of   reducing greenhouse-gas emissions, nor the
              effects that various policies will have on these   costs. In recent work, the
              investigators have demonstrated a new framework for policy   analysis that does
              not depend on making best-estimate predictions of the future. The   approach is
              based on two concepts, called adaptive strategies and exploratory modeling,  
              that take advantage of the new analytic capabilities provided by recent
              computer   technology. Exploratory modeling treats problems having extreme
              uncertainty by   conducting computer simulation-experiments on a very large
              number of plausible estimates   of the future and using sampling strategies and
              data visualization to find important patterns   in the results.
              Adaptive-decision focus on modeling environmental policies where decision- 
              makers can make midcourse corrections based on observations of the relevant  
              environmental and economic systems. In this research project, the investigators
              will use the   exploratory modeling/adaptive strategies  framework to examine
              how the potential of new   technology should affect near-term climate change
              policy choices. In particular, the project   will: 1) demonstrate and advance
              the capabilities of the exploratory modeling/adaptive   strategies framework,
              and 2) examine a central climate-change policy question -- under   what
              conditions should society pursue technology-specific policies (e.g., tax
              credits,   subsidies, or government procurements) in addition to carbon taxes?
