Title       : Heat Induced Changes in the Mechanics of Soft Tissue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9634109

Award Number: 9634109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Frederick Bowman                     
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158641             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay D. Humphrey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil T. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634109  Humphrey  Advances in laser, microwave, radio-frequency, and similar 
              technologies continue to promote new applications of heat to  treat various
              pathologies.  yet, most clinical studies are  motivated by the advances in
              device technology, not a  fundamental understanding of the underlying thermo- 
              biomechanics, which at present remains poorly understood.  Exploiting the
              potential of heat-therapy will, therefore,  require quantification of the
              effects of clinically  controllable parameters such as the temperature level, 
              heating history, and the mechanical load state during  heating.  In general,
              there are two primary irreversible  effects of heat treatment, cell necrosis
              and denaturation of  structural proteins.  Thus, to design and eventually 
              optimize a heat-therapy, one must be able to predict  (spatially and
              temporally) the concomitant irreversible  effects on cell viability and
              connective tissue integrity  for a given heating device.  Rather than studying
              a specific  clinical application, the overall goal of this work is to 
              establish a theoretical basis for quantifying irreversible  heat-induced
              changes in the nonlinear, anistropic behavior  of soft tissue -- our specific
              aim is to develop and  validate phenomenological thermomechanical damage
              relations  for three different tissues that will be exposed to a broad  range
              of temperatures (from 45 to 85oC), both isothermally  and non-isothermally),
              hearing periods (from seconds to  hours), and mechanical load states during
              heating  (isometric, isotonic, and cyclic stretching).  The proposed  tissues
              are bovine chordae tendineae, epicardium, and  endocardium.  In addition to a
              gel matrix, chordae consists  primarily of uniaxially oriented collagen,
              epicardium of a 2-  D network of collagen, and endocardium of a 2-D network of 
              collagen and elastin.  These three tissues were selected  because they have
              increasingly more constituents and  microstructural complexity, and they admit
              rigorously  performed and interpreted uniaxial or in-pl ane biaxial  testing --
              this will allow the development of 1-D and then 2-  D relations of increasing
              complexity.  There are no  comparable data or constitutive relations for
              thermal-damage  in the literature.    The PIs recently showed that the effects
              of temperature  level and heating period are coupled in heat-induced  collagen
              denaturation:  there exists a "time-temperature  equivalency" in the form of an
              exponential relation in  traction free, isothermal shrinkage tests on chordae. 
              A  similar relation exists in heat-induced cell death.   The  PIs hypothesize
              that an analogous equivalency exists in  tissues under more general conditions
              (e.g., multiaxial, non-  isothermal loading), which will simplify
              quantification in  terms of a load and temperature-dependent scaled heating 
              time.  Concepts from finite strain damage mechanics and  irreversible continuum
              thermodynamics will be extended to  determine the dependence of the Helmholtz
              free energy and  the damage evolution equation on the current finite strain 
              and prior thermal-damage, the latter of which likely depends  on an
              accumulative scaled heating time.  Such quantification  will allow tissue-level
              engineering analysis of potential  heat-therapies, and hopefully optimization
              thereof.  ***
