Title       : Multisite University-Industry Collaboration: A New Paradigm for Graduate
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9634238

Award Number: 9634238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1705000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray V. Johnston mvj@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean H. Futrell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Douglas P. Ridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Burnaby Munson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1990      CHEMISTRY EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1024,1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9634238  Futrell  Univ of Delaware  A new program in graduate and postdoctoral
              education designed for relevance to research careers in industry will be
              established through this award to the University of Delaware under the Grant
              Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program in the
              Chemistry Division and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.  Led by Jean H. Futrell, a
              team of scientists from the University of Delaware, Johns Hopkins University,
              the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, and DuPont Central Research and
              Development will provide a new research and training program in analytical
              chemistry focusing on both fundamental research in mass spectrometry and
              applications to industrial problems.  The educational program features shared
              mentorship responsibilities in research and training across the four sites,
              along with a combination of new courses, professional training experiences, and
              structured internship rotations.  The proposed program differs from the
              standard model of graduate education in that the faculty team for the proposal
              will be jointly responsible for the programs of study recommended to individual
              Ph. D. committees.  Students will be required to demonstrate mastery of all
              modern tools for analytical problem solving in addition to in-depth research in
              a selected area of mass spectrometry.  Thesis research will explicitly include
              an industrial applications component in addition to traditional emphasis on
              fundamental discovery research.      This university/industry collaboration
              tests a new paradigm in graduate and post-graduate education of analytical
              chemists with the objective of preparing them for leadership roles in
              industrial research.  Scientists from three universities and a major industrial
              research laboratory partner to offer an educational program spanning all
              aspects of modern mass spectrometry.
