Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computability in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9634565

Award Number: 9634565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Cholak Peter.Cholak.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9634565  Peter A. Cholak      Cholak's main interest is in the interaction
              between various mathematical  structures and different measures of
              computability.  One such important  mathematical structure is that of the
              computably enumerable sets -- those  sets which can be enumerated by a Turing
              machine, with the relation of set  inclusion. Cholak's project aims at 
              understanding the relationships between  the definable sets, the various
              dynamic properties of these sets, and  the automorphisms of this structure. 
              For example, Cholak wishes to  determine the complexity (in terms of the above
              measures) of the question  whether two computably enumerable sets are in the
              same orbit.  This  could help one show that certain jump classes are invariant
              within this  structure.  Another part of the project is to explore whether
              every partition  of pairs has a non-high homogeneous set.  Such a result would
              improve our  understanding of the proof-theoretic strength of Ramsey's Theorem
              for pairs  and of Weak Konig's Lemma.    Cholak works in computability theory,
              an area of mathematical logic.  Cholak's main interest is in the interaction
              between various mathematical  structures and different measures of
              computability.  For example, the most  generally used model of computability is
              that of the Turing machine -- more  or less an ideal computer running without
              any memory or time bounds.  Cholak's research concerns the sets which can be
              listed using a Turing  machine, with the hope of further understanding the
              relationships between  sets which can be defined by formulas. Additionally, his
              research concerns  various dynamic properties of these sets -- how fast or slow
              their enumeration is,  and their information content.
