Title       : GOALI: A GOALI Study of the Stability of Monolayers, Bilayers, and
               Multivesicular Lipsomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9634050

Award Number: 9634050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob N. Israelachvili jacob@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Zasadzinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mantripragada Sankaram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9634050     It is planned to pattern model biomembranes onto solid
              substrates via functionalized silane self assembled monolayers ("patterned
              SAMs") produced by microcontact printing on oxidized silicon or mica.  The free
              ends of the silanes will be functionalized with specific reactive groups such
              as thiol-coupled gold colloids or ligand-receptor pairs such as biotinated
              lipid-streptavidin to anchor an otherwise free-floating bilayer at a pattern of
              discrete points.  The unfunctionalized part of the substrate will be treated
              with a second silane terminated with a neutral group to prevent adhesion to the
              substrate.  Bilayers incorporating biotinated or gold-colloid lipids will be
              deposited on these functionalized surfaces either by adsorption from vesicle
              solution or by Langmuir-Blodgett or Langmuir-Schaefer deposition, to bind to
              the SAM layer at discrete points.  Alternatively, we can lithographically
              pattern a substrate via plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition of silicon
              oxide, then apply monolayers of functionalized silanes to anchor bilayers.  The
              idea is to create the bilayer equivalent of a Langmuir monolayer in which we
              can study the morphology and interactions of nearly free-floating membranes
              with the Surface Forces Apparatus, fluorescence and Brewster angle microscopy
              (BAM), and AFM.  In addition to studying membrane properties, patterning
              membranes is a first step toward biofunctionalizing semiconductors with a
              micronresolution technique similar to and compatible with microlithography for
              use in biosensors.    An important part of this project is to study the
              long-term stability of surfactant and lipid structures on surfaces (2D
              assembly) and in solution (3D assembly).  It is still not known whether many
              surfactant structures, such as circular or stripe domains in monolayers, or
              unilamellar vesicles in solution, are true equilibrium structures.  This
              question is particularly important to creating membrane-based biosensors that
              require long-term stability and our GO ALI project of predicting drug release
              from the DepoTech Co.'s multivesicular liposomes (MVL).  It is proposed to
              study these effects at the air-water interface in monolayers by constructing a
              completely sealed Langmuir trough to provide temperature and environment
              control.  The surface pressure will be measured using a novel floating wire
              sensor the monolayers will be viewed by fluorescence  microscopy and BAM.  It
              is planned to investigate the long-term stability of domain structures at the
              airwater interface by continuously monitori.ng.  Concurrent with these studies,
              freeze-fracture electron microscopy will be used to examine a novel
              multivesicular liposome (DepoFoam) drug delivery system in collaboration with
              the Depotech Co. The MVL are made from a water-organic-water double emulsion
              process and the structure is similar to a gas-liquid foam.  The goal is to
              determine the effects of  processing conditions, drug composition, and the
              progression to equilibrium on drug-release properties.
