Title       : Nonlinear Optics in Single Crystal Microstructures of Organic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9634268

Award Number: 9634268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mrinal Thakur mthakur@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634268  Thakur  A major objective of this project is to demonstrate picosecond
              all-optical  logic and optical bistability using the large off-resonant
              nonlinear  refractive indices of specific organic single  crystal films. The
              overall  project objectives include: i) preparation of single crystal films and
               device microstructures of organic second and third order optical materials, 
              ii) detailed studies of the off-resonant nonlinearities of the films and,  iii)
              demonstration of devices including phase-matched SHG in waveguides, 
              all-optical and electro-optic switching and logic. The nonlinear  optical 
              studies will include polarization dependent SHG and electro-optic effects  in
              second order optical films and time and wavelength resolved nonlinear 
              refractive index measurements for the  third order optical films. The 
              mechanisms involved in the off-resonant third order processes will  be 
              elucidated and picosecond all-optical logic will be demonstrated using 
              specific organic  materials and device geometries. Utilizing organic films  of
              very large second order nonlinearities,  electro-optic switching and  logic
              will be demonstrated. Specific conjugated polymers such as  polydiacetylenes
              are known to have extremely large nonlinear refractive  indices along with low 
              absorption coefficients in the off-resonant domain.  Such large nonlinearities
              are obtained only if the polymer chains are  organized as a single crystal.
              Specific organic molecular crystals (e.g.  NPP, DAST have very large and stable
              second order nonlinearities which can  be utilized in  many applications (e.g.
              SHG for infrared diode lasers,  electrooptic switching), if single crystal 
              films and waveguides can be  prepared. A method ("shear method" and its
              modified version) that  the  principal investigator has established, will be
              utilized for the  preparation of single crystal  films of the organic second
              and third order  optical materials. Subsequently specific device 
              microstructures in the  Fabry-Perot etalon and waveguide geom etries will be
              fabricated using the  films. The nonlinear optical measurements in the films
              and waveguides will  be performed using  established procedures. Recently, we
              have demonstrated  all-optical switching using the off-  resonant nonlinearity
              of a  polydiacetylene film, placed in a Fabry-Perot cavity. The measured 
              switching time was limited by the pulse-width (30ps) that was used.  Detailed
              measurements  involving all-optical logic and bistability will be  performed in
              this proposed work using !  picosecond and sub-picosecond  pulses. Ultrafast
              all-optical switching and logic in a compact device  geometry should have a
              variety of future applications in photonics. Single  crystal films  and
              waveguides of organic materials having very large second  order nonlinearities
              are expected  to have near-term applications in  frequency conversion and
              electro-optics. The research as  proposed is  important for fundamental
              understanding of these off-resonant nonlinear  optical  effects and for
              realizing many practical applications.  ***
