Title       : Microparticle Photonics: Frequency Control and Linewidth Quenching of
               Semiconductor Lasers Using Optical Feedback from Spherical Micro-Cavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9634617

Award Number: 9634617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giora Griffel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1493      LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634617  Griffel  Frequency stability and the optical linewidth of semiconductor
              laser are critical parameters, affecting a wide range of applications such as
              coherent and optical communication system performance, wavelength division
              multiplexing (WDM) based photonic switching and communication systems,
              room-temperature spectral-hole-burning optical memory, interferometric sensing,
              path length measurement, and high-resolution spectroscopy. For many
              applications the operating frequency of a single longitudinal mode (SLM) laser
              such as the distributed feedback laser (DFB), or the distributed Bragg
              reflector laser (DBR), is not stable enough. It is susceptible to thermal
              fluctuations, and intensity as well as spatial variations of carrier
              concentration cause chirping. In addition, a typical DFB laser, operating at
              1.5 microns has a linewidth of the order of 3-10 MHz, while most coherent
              optical communication systems require sub MHz linewidth. Several techniques
              have been used in the past to lock the operating frequency and reduce the
              optical linewidth, among which are electronic or optical feedback. Reduction of
              the optical linewidth to the kHz range has successfully been demonstrated using
              bulk external cavity semiconductor laser. Another approach is to couple the
              laser cavity to a properly detuned external high finesse resonator. Frequency
              locking with dramatic linewidth reduction by a factor of ~1000, using coupling
              of a semiconductor laser to high-finesse Fabry-Perot etalon, has been
              demonstrated. However, in spite of impressive reduction of the laser noise,
              most of these techniques are cumbersome, require a bulky, laboratory-type
              optical set-up, and are sensitive to cantankerous parameters, such as the phase
              of the reflected signal, which is strongly affected by microphonic effects. In
              addition, due to the length of the cavity required for the set-ups, the
              longitudinal mode spacing is small and SLM operation is difficult to realize.
              As a result, these techniques were primarily used only for ex perimental
              set-ups.    In this project, we propose to develop and carry out theoretical
              and experimental studies of a novel scheme for realizing frequency locking and
              linewidth reduction of semiconductor lasers in a small scale geometry. The
              approach involves the use of a new type of optical resonator system, based on a
              very high Q micro-sphere cavity. It has been known for some time that
              micrometer sized dielectric spheres act as high-Q resonators, with
              electromagnetic energy stored in form of spherical cavity modes confined around
              the sphere, near its surface. Employment of such modes in an axially-symmetric
              dielectric body results in sharp resonance peaks named "morphology dependent
              resonances" or MDR's. The Q-factor of these resonances is projected to approach
              10^8 at T = 77=degrees K, and exceed l0^9=at T= 4 K. For comparison, a
              Fabry-Perot etalon type resonator, comprised o= f two mirrors of 98%
              reflectivity separated 10 cm apart would result in a Q factor of 3X10^7. These
              resonance peaks of the micro-spheres occur at specific values of the sphere
              size parameter X, where X = 2*Pi*a/lambda; a is the radius of the sphere, and
              lambda is the optical wavelength. Using this phenomenon, cavity effects such as
              optical bistability, and lasing have been reported. In our case, the
              micro-sphere can be used as a detuned loading for a semiconductor laser,
              causing the oscillating field to lock on to one of the MDR's and quench its
              linewidth at the same time. This approach may achieve extremely narrow
              linewidth in a system that is stable, cost effective, and not larger than the
              laser itself.    In addition, the ability to lock into and measure MDR's of
              single stationary micro-spheres opens up the prospect of performing extremely
              sensitive adsorption and reaction measurements between species bonded to the
              micro-sphere surface and reagents in a surrounding solution. With modest Q's of
              10^6, a layer having a subatomic thickness (~0.1 Angstrom) may be detected on a
              micro-sphere with r =3D 10 microns. Since th is thicknes= s is considerably
              less than the molecular size of a typical antigen molecule, the possibility of
              observing small fractions of a monolayer is reasonable and thus paves the way
              to new immunological testing techniques.  ***
