Title       : Optimal Design of Bulk Forming Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9634920

Award Number: 9634920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoinette M. Maniatty maniaa@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9634920   Maniatty   This grant provides funding for the development of a
              numerical tool for determining optimal process parameters in bulk forming
              processes, such as rolling, extrusion, and forging.  The developed numerical
              tool will determine the optimal process geometry, temperature and speed that
              satisfy specified design criteria for a given two-dimensional forming process. 
              An optimization algorithm based on an adaptive arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian
              finite element formulation for modeling large deformation
              thermo-elasto-viscoplastic contact problems will be used.  The algorithm will
              be implemented in the context of an existing advanced computational framework
              that has tools for mesh generation, adaptivity, and parallel computing. 
              Experiments involving the extrusion process will also be performed to validate
              the algorithms developed. Experimental dies   will be manufactured according to
              the optimal die shapes predicted in this work and tested at the predicted
              optimal die speeds.  A model press, which can extrude plasticine material
              marked with a grid, will be used in these experiments to observe the material
              flow behavior.      If successful, the results of this research will lead to
              improvements in the design of bulk forming processes and new developments in
              optimization methods for handling complex non-linear problems.  The primary
              goal of this work is to determine optimal process geometry, thermal conditions,
              and process speed in bulk forming processes that will satisfy typically
              prescribed design criteria.  These design criteria may include generating a
              uniform flow of the material, generating a specified material property
              distribution in the formed product, minimizing the production time, or
              minimizing the energy required for the process.  Determining the process
              parameters to achieve these objectives will help to reduce the cost and improve
              the quality of the final product in   processes such as extrusion and forging. 
              The work will also contribute to the computational tools and metho dologies
              available for nonlinear optimization problems.
