Title       : CRI: A Model-Driven Investigation of Hippocampal Functionality in the Rat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9634424

Award Number: 9634424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali A. Minai ali.minai@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. Best  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1054,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ID: IBN-9634424.  PI: Ali A. Minai    The hippocampus is an extremely important
              region of the brain. It is   well-established that the hippocampus is crucial
              to memory-related   performance in most mammals, including humans. the best
              candidate mechanism   for memory --- long-term potentiation (LTP)--- is known
              to occur in many   parts of the hippocampus. Finally, It is also an important
              epileptic focus   region and a prime target of Alzheimer's disease in humans.
              It is thus   critically important to understand the functioning of this brain
              region.  So far, most research on the hippocampus has been driven by
              physiological   and behavioral experiments. This has produced an impressive
              body of data,   but a systematic understanding of hippocampal function is still
              lacking.   Such understanding is necessary if experimental research on the
              hippocampus   is to proceed logically with mutual feedback between theory and
              experiment.    The broad objective of the proposed research is to develop and
              validate a   concrete quantitative model of the hippocampus as a system. This
              model, based   on existing data, would then provide a theoretical framework for
              posing precise   questions and designing systematic series of experiments.
              Further, because  of its computational nature, the model will allow concrete
              predictions to be   made on the basis of simulations, thus providing a means
              for continuously   improving the quality of the model itself. In the short
              term, the project  will focus on the issue of spatial learning (e.g.,
              remembering places) for   which a large amount of well-organized experimental
              data is available.  The specific issues addressed will be: 1) The role of
              multiple inputs to   the hippocampus; 2) Discrimination between similar places
              and environments;   and 3) The role of timing in the storage and recall of
              information.  The model will use methods developed in the area of neural
              networks and   dynamical systems, proceeding from a phenomenological level to
              one of   greater physiological detail.  The hypotheses and predictions of the
              model   will be rigorously verified using behavioral and physiological
              experiments.   The project thus represents a significant integration of
              computational and   experimental techniques. Future work will generalize the
              results to other   aspects of memory function.
