Title       : Coalescence and Phase Separation During Spinodal Decomposition of Solvent
               Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9634324

Award Number: 9634324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Mauri mauri@che-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reuel Shinnar  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9634324    In recent years, the authors have developed solvent
              extraction processes that are based on phase separation of partially-miscible
              solvent mixtures.  During this work it was found that under certain
              circumstances, when two rapidly miscible solvents are heated above critical
              temperature and then rapidly cooled at a temperature below their co-existence
              curve, phase separation is extremely rapid, even in the presence of emulsifiers
              and impurities that tend to slow down coalescence.  There is considerable
              experimental evidence in our previous work indicating that separation occurs by
              spinodal decomposition and not by conventional nucleation and growth.  In
              addition, the possibility of phase separation without nucleation at the
              submicron scale was further supported by our theoretical work.  What still
              remains to be explained is why, after a deep temperature quench, phase
              separation leads to the formation of large, millimeter-size drops, as opposed
              to the  micron-size drops that are formed as a result of very small quenching. 
              The explanation of this quite fascinating phenomenon is one of the main
              objectives of our proposed research.    The formulation of a theory of  phase
              separation of deeply quenched systems remains a major challenge.  Almost all
              the experimental and theoretical works on spinodal decomposition have
              considered only very small temperature quenches (i.e. 0.1(C at most) from the
              critical point, often assuming that other effects due to temperature
              inhomogeneties could be simply superimposed.  However, one of the results of
              our work dealing with the phase separation of deeply quenched (i.e. ( 10(30(C)
              below the critical point) systems, is that this "superposition" approach is not
              correct.  In fact, instead of the small, mircron-size drops that form as a
              result of  "classical" spinodal decomposition, we observed the formation of 
              large, millimeter-size drops.  Now, if these large drops were initially small,
              and then grew by diffusion and coalescence (as the "classi cal" theory would
              suggest), then their growth would be heavily retarded by the presence of  any
              surface-active compounds within the system.  On the other hand, we observed
              that phase separation of deeply quenched systems is fast, independently of the
              presence of such compounds.   A complete explanation of  the phenomenon is not
              available at present, although our theoretical model does offer some
              encouraging results in that direction.  What is needed, however, is not only
              more theoretical work, but also visual observations of the phenomenon at much
              shorter timescales than we were able to do till now.  This experimental work is
              the main subject of the current proposal, and includes the construction of an
              experimental setup that will allow us to study the phase separation in a
              continuous, steady state apparatus, overcoming the difficulties encountered in
              the past to observe the initial, fast stage of the phenomenon.    The proposed
              research will lead to a better understanding of spinodal decomposition.  In
              addition, it has applications in the development of improved solvent extraction
              processes both in biotechnology and in the extraction of metal ions from
              contaminated soils, sediments and sludges, using chelating agents that are
              soluble in organic solvents.   ***
