Title       : Systematic Study of Subfamily Chloridoideae (Poaceae, Grasses) Using matK Gene
               Sequence Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9634231

Award Number: 9634231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Khidir W. Hilu hilukw@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634231  Hilu   The grass or cereal family Poaceae (Gramineae) is large and
              economically significant, but it remains taxonomically difficult. Recent
              results in molecular phylogenetic studies have yielded abundant DNA sequence
              data bearing on the closest living relatives of the extant grasses and on the
              major lineages of evolution within the family. With that "first generation" of
              molecular analyses having established an overall phylogenetic framework for the
              grass family, scientists are now turning their attention to fine scale analyses
              of tribe, genus, and species-level relationships. Dr. Khidir Hilu at Virginia
              Polytechnic Institute and State University is studying the subfamily
              Chloridoideae, which comprises ca. 150 genera of grasses with a distinctive C4
              pathway of photosynthesis. Many of these are southern-hemisphere plants,
              especially rich in Africa and Australia. The subfamily is characterized by
              subtle anatomical features of the leaf, presumably related to the biochemical
              pathways for carbon fixation and transport; but major questions exist about the
              naturalness of this group of genera, in particular whether different grass
              lineages may have evolved the same C4 pathway convergently, in response to
              similar drought-stressed environments.   Working with Dr. Nigel Barker from
              University of Cape Town, South Africa, Dr. Hilu is collecting representative
              species samples from the Chloridoideae subfamily, for sequence analyses of the
              chloroplast matK gene, which will be complemented by extensive data already
              accumulated by Barker for the rbcL gene and by published data for nuclear
              ribosomal genes. Comparisons among these gene sequences will yield estimates of
              mutational differences (nucleotide substitutions) between grass taxa, and
              permit reconstructions of the phylogenetic relationships of the subfamily. In
              turn, this knowledge will answer questions about the evolution of particular
              photosynthetic pathways in grasses and their attendant leaf anatomy.
