Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Synthesis of Higher Alcohols from Synthesis Gas
               through Modified Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis, Award in Indian Rupees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9634279

Award Number: 9634279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sisir K. Roy   (Principal Investigator current)
              M P. Sharma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Fuel Research
	      
	      Dhanbad, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Description:  The work proposed, `Synthesis of Higher Alcohols from Synthesis
              Gas through Modified Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis`,  is a collaboration in
              chemical engineering between West Virginia University (WVU) and the Central
              Fuel Research Institute (CFRI) in India.  The investigators are Professors
              Dadyburjor, Kugler of WVU and Drs. Roy, Sharma of CFIR.  The goals of the
              research are to develop catalysts and processes for the production of
              high-molecular-weight, branched alcohols from synthesis gas.  This includes
              preparation and characterization of the catalysts, and testing under reaction
              conditions.  The kinetics and mechanism are to be studied, to help in the
              design of improved catalysts.   Characterization and reaction studies will be
              run in both locations.  The studies are complementary, in that experimental
              facilities that are unavailable at CFRI are available at WVU and vice versa. 
              The results of the proposed work are of value in both countries.  In the US
              higher alcohols can be used in reformulated gasoline, while in India they can
              be substituted for tetraethyl lead in gasoline or used as a feedstock for mixed
              olefins.    Scope:  This is a new collaboration with the unique feature of
              linking a university laboratory in the US with a government research laboratory
              in India.  Such laboratories are among the most important centers in India for
              their effectiveness in conducting research that is of value to economic and
              industrial development.  The CFRI group is highly experienced in the synthesis
              of olefins and other selected chemicals.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
