Title       : CRI: Context-Dependent Mechanisms for Cortical Gain Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9634367

Award Number: 9634367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leif Finkel leif@jupiter.seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1054,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN:  9634367  PI: Finkel     Gain control is a powerful process that is used in
              many  biological and engineering applications.  In a videocamera, the
              photodetectors   can only operate over a limited range of light levels, so in
              order to be able to  record in bright daylight and dim internal light, the
              signal must be  re-scaled to stay within a limited range of intensities.  A
              slightly smarter   system, used in more expensive devices, is to change the
              gain (how much the   signal is amplified) separately in each local region.
              Changing the amount of   gain in an adaptive manner allows signals to be
              extracted from  ambient noise. The same principles of gain control act in our
              visual system--   in a simple manner on the pupil to control light entering the
              eye, but in   increasingly more sophisticated ways as one goes to higher levels
              in the visual   cortex. Our goal is to investigate these mechanisms of cortical
              gain control to  better understand how the visual sytem works, and as a means
              of uncovering   new image processing applications.  The cortex has the ability
              to control gain not only based on spatial  location, but also in a
              context-dependent manner.  The response to a   particular feature, say a short
              line segment, depends upon what other features   are present in the image.  If
              the line segment forms part of a circle or an   extended line, the response is
              increased.  Psychophysical studies have   identified the conditions under which
              certain features "pop-out" and become the focus   of visual attention.  Recent
              physiological studies have shown that cortical  cells are exquisitely sensitive
              to small changes in the context of the scene.   It is believed that response
              changes are a result of a change in gain of   individual cortical cells, but
              the mechanisms controlling cell gain are   poorly understood.  We are
              particularly interested in differential changes of gain  among different cells
              in a neural population.  Most features are   represented, in the cortex, by a
              set of graded responses ove r a   population of cells.  The orientation of a
              line, for example, is   coded by a distribution of responses over cells that
              prefer various  orientations (vertical, horizontal, oblique).   We hypothesize
              that inputs   from stimuli in the visual image act to differentially change the
              gain of   cells.  A differential change in gain across a population would  lead
              to increased sensitivity--a better estimate of line orientation, or   whatever
              feature is being analyzed. This type of context-dependent gain   control could
              lead to enhanced discrimination of the salient features in   an image.  We will
              carry out a series of physiological experiments in  cat visual cortex to
              investigate this hypothesis.  We also will conduct   a set of computer
              simulations of various cellular mechanisms to test   our model.  Finally, we
              will build a prototype image processing  device, based on these findings, and
              apply it to real images.
