Title       : The Wheel in Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9634256

Award Number: 9634256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49973              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel E. Schneider joel.schneider@sesameworkshop.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Children's Workshop
	      
	      New York, NY  10023    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9634256  Joel Schneider    This is a planning grant to Children's Television
              Workshop (CTW) to develop further the science content in a proposed television
              series for 8-12 year olds entitled, The Wheel In Space.  This adventure series
              would be set on an orbiting space station 100 years in the future which, by
              definition is an enormous scientific and technological enterprise.  The
              planning period would be used to investigate how its complex systems and
              operations can best be used to illustrate principles and processes science. 
              Specific planning tasks include:    o Working with consultants in space science
              and other scientific disciplines as well as with organizations such as NASA and
              the National Air and Space Museum to explore the science and technology
              involved in the operation of a space station and to project what living,
              working, and growing up on a space station might be like a century from now.   
              o Writing a content "bible" that will serve as a technical guide to writers of
              the series.    o Writing a treatment of the series that outlines story premises
              that incorporate science topics.    o Investigating potential components of the
              project that may enhance the reach and impact of the television series.    o
              Examining the advantages and disadvantages of a co-production arrangement with
              Southern Star, a television production company in Australia interested in
              participating in the project.     The PI's for the project will be Joel
              Schneider who will serve as Content Director and Jeffrey Nelson who will be
              Executive Producer.  Both have worked on previous science and mathematics media
              projects at CTW.  A principal consultant will be Samuel Gibbon, producer and/or
              executive producer for Sesame Street, The Electric Company, 3-2-1 Contact, and
              The Voyage of the Mimi.
