Title       : ECM: Supply Chain Management for Electronics Manufacturing with Product Recovery
               and Remanufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a9634914

Award Number: 9634914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reha M. Uzsoy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9634914  Uzsoy   As both environmental awareness and regulation increase in many
              countries, industry is considering recovering products at the end of their
              useful life for remanufacturing into new products or to reuse and recycle
              materials and components, thereby significantly increasing the problem of
              coordinating a company's supply chain. The goal of this research is to provide
              solutions to supply chain coordination and design problems encountered by
              companies with product recovery operations.  The investigator will develop
              supply chain models that include recovery of returned products, disassembly,
              remanufacturing, purchasing of new components, assembly, and distribution. 
              These models are formulated as linear programs, and the research involves the
              development of specialized solution procedures for these models. While these
              models are intended to be used for supply chain operation once the basic
              topology of the supply chain is given, the investigator will also develop
              models to support the longer-term issues of supply chain design.    Although
              much research has been directed toward designing environmentally benign
              products and processes, the economic viability of remanufacturing and recycling
              schemes is also affected by the design and control of the logistics and
              production systems in which they are realized.  This research addresses a
              strong need for model-based decision support tools for these systems, with high
              potential impact on their economic viability.  Increased economic viability of
              these systems will contribute to more widespread adoption of remanufacturing
              and recycling, with benefits not only to the environment but to the economy as
              a whole.
