Title       : Contemporary Variability, Future Changes and Human Dimensions of Snowpack Water
               Resources Over the Western United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9634329

Award Number: 9634329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Serreze serreze@kryos.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger G. Barry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. McGinnis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634329  Serreze   A research team combining skills in data analysis, remote
              sensing, modeling and the human dimensions of global change will conduct an
              integrated assessment of the variability and sustainability of snowpack water
              resources over the western United States under contemporary and possible future
              climate states.  Emphasis will be placed on the Colorado and Columbia basins
              and sub-basins.   Contemporary variability will be assessed using  blended data
              sets incorporating daily snow water equivalent (SWE), temperature and
              precipitation records from SNOTEL (SNOwTELemetry) sites and synoptic reporting
              stations as well as SWE derived from passive microwave brightness temperatures.
               In conjunction with National Meteorological Center (NMC) 'reanalysis'
              atmospheric fields, we will first focus on establishing large-scale and
              regional relationships between circulation and the seasonal accumulation/melt
              of the snowpack.  This will be followed by analyses of extremes in the observed
              record and linkages between SWE variability and teleconnection patterns,
              emphasizing regional responses to El-Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) forcings.
                These investigations will also utilize ensemble forecasts from a version of
              NMC's Medium Range Forecast (MRF) model, forced by observed and idealized
              evolutions of sea surface temperature.   Our empirical and modeling studies
              make use of circulation 'downscaling', whereby point or regional variables
              (e.g., SWE from SNOTEL sites average for sub-basins) are related to circulation
              through empirical relationships with the frequency/persistence of atmospheric
              circulation patterns based on principal component analyses.     Following
              studies of contemporary variability, the circulation downscaling transfer
              functions will be applied to 2xCO2 output from at least two different general
              circulation models (GCMs).   This technique makes the best use of today's GCMs
              to provide climate change scenarios through use of the large-scale circulation,
              which the models reproduce fairly  well, while avoiding the uncertainties
              modeled point surface variables.  Following diagnostic studies similar to those
              outlined above, reconstructed daily temperature, SWE and precipitation from the
              2xCO2 scenarios will be coupled with a snowmelt runoff model, providing
              assessment of potential future changes in snowmelt runoff in a series of
              regional studies.     Using information from the above investigations along
              with other existing data, different systems of water administration in the
              Colorado and Columbia basins will be examined as they relate to seasonal to
              international variations in SWE and conditions of  global change.  The
              objective is to improve predictions on the time and space scales most relevant
              to the management of waters resources at urban-rural interfaces and those
              appropriate to understanding hydrologic variability.   These studies will focus
              on:  1) flexibility of water allocation among users in response to interannual
              variability and potential changes in water availability and 2) vulnerability of
              system outputs (agriculture, recreation, power, water quality) to possible
              extremes of climate variations, sequences of climate events and climate change.
