Title       : Global Change and Ecological Complexity: A Two Workshop Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9634876

Award Number: 9634876
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osvaldo E. Sala   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Universidid de Buenos
	      
	      1428 BS AS,       /   -

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634876  Sala  The two workshops proposed by this group will foster cooperative
              efforts among countries of the Americas in the area of biodiversity and global 
               change research, building upon the previous work of two programs that
              addressed biodiversity within a global change context - DIVERSITAS, and the
              Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE) Program on
              Ecosystem Functioning of Biodiversity.  Because this is a very new area of
              ecological interest, there are no generally accepted principles.  Many new
              hypotheses about the interaction between ecological complexity and function
              have been advanced, but no overall coordination exists to test them. Global
              Change and Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) a core project of the International
              Geosphere-Biosphere Program (IGBP) has selected ecological complexity and
              function as one of its areas of focus, as has the   Inter-American Institute
              for Global Change Research (IAI).  These workshops will jointly address the
              GCTE and IAI research agendas for this topic.  The first workshop will develop
              scenarios of biodiversity change over the next fifty to one hundred years,
              based on currently available Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
              climate, atmospheric composition and land-use change scenarios.  These
              biodiversity scenarios would be analogous to the IPCC scenarios, and could form
              the basis for policy decisions regarding biodiversity impact and mitigation. 
              The second workshop will develop a cooperative research program, based on an
              integrated set of experimental, observational, and theoretical studies to
              determine the strength and generality of potential effects of ecological
              complexity on ecosystem function.  %%%  This workshop provides an opportunity
              for scientists to develop new research in the Americas that is tightly
              coordinated with major global and regional research programs.  The workshops
              will develop a research program to examine the relationships between the
              diversity found in an ecosystem and the functions that the eco system performs.
               Understanding these relationships will aid decision-makers in assessing
              impacts, and designing policies to mitigate the effects of global change. 
              These workshop are being co-sponsored by the National Center for Ecosystem
              Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS), and the National Science Foundation (NSF) on
              behalf of the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI).  The
              IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change
              issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas.  The National Science
              Foundation is the lead U.S. Government agency designated by the White House to
              carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.  ***
