Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Methods for Developing and Evaluating Computer Models
               Used in Integrated Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2000      
File        : a9634297

Award Number: 9634297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Berk berk@stat.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Turco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634297  Berk    In this project, the investigators will develop methodological
              tools essential for computer   models used in integrated assessments. Three
              kinds of methodological contributions are   involved: 1) a flux coupler that
              links output from one model to input from another, 2)   methods to assess
              uncertainties in coupled computer models, and 3) statistical diagnostics   for
              coupled computer models. The flux coupler transforms model output in one set of
                units, and for particular spatial and temporal scales, into model input in
              new units and   spatial temporal scales. The tools for assessing uncertainty
              capitalize on recent advances in   resampling procedures to represent sampling
              distributions for key model parameters and   outputs. The diagnostic techniques
              exploit new ways to link multiple inputs to multiple   outputs in a nonlinear
              fashion. As such, they provide a yardstick with which to judge the  
              performance of coupled computer models. The laboratory for developing and
              testing the   methodological tools is a coupled computer model linking local
              weather, local air quality,   and human outdoor water use for the Los Angeles
              Basin.    The interactions between humans and the larger physical and
              biological environment are   often simulated with large-scale computer models.
              In this project, the investigators focus   on how human water use affects local
              climate and air quality and then, in turn, is affected   by local climate and
              air quality. Outdoor water use, for instance, has impacts on local  
              temperature and the meteorological conditions that contribute to urban smog.
              But the   computer models used in such simulations need to be carefully
              evaluated. The key   products of this project are new tools for developing and
              assessing the computer models   used to understand human-environmental
              interactions. The new tools include: 1) a means   to allow computer models to
              more effectively transfer data between them, 2) methods that   allow the
              statistical uncertainties in the computer results  to be better described, and
              3)   techniques for analyzing more thoroughly how well the computer models are
              using the   information provided to them. These tools all speak to the more
              general issue of   improving large-scale computer simulations in a wide variety
              of applications.
