Title       : A New Technique for Monitoring Metallic Contamination During Aqueous
               Semiconductor Wafer Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9634058

Award Number: 9634058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Suni isuni@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed A. Busnaina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634058  Suni  As device and interconnect sizes continuously shrink, the
              microelectronics industry faces a number of serious technological challenges. 
              One important challenge is to decrease the level of metallic contamination on
              wafer surfaces during processing.  This is evidenced both by the tolerance
              limit of 1010 metal atoms/crn2 during fabrication of 16-MB dynamic random
              access memory(DRAM) and by the ability of metallic contaminants to
              short-circuit ultrathin((40() gate oxides . The level of contamination on the
              wafer surface is determined to a large extent by the tradeoff between
              deposition and dissolution of trace metallic impurities in aqueous chemical
              process solutions.  This tradeoff involves a number of fundamental physical and
              chemical processes, including surface electroless reaction, bulk diffusion and
              convection.  The potential sources, deposition mechanism(s) and transport of
              contaminants are still poorly understood despite their critical importance. 
              Study of these problems has been hampered by analytical difficulties in
              measuring the level of surface contamination.    We propose to develop a new in
              situ technique for indirect monitoring of metal contaminant deposition and
              dissolution in aqueous chemical process solutions.  This employs spatially
              resolved absorption spectroscopy to detect concentration gradients in the
              boundary layer near the wafer surface with sensitivity limits in the ppb range.
               We will employ this technique to monitor the rate of Cu(( deposition from a
              buffered oxide etchant(BOE) and to monitor the rate of Cu dissolution in a
              standard chemical process solution SC-1.  The experimental measurements will be
              complemented by computer modeling of metal contaminant deposition and
              dissolution during aqueous wafer processing using realistic process geometries.
               The proposed model will include diffusion, convection and electroless surface
              processes using time-dependent, three-dimensional finite difference solution of
              the governing momentum and mass transport equation s.  Experimental
              determination of the rates of surface electroless processes and bulk transport
              are essential to correctly predict rates of metal contaminant deposition and
              dissolution.  Besides potential applications as an in situ sensor, the
              experimental technique can be employed in a variety of studies of the
              fundamental physical and chemical processes occurring during metal contaminant
              deposition and dissolution.  By illuminating the surface with ultraviolet light
              and controlling the surface electrochemically, the potential at which
              deposition is initiated can be measured.  This will allow determination of the
              applicability of the Nernst equation to the prediction of metal contaminant
              deposition by electroless processes.  ***
