Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Plankton Communities in the Antarctic Frontal Zone:
               Interactions of Physical Forcing, Iron Limitation and Microzooplankton Grazing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9634053

Award Number: 9634053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Landry landry@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                96-34053  Landry  This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean 
              Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1 ) a  better understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic  and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the  physical, ecological and biogeochemical favors and
              processes  which regulate the magnitude and variability of these  fluxes, and
              (3) placing these fluxes into the context of the  contemporary global carbon
              cycle.    The Southern Ocean is a vast and variable environment with a 
              potentially large role in global carbon cycling. The JGOFS  Southern Ocean
              Program seeks to advance the understanding of  this region by investigating
              seasonal and spatial dynamics  in two important subsystems -- the Ross Sea
              shelf and the  Antarctic Polar Front Zone. This project will contribute to 
              this effort by determining microbial community structure and  by assessing
              rates of phytoplankton growth and  microzooplankton grazing on four cruises
              covering the  spring, summer, and autumn seasons in the open-ocean frontal 
              zone. The overall goal of this research is to understand how  physical
              processes (advection, mixing, and light),  iron-limitation, and grazing
              interact to determine plankton  community structure and production in the open
              oceans.    Population abundances and biomasses of the plankton  community will
              be assessed by analytical flow cytometry  (bacteria and phytoplankton) and
              microscopy (nano- and  microplankton) to determine their temporal and spatial 
              patterns relative to physical features of the polar front.  Growth rates of
              phytoplankton and bacteria, and  microzooplankton herbivory and bacterivory
              will be measured  with a suite of complementary methods including dilution, 
              fluorescently labeled prey, size fractionation, and a  Iysozme assay for
              bacterivory. Results of this project will  contribute to the general
              understanding of phytoplankton  control mechanisms and trophic interactions in 
              high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll regions of the world's  ocea ns. They will also
              help to identify how potential global  change affects water-column stability
              and how physical  forcing in the Southern Ocean may alter food web structure, 
              carbon storage and export from the euphotic zone.
