Title       : Bioengineering Analysis of Three-Dimensional Electromechanical Interactions in
               the Heart
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a9634974

Award Number: 9634974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. McCulloch amcculloch@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Omens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634974  McCulloch  The heart is a complex three-dimensional muscular organ in
              which  electrical signals trigger coordinated muscle contraction to  produce
              the pumping action.  Not only does the electrical system  of the heart affect
              its mechanical pumping, but mechanics also  affect the electrical system.  The
              cause of these interactions  has been studied in great detail at the level of
              the individual  heart muscle cell.  But understanding how these cellular 
              properties affect the performance of the whole heart is made  extremely
              difficult by the complex anatomy and structure of the  heart wall.  Such an
              understanding is essential if the new  findings of cellular biological science
              are to be applied to the  prevention and diagnosis of cardiac disease and the
              treatment of  heart patients.  Therefore, the objective of this research is to 
              develop anatomically accurate computer models of the heart that  are based
              soundly on the underlying physics and biology of the  heart cells.  To test
              these models, accurate measurements in  careful experiments will be conducted. 
                Building on our work over the past five years, we will conduct  sophisticated
              new computer models of the heart using methods of  analysis similar to those
              used in the automotive and aerospace  industries.  Our methods have been
              specialized to handle the  unique complexities of cardiac biology.  The models
              vi II be  based on detailed new measurements of the shape and structure, 
              mechanical, electrical and cellular properties of the heart wall.  Because
              these models will be extremely demanding to even the  fastest computers, we
              will run them on supercomputers at the San  Diego Supercomputer Center.  The
              completed computer models will  be used to investigate unanswered questions
              about how the  electromechanical properties of individual heart cells affect
              the  performance of the whole heart.    To test the reliability and accuracy of
              the computer models, new  experimental methods will be developed for
              simultaneously  studying electrical  and mechanical properties in the heart. 
              These measurements will be used to improve the models, which can  then be
              extended to analyze interactions between mechanics and  other physiological
              processes in the heart such as bloodflow.  'These new computer models will have
              diverse applications in  cardiac physiology, in the bioengineering design of
              new cardiac  diagnostic and treatment methods (such as cardiac ultrasound, MRI 
              and pacemakers) and as simulation tools for education and  training of doctors
              and patients, scientists, students and  engineers.  ***
