Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Compact Accelerator Mass Spectrometer for the Analysis of
               Biological Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1999   
File        : a9634259

Award Number: 9634259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Klinkowstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Newton Scientific Inc
	      7 Red Coach Lane
	      Winchester, MA  018902347    617/729-8553

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9634259  Klinkowstein     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project is to develop a compact, low cost accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)
              system for the measurement of ultra-low quantities of carbon-14 and tritium in
              labeled biological samples. The instrument will have a sensitivity 100-1000
              times higher than that of liquid scintillation decay counters and will allow
              the measurement of carbon-14 concentrations at or below naturally occurring
              levels in contemporary samples.  The high sensitivity afforded by AMS allows
              the fate of environmental carcinogens, mutagens, and toxins to be studied on
              the molecular level at extremely low levels of exposure. Existing AMS systems
              use large, costly nuclear physics accelerators which are not generally
              available to biomedical researcher and are not compatible with interface to
              standard chromatographs used for the purification of biological samples. The
              research is intended to lead to development of a dedicated, biomedical AMS
              system based on a new approach which allows the accelerator energy to be
              lowered by approximately a factor-of-three compared with existing systems. 
              This greatly reduces the size, cost, and complexity of the instrument. The
              feasibility of this approach was demonstrated in the Phase I experiments which
              showed that an AMS system using a 1 MV tandem accelerator will allow the
              unambiguous detection of 14C in labeled contemporary samples. The Phase II
              research will focus on the construction and testing of the first on-line sample
              purification and injection interface for biomedical AMS. The interface will
              make possible the direct introduction of biological samples from a gas
              chromatograph into an AMS system thereby allowing the use of AMS in conjunction
              with standard, high resolution chemical separation techniques.      The system
              will provide the critical front-end technology for a dedicated low energy AMS
              instrument and will also make possible the use of any existing AMS system for
              on-line analysis of biological samples.   This system will be of interest to
              research and analytical laboratories studying the biological effects of
              environmental carcinogens and genotoxins.  ***
