Title       : Metrics for Evaluation of the Product Design Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a9634768

Award Number: 9634768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246421             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Ullman ullman@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9634768  Ullman   This grant provides funding for the development of metrics
              usable by practicing engineers and managers to evaluate and improve the product
              development process.  These metrics will measure the current process, point to
              potential process inefficiencies, and assist in the evaluation of new best
              practices.  The metrics will be based on characterizing the information
              evolution and decision structure used during product development.  The concept
              of design process robustness will be developed as a foundation for the
              measures.  When non-robust processes are identified, guidelines developed
              during this research will provide opportunities for improvement and the ability
              to document the potential for increased design process efficiency.    
              Product-based industries are under continuous pressure to design and produce
              new, and increasingly higher quality, products in less time and with fewer
              resources.  With this pressure has come the realization of the importance of a
              known and managed product development process.  Many large companies have spent
              considerable time and effort documenting their development process.  Integrated
              within the process are many industry-wide best practices (for example, quality
              function deployment, functional modeling, design of experiments, design for
              assembly).  Many small companies have only just begun to identify and attempt
              to control the processes that determine the evolution of their products.  Both
              large and small companies need better tools for measuring the product design
              process  Standards, like ISO-9000, require a product development process but
              give no guidance on how to develop, measure and ensure the usefulness of such a
              process.  This research will result in tools usable by industry for self
              assessment and guidance to improve their product design process.
