Title       : Analysis of the Plant CR4 Receptor Kinase and Gene Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9634145

Award Number: 9634145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Becraft becraft@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY    _    The Project Summary should include a statement of
              objectives, methods to be employed, and the significance of the proposed
              activity to the advancement of knowledge or education. Avoid use of first
              person to complete this summary. DO NOT EXCEED ONE PAGE. (Some Programs may
              impose more stringent limits.)    The maize crinkly4 (cr4) gene encodes a
              receptor kinase involved in the development of leaf epidermis and the aleurone
              of kernels (Becraft et al., in preparation). The novel extracellular domain
              contains a 39 amino acid repeat motif and a cysteine-rich region with
              similarity to the extracellular ligand-binding domain of mammalian tumor
              necrosis factor receptors (TNFRs). A nucleotide probe containing the
              extracellular domain coding sequence hybridizes at low stringency to several
              genomic fragments in both maize and Arabidopsis, thus cr4 represents a new gene
              family. The objectives of the current proposal are twofold: 1. to initiate
              attempts to isolate the signal molecule by direct molecular techniques and 2.
              to characterize this gene family in Arabidopsis. The latter will also result in
              the isolation of the cr4 cognate gene which will be used to develop a genetic
              system to study the CR4 receptor and possibly to identify the signal molecule. 
                The similarity between CR4 and the ligand-binding domain of TNFR suggests
              that CR4 probably also binds a peptide signal molecule. Toward the first
              objective, a phage display library will be constructed using RNA from leaves at
              the stage when the mutant phenotype first becomes apparent. The library will be
              screened by biopanning for clones encoding peptides bound by the extracellular
              domain of CR4.    Members of the cr4 gene family will be isolated by screening
              an Arabidopsis genomic library at low stringency with the extracellular probe
              from the maize cr4. The clones will be used to examine expression of the
              Arabidopsis genes by RNA gel blot analysis. These probes will also be used to
              genetically map the genes and obtain cDNA clones  which will be sequenced.
              Sequence comparisons among Arabidopsis gene family members and with the maize
              gene will provide clues to functionally significant amino acid motifs.
              Particular, attention will be paid to the TNFR-like domain. The cr4 cognate
              gene will be determined from structure and sequence similarity, and become the
              focus of longer term studies comparing the developmental role of cr4 in
              Arabidopsis with maize and to functionally dissect the CR4 protein. This could
              also provide a tool for genetic screens to identify the signal molecule if
              direct molecular methods are unsuccessful.    NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)
