Title       : Separation of Complex Materials by Composition Using Thermal Field-Flow
               Fractionation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9634195

Award Number: 9634195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Schimpf mschimpf@boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is a Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) activity  
              directed by Dr. Martin E. Schimpf of the Chemistry Department at Boise   State
              University, and supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry   Program in
              the Division of Chemistry.  The focus of the research is on   Thermal
              Field-Flow Fractionation (ThFFF).  This separation technique is   based on
              thermal diffusion and the separation process is known to depend   on both the
              chemical composition and  the molecular weight or size of the   compounds under
              investigation.  Work by undergraduate students will be   done to develop a
              fundamental understanding of thermal diffusion,   particularly in terms of the
              separation of macromolecules and particulate   matter.   The effect of
              properties of the sample material and the carrier   solvent will be studied to
              reveal their impact on retention.  Factors   governing thermophoretic motion of
              polymers such as the effect of chain   branching will be investigated.  The
              knowledge gained from the   fundamental work will be applied to practical
              separation problems   involving copolymers.  A combination of ThFFF with
              measurements of   viscosity will be used to obtain the average molecular weight
              and   composition of block copolymers.    Two-dimensional separations using  
              ThFFF and size exclusion chromatography will be investigated.  The ability to
              separate the components of complex mixtures of compounds   is vital to the
              successful solution of a number of major problems in   chemical analysis such
              as the identity and concentration of environmental   pollutants, and the
              composition of drug formulations.  This project, to   be carried out by
              undergraduate students, will investigate the   fundamental basis and
              applications of a separation method known as   Thermal Field-Flow Fractionation
              (ThFFF).  A major factor for the   interest in this approach is that the method
              is potentially applicable to   the separation of polymer materials in solution
              and solid particles of   matter.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
