Title       : Development and Rubustness Analysis of Fifth-Level Adaptive Critics for Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9634127

Award Number: 9634127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212219             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. N. Balakrishnan bala@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634127  Balakrishnan         This study will build on previous supported
              research into  brain-like intelligent control, using an advanced form of neural
               network design.       This research has three major objectives: the first is
              to  develop two level-5 adaptive critic designs.  (Increasing level  numbers
              indicate increasing level of capabilities to solve  engineering problems and
              closer mimicking of perceived human  intelligence.  Currently, the highest
              level of critic design that  has been well understood and used in a few
              applications is a level- 4 critic.) The first critic design based on
              approximate dynamic programming outputs the optimal return function and the
              derivatives of cost with respect to system states.  The second critic design
              outputs the Hamiltonian and the derivatives of the Hamiltonian with respect to
              states and control.  Advantages of these designs include retrieving Ricatti
              mattrix from the critic, and being able to check the Legendre-Clebsch
              condition, necessary for minimality.       The second major objective is to
              investigate the robustness of the synthesized controller to: a) parametric
              variations, b) bound but unmodelled disturbances, and c) stochastic
              disturbances.  The robustness analysis will be based on singular value based
              techniques, Liapunov concepts, and Montecarlo simulations.       The third
              major objective is to use a set of two critics in  conjunction to solve bench
              mark engineering problems involving  inner loop and outer loop to account for
              slow dynamics and fast  dynamics.       The significance or major goal of this
              research is to combine human problem solving (brain like intelligence)
              philosophy embedded in a level-5 critic design and firm mathematical
              foundations offered by modern control and dynamic programming to solve
              difficult control problems in engineering.  This approach not only finds
              optimal solutions but attempts to analyze the resulting solutions through
              robustness analysis.  Such relations to establish relative stability of
              neurocontrolle rs are expected to help in the acceptance of neurocontrol for
              implementation in engineering.  ***  ??
