Title       : CRI: Reliable and Adaptive Behavior of Neurons: Experiment and Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9634405

Award Number: 9634405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry D. I. Abarbanel hdia@jacobi.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen I. Selverston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1054,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN:  9634405  PI:  Abarbanel    The last ten years has seen a huge increase in
              the number of computational studies aimed at understanding the brain.  This is
              largely the result of an enormous expansion of computer power as well as
              promising new programs which are useful in studying neural-like phenomena such
              as pattern recognition and memory formation.  During this period there has also
              been a parallel increase in our knowledge of small nervous systems at the
              cellular and circuit level.  Because the brain is so complex in terms of the
              number of cells and connections between them, smaller invertebrate nervous
              systems, which operate in exactly the same manner as larger ones,  can serve as
              models for understanding fundamental properties of information processing. 
              There are now many small circuits which have been completely described in terms
              of synaptic connectivity.  While such circuits can be modeled
              phenomenologically, there is a lack of deep understanding of the fundamental
              principles by which they operate.  Our approach will be to look for such
              general principles in the thirty celled stomatogastric nervous system of the
              lobster.  We will use new mathematical techniques which have been so successful
              in physics, to provide a dynamical, nonlinear analysis of the rhythmic motor
              output patterns generated by the ganglion.  These methods have not yet been
              applied to studies of the nervous system at the level of single identified
              neurons and small neural circuits.  This project is both special and timely
              because it has the ability to move back and forth between theory and experiment
              at a level of resolution not possible in other systems.  Using this approach,
              we hope to provide a new and generalizable description of how neural networks
              produce and process information so as to achieve reliable, robust and adaptive
              behavior for the animal.  We believe a cross-disciplinary synergy such as we
              describe here, holds the key for future developments in robotics and artificial
              intelligence as well as providin g basic information about neural processing.
