Title       : Electrocatalysis for Electroanalysis: Anodic Oxygen-Transfer Reactions at Doped
               Metal-Oxide Film Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1998   
File        : a9634544

Award Number: 9634544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis C. Johnson dcj@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9183,9197,AMPP,BIOT,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program   in the
              Division of Chemistry, is directed by Prof. Dennis C. Johnson of   the
              Chemistry Department at Iowa State University.  The work utilizes   
              electrochemical cells containing doped metal oxide anodes whose  
              electrocatalytic properties will be exploited in a study of   oxygen-transfer
              oxidations involving polar organic molecules.  Oxygen   atom mediation is
              proposed by the PI as the mechanism by which these   oxidations proceed. 
              Experiments designed to provide evidence to support   or deny this mechanism
              will be carried out and digital simulations will   be used to confirm
              mechanisms.  Aliphatic amines, amino acids and small   peptides, many with
              functional groups containing sulfur, are the test   compounds. Working
              electrodes fabricated as disks suitable for the   rotated disk electrode
              assembly are used to obtain current-voltage curves   which can be analyzed for
              their mechanistic information.  The surface   topography of the electrodes is
              explored using the scanning electron   microscope.  To provide additional
              information to support the mechanism   studies, chemical analysis of the
              products of exhaustive electrolysis   will be done with gas chromatography-mass
              spectrometry and   electrospray-mass spectrometry.  Electrode reactions in
              electrochemical cells produce chemical changes in   the ions or molecules which
              take part in the reaction but until the   pathway is known by which such a
              change occurs, scientific use of the   process is limited.  The objective of
              this project is to understand the   nature of reactions taking place at the
              anode of a cell which involve the   transfer of an oxygen atom to form a
              product. There are many examples of   compounds which might follow such a
              pathway including some of biological   interest and others of environmental
              concern.   Potential applications of   the knowledge gained are found in the
              area of sensors for chemical   analysis.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
