Title       : Geosynthetics for Foundation and Soil Isolation in Earthquake Hazard Mitigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9634747

Award Number: 9634747
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mishac Yegian myegian@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: CMS-9634747, Mishac Yegian, Northeastern U    Under dynamic
              excitation, slip deformations occur along a  smooth geosynthetic interface,
              thus reducing the energy  transmitted through the interface. As a result,
              geosynthetic  liners placed under the foundation of a constructed facility  can
              absorb seismic energy, and hence transmit smaller ground  motions to the
              overlying structure. This concept of using  geosynthetics for Foundation
              Isolation is similar to  mechanical isolators used in structural engineering.
              In  addition, using geosynthetic liners at different depths  within new slopes,
              embankments or hydraulic fills -- known  to be extremely vulnerable to
              liquefaction -- can reduce the  soil amplification effect on the ground motion,
              and the  liquefaction potential of loose fills. This concept is  referred to as
              Soil Isolation.    This research program investigates, through experimental and
               analytical work, the technical feasibility, practicality,  and limitations of
              using geosynthetics for foundation and  soil isolation to mitigate earthquake
              hazard.    The scope of this research includes shaking table tests on 
              geosynthetics that show the best promise for foundation and  soil isolation.
              The experimental results are used to develop  and validate constitutive models
              that describe the dynamic  response of geosynthetic interfaces. Model tests on 
              buildings, fluid retaining structures and soil profiles are  conducted using a
              shaking table, and the results used to  develop procedures for the analysis of
              the dynamic response  of structures and soil profiles that are isolated using 
              geosynthetic liners.    The results are used to identify areas of need for
              further  investigation that will help to transfer the research  results to
              engineering practice.    The innovative concept of using geosynthetics to
              reduce  earthquake ground motion intensity, and to reduce  liquefaction
              potential, can be extremely cost effective and  a simpler alternative to
              conventional earthquake hazard  mitigation me asures.
