Title       : GOALI: Efficient Production of Correctly Folded tPA and Other Complex Eucaryotic
               Proteins in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1996   
File        : a9634036

Award Number: 9634036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Georgiou gg@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Swartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1049,1491,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9634036  Georgiou  This proposal is on research to improve the production  of
              correctly folded complex eucaryotic protein in E.  coli.  It is proposed to
              employ thrombolytic enzyme  tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) as the model
              protein  for optimizing the expression of secreted  multidisulfide proteins in
              bacteria.  It is expected  that conditions which maximize the formation of the 
              correct disulfide bonds in tPA will also be useful for  the expression of
              simpler proteins with fewer disulfide  bonds.  A three part strategy is
              proposed.  This  includes: (1) Cellular Engineering:  This approach  utilizes a
              recent discovery by the investigators that  the mammalian protein disulfide
              isomerase (PDI) can be  expressed in a functional form in E. coli where it can 
              mediate the expression of low, but significant, amounts  of active tPA. 
              Conditions that enhance the activity of  PDI in the bacterial periplasmic
              space, and thus result  in increased yields of correctly folded tPA, will be 
              determined. (2) Genetic Screening:  The use of genetic  screens to isolate
              mutants producing high amounts of  correctly folded tPA will be employed since
              disulfide  bond formation is a complex process that may prove  difficult to
              optimize solely by cell engineering  approaches.  Mutants exhibiting the
              highest titer of  active tPA will be isolated and characterized to  determine
              the genetic lesions that result in more  efficient disulfide bond formation. 
              (3) Fermentation  Engineering:  A systematic study of the effect of 
              fermentation conditions which are known to have an  influence on tPA folding
              will be conducted.  These  include parameters such as dissolved oxygen 
              concentration, the redox potential of the growth  medium, the presence of low
              molecular weight thiols and  disulfides and culture pH.  The in vivo oxygen
              states  of the enzymes that catalyze disulfide bond formation  will be
              determined so that the effect of growth  conditions on function of the
              disulfide machinery can  be understood.  Also, fermentation c onditions that 
              maximize cell density while maintaining the optimal  oxidation state for
              heterologous protein folding will  be investigated.  This research is a
              cooperative  activity with Genentech Inc. in South San Francisco,  California. 
              Genentech will commit significant  resources including scientists' time
              fermentation  equipment, expression vectors, antibodies, analytical  support,
              tPA samples etc. towards the completion of  this research.  ***
