Title       : New Methods for Decision-Focused Integrated Assessment: Multiple Objectives,
               Risk Evaluation and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9634336

Award Number: 9634336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199964             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Hugh Ellis hugh.ellis@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin F. Hobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9634336  Ellis  Hobbs  Johns Hopkins University     This award was made as
              part of the Methods and Models for Integrated Assessment competition.  It
              provides funds for the investigators to develop methods that will improve the
              capability of integrated assessment systems to perform policy relevant modeling
              and decision evaluation by incorporating:  (1) explicit representation of
              alternative policies;  (2) credible physical models and/or the capability to
              easily modify the system to incorporate alternative model structures and
              parameters;  (3) performance indicators or objectives that address the concerns
              of the policymaker/user of the system;  (4) characterizations of the level and
              sources of uncertainty associated with model outputs;  (5) a user interface
              that encourages sensitivity analysis and exploration and that effectively
              communicates tradeoffs among objectives and uncertainties;  and (6) the ability
              to show the implications of alternative value judgments concerning acceptable
              risks and tradeoffs among objectives.  These goals require research in three
              research areas.  The computation issues that will be studied include:  (1)
              rapid generation of nondominated alternatives;  (2) identification of
              stochastically nondominated alternatives when there are multiple objectives; 
              (3) identification of alternatives that perform well on regret-based criteria; 
              and (4) the ability to link a solution in objective space with the
              corresponding solution in decision space and the value judgments implied by
              choosing that solution.  The visualization issues to be developed focus on
              effective presentation of information on tradeoffs and risks.  Finally,
              research into system-user dynamics will compare methods for users to save and
              compare results.  The investigators' work in these three areas will be tested
              in a set of demonstration workshops that are supported by this award.  These
              workshops will use the new modeling and display methods on actual integrated
              assessments, to see how policy-makers make use o f the new methods.  Overall,
              these improvements should increase the potential for policy recommendations
              that consider a fuller range of integrated models and possible outcomes.
