Title       : Integration of Computer Aided Design and Dimensional Inspection Through
               Automatic Process Planning and Probe Path Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9634727

Award Number: 9634727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aristides A. G. Requicha requicha@lipari.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9634727  Requicha   This award provides funding for investigating the
              development of software   systems for automatically generating all the
              information necessary to inspect mechanical parts with computer-controlled
              Coordinate Measuring Machines (CMMs). The focus will be on unsculptured parts
              that may contain many 2.5-dimensional features such as bosses, slots and
              pockets. The primary input will be a solid model of a workpiece to be measured
              and toleranced according to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)  
              dimensioning and tolerancing standard. The output will be a set of setups, each
              associated with surface features to be inspected, probes to be used, probe
              orientations, points to be inspected in each feature, and CMM programs
              expressed in the ANSI standard language for CMM control. This work will provide
              a direct link between the Computer Aided   Design and metrology activities in a
              product's life cycle.   If successful, this research will result in both
              scientific and industrial advances. Scientifically, it will improve the current
              understanding of spatial reasoning, which is a difficult area of artificial
              intelligence. Industrially, it will provide a means for significantly reducing
              the costs of dimensional inspection of mechanical parts, for reducing
              inspection time, and for promoting consistency in part measurement. All of
              these benefit the overall   manufacturing process and product quality, which is
              increasingly important in today's marketplace. This work impacts directly the
              measurement of mechanical parts (1) to decide whether final products or
              supplier parts are acceptable, (2) to qualify manufacturing processes, that is,
              to show that they produce the required features, and (3) to control processes
              by identifying dimensional trends that must be corrected by adjusting process
              parameters.
