Title       : Passive Vibration Control by Solid Free-Form Structural Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9634717

Award Number: 9634717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu Wang yuwang@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project focuses on the development of an  innovative passive
              techniques for vibration suppression and  control. A design technique of solid
              free-free structural  optimization is formulated. In this design methodology, a
               structure is defined as a spatial arrangement of micro-  structural elements.
              The structural design starts with a  specified design domain as a union of
              every conceivable  design space that can possess materials without violating 
              any geometric and loading constraints. Then the design  domain is divided into
              many small design cells. Each of the  design cells is modeled as a `composite`
              material with micro-  geometry perforations. By changing the parameters
              defining  the micro-geometric structures, the topology and shape of  the
              structure is represented effectively and desired  structural dynamic
              characteristics can be obtained during  the research project. Two major passive
              vibration  suppression techniques are investigated:(i) eigenstructure 
              assignment, and (ii) frequency response function shaping.  The essence of the
              first approach is to derive the response  of a structure in terms of a set of
              desired modal  properties, whereas the second approach aims at controlling  the
              overall response characteristics of the structure at  certain critical points
              and through a bandwidth of interest.  The proposed approaches are validated by
              using scaled models  in experimental testing. The results of this research lead
               to the development of robust design techniques of passive  vibration control
              for aerospace and automotive applications,  and a new structural design tool
              for substantial performance  improvement in lightweight engineering structures.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
