Title       : A Nonlinear Dynamical Technique for Improving the Function of the Human Postural
               Control System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9634024

Award Number: 9634024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189712             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Collins jcollins@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634024  Collins  The objective of this project, which is a renewal proposal of
              a  prior NSF award, is to develop a noise-based technique which can  be used to
              lower the detection thresholds of the proprioceptive  system and thereby
              improve the performance of the human postural  control system.  Upright stance
              in humans is regulated by a  complex control system that involves a number of
              different  sensory mechanisms, including the proprioceptive system.  Aperiodic
              stochastic resonance (ASR) is a phenomenon wherein the  response of a nonlinear
              system to a subthreshold aperiodic input  signal is optimized by the presence
              of a particular level of  noise.  ASR has been demonstrated in a simple
              neuronal model and  in cutaneous sensory neurons.  This work suggests that it
              should  be possible to introduce noise artificially into a  neurophysiological
              sensory system (e.g., the proprioceptive  system) in order to improve its
              ability to detect arbitrary  subthreshold signals.  To date, however,
              bioengineering  applications have not been explored.  The specific objectives
              of  this study are 1) to develop a physiologically-realistic neuronal  model as
              a test-bed for bioengineering applications of ASR; 2) to  demonstrate that the
              detection thresholds of the proprioceptive  system are changed with the
              addition of input noise; and 3) to  demonstrate that noise-induced changes to
              the proprioceptive  detection thresholds at the ankle affect the postural
              control  system.  This work could result in the development of an  inexpensive
              technique for improving the performance of the human  postural control system. 
              Such a technique could have important  ramifications for individuals with
              elevated proprioceptive  thresholds, such as older adults and patients with
              neural  disorders, who may be predisposed to falls.  Thus, the results of  this
              project could eventually serve to reduce the incidence,  cost, and health risks
              of falling.  ***
