Title       : Mechanics of Sediment Transport in Complex Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9634261

Award Number: 9634261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. McLean mclean@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal Number: CTS 9634261    Principal Investigator: McLean    
              This is a grant to support the investigation of the mechanics of sediment
              entrainment and transport in situations where near-bed mean flow and turbulence
              structure is significantly different than that of steady, uniform flows. This
              will be done within the context of an overall goal of developing the capability
              to predict the flow and sediment dynamics over an erodible bed and the
              resulting topographic response. Existing relations between flow characteristics
              and sediment transport developed in steady, uniform flows yield inaccurate
              results for more complex flows. This error arises through the alteration of the
              distributions of lift and drag forces on sediment grains making up the bed as a
              result of the effects of spatial and temporal accelerations on the turbulence
              field. These effects are a critical part of the mutual interactions between
              flow structure, sediment transport, and bed morphology that give rise to a wide
              spectrum of erodible bed phenomena, such as the formation and stability of
              ripples and dunes.  The principle aims of this research are threefold: a) to
              extending the knowledge gleaned from two-dimensional bedforms to
              three-dimensional features b) to determine the response of a sediment particle
              to complex flow and c) to extend this information to suspended particles
              through the use of a multi-frequency acoustic backscatter system as well as
              with an imaging fiber optic system for observing very near-bed processes.
              Measurements will be combined with an advection/diffusion model for suspended
              sediment to investigate the nature of the relationship between local
              entrainment at the bed and the near-bed flow field and how this affects the
              evolution of the bedforms.
