Title       : GOALI: Optimal Hybrid Control and Coordination of Engine and Transmission
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9634375

Award Number: 9634375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Le Yi Wang lywang@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jing Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634375  Wang         The main objective of this project is to develop new 
              optimal hybrid control methods and to investigate feasible  control strategies
              for coordination and robust control of  automotive engine and transmission
              systems.  The project will  formulate and investigate certain generic optimal
              hybrid control  problems which are strongly motivated by the problem of 
              stabilization and performance optimization in automotive  powertrain systems. 
              In terms of automotive applications, the  discrete actions will be VDE
              (variable displacement engine) and  transmission gear selections.  Performance
              measure will then be  introduced to formulate an optimal hybrid control
              problem.   Feasible hybrid control methods will be investigated and developed. 
                   This project will be of importance in gaining a better  understanding of
              essential features of hybrid control systems,  and in developing reliable
              design methods for hybrid systems.   The approach of employing powertrain
              control as benchmark  problems will provide the PI and industry collaborators
              with  insightful motivations for problem formulation, clarifying  criteria for
              justifying design assumptions, and a platform for  design verification.  This
              project will provide certain benchmark  problems and feasible control
              strategies for hybrid systems, and  contribute toward narrowing the gaps
              between good intuition and  rigorous problem formulation, between
              trial-and-error design and  reliable control methods, and between
              application-oriented  methodologies and mathematical theory.  The project will
              provide  an excellent opportunity for intensive long-term cooperation  between
              the PI and researchers at Ford Motor Company. Several  Ph.D. students of the PI
              will participate in the project as part  of their dissertation research and
              will be jointly supervised by  the industry collaborators. A graduate-level
              course on automotive  control systems will be developed.  ***
