Title       : Congested Network Flow Models and Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9634849

Award Number: 9634849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Hearn Hearn@ise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Motakuri V. Ramana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9634849  Hearn   This project involves modeling and analysis of congested
              networks.  Congested networks are encountered in a variety of scenarios,
              including vehicular traffic flow, routing of calls in telecommunications
              systems, natural gas distribution, water distribution.  The research is
              concerned with two distinct problems:  (1) optimal toll pricing in congested
              networks, and (2)  determination of flows in bounded congested network flow
              models.  The investigators will develop algorithms to efficiently solve these
              problems and will carry out a large-scale numerical implementation of the
              approaches developed in the research.  In the case of congestion toll pricing, 
              these algorithms will be based on an existing two-stage approach for
              determining tolls known as MINSYS.  New research will focus on efficient
              specialized methods to exploit the network structure of the problem, and
              extensions to the case where the system objective function is convex but each
              of the components of the cost map is concave.  In the case of bounded networks,
              these algorithms will represent enhancements to the principal investigator's
              non-linear, multicommodity congestion network code, which uses the affine
              scaling with centering bundle method (ASCBM).  In particular, the method will
              be extended to handle non-differentiable objective functions and
              ill-conditioned problems.       Pricing of tolls on congested networks to
              guarantee that the "user" equilibrium is close to the "system" equilibrium is a
              problem faced by organizations as diverse as city traffic planners and
              telecommunications engineers.  The theory and algorithms developed in this
              research have great promise to improve planning and decision-making functions
              in these networks.  Moreover, the research should open up new avenues for the
              analysis of  network flows in general.
