Title       : MOTI: A Distributed Decision Framework Integrating Manufacturing Planning and
               Multiple Supply Chain Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9634808

Award Number: 9634808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392058             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. David Wu david.wu@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick T. Harker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9634808  Wu   In order to remain competitive, many companies must increase
              product variety at the same time that they decrease product volumes.  As
              product lines proliferate, these companies often struggle to plan production
              and manage complicated supply chains across multiple production facilities and
              product lines.  This research involves the development of integrated production
              planning and supply chain management functions in such an environment.  The
              investigators will develop an analytical framework for production planning with
              multiple supply chains, each with its own unique dynamic.  Rather than
              decoupling supply chains, this research investigates methods of integrating
              decisions along and across multiple supply chains.  Trade-offs between
              centralized and decentralized (distributed) decision-making, resource
              consolidation and capacity management are considered.  Using economic
              techniques such as market auction theory and game theory, it will provide a
              basis for distributed decision-support, with the requisite information transfer
              between supply chains and production facilities.  The investigators will work
              closely with a large automotive firm and a major electronics company to ensure
              that the research is responsive to industry's needs.        Supply chain
              management is a pressing concern in industries that, by virtue of their complex
              product lines and introduction of new technologies, have layers of suppliers. 
              Moreover, the push to lower inventories in most manufacturing concerns makes
              supply chain management even more critical.  This research should have high
              potential for better capital management, material planning, and customer
              service, and thus improved competitiveness, especially in certain critical
              industries, such as automotive and electronics.
