Title       : PDS: Architecture, Algorithms and Applications for Future Generation
               Supercomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1997   
File        : a9634719

Award Number: 9634719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Van Rosendale                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vipin Kumar kumar@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed H. Sameh  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research proposes a preliminary evaluation of enabling technologies for 100
              TeraFLOP class computers.  The research is broadly classified into the
              following parts: architectures (single node architecture, parallel
              architecture), system software (languages, compilers, programming tools and
              environments), algorithms (design models, performance and scalability) , and
              applications (scaling and realizable performance).  Single node architectures
              for future generation computers will exploit considerable implicit parallelism.
               Candidate technologies for single node architectures include super-scalar
              execution, very long instruction words, simultaneous hardware multithreading,
              and processors-in-memory.  The PIs propose a processor architecture based on
              the VLIW with possible implementations using PIMs.  Parallel architectures are
              based on clusters of these nodes in a hierarchical network.  Due to the large
              number of computational units, algorithm design and scalability issues become
              critical.  Hierarchical decomposition of problems with an emphasis on proper
              mapping to the underlying architecture is necessary.  Whereas problems at
              higher levels must be loosely coupled, they can be very tightly coupled at
              lower levels.  Alternate algorithm design methodologies and abstract machine
              models must be constructed.  Finally, the scope of applications that can
              effectively use these architectures needs to be identified. This research will
              perform a study of each of these aspects of future generation computers.  The
              PIs expect to draw heavily from their experience in the design of scalable
              parallel algorithms and architectures and from the CEDAR project.
