Title       : Analysis of a Stress-Inducible DNA-Binding Protein in a Cyanobacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9634049

Award Number: 9634049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186413             (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Bullerjahn bullerj@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9634049  Bullerjahn  This project is an investigation of a mechanism by which
              the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942 can adapt to oxidative
              stress.  The gene dpsA, encoding a stress-induced DNA-binding protein has been
              cloned and sequenced.  Previous work has shown that the DpsA protein
              accumulates under conditions of nutrient stress as well during the stationary
              phase of the growth curve.  The protein forms extremely stable hexameric
              complexes that bind DNA; studies of the evolutionarily divergent Escherichia
              coli gene and its product indicate the DpsA protein serves to protect the
              chromosome from oxidative stress during long-term nutrient depletion and
              exposure to peroxide.  However, a major difference between the E. coli and
              Synechococcus polypeptides is the presence of a heme-binding domain in the
              C-terminal half of the Synechococcus DpsA protein.  It is suggested that the
              function of heme is to consume excess peroxide by a catalase mechanism.  There
              is potentially a higher demand for detoxifying reactive species of oxygen in
              oxygen-producing phototrophs such as cyanobacteria.  Mutants defective in the
              production of DpsA will be examined with respect to their ability to survive
              conditions of photooxidative damage and peroxide treatment.  Truncated and
              chimeric forms of dpsA will also be introduced into dpsA null mutants of
              Synechococcus in order to test whether the presence of the heme-binding domain
              plays an important role in survival.  RNA blots and promoter fusions will be
              used to determine the environmental conditions contributing to dpsA
              transcription.  Immunocytochemical methods will be used to attempt to determine
              the location of the DpsA/DNA complex in the cells during adaptation to
              stationary phase.  This study may help determine whether there is a distinct
              structural region of the nucleoid that is preferentially protected by the DpsA
              protein complex.  Lastly, the yeast two-hybrid system will be employed to
              screen for possible protein-protein interactions that might be  involved in
              regulating assembly and turnover of the stable DpsA complex.  Overall, this
              work will help reveal mechanisms involved in global stress responses in
              cyanobacteria, and other phototrophs.  %%%  This study is concerned with how
              the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942 can adapt to conditions
              which cause oxidative damage to cell components.  The gene dpsA and the protein
              it encodes DpsA will be studied.  DpsA helps protect the cells against
              oxidative damage by an unusual mechanism.  This proposal will focus on how
              light and other environmental conditions control production of DpsA.  These
              studies will provide new information about how photosynthetic organisms respond
              to oxidative stress and change.  ***
