Title       : Control Theory for Nonlinear, Distributed, Mechatronic Systems with Applications
               to Overhead Crane Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9634796

Award Number: 9634796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63834              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher D. Rahn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Darren M. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project develops an overhead crane control system for  precision transport
              and assembly operations. The crane  system provides an excellent testbed for
              the development of  advanced control theory for nonlinear, distributed, 
              mechatronic systems. The crane model includes a nonlinear,  distributed cable
              and typically an electrical drive motor.  The theory can then be applied to
              many similar systems, such  as smart structures, flexible rotors supported by
              magnetic  bearings, and high speed material transport machinery.  Overhead
              cranes have higher load capacity, larger workspace,  simpler position
              monitoring, and easier obstacle avoidance  than forklifts or Automatic Guided
              Vehicle. The poor payload  position and orientation control of overhead cranes
              has  limited their application in precision transport and  assembly operations.
              Due to the flexible cable, the payload  of an overhead crane swings during
              transit, making manual  remote positioning difficult and damage or injury
              possible.  In manufacturing environments, high speed response, accurate 
              tracking, and good stability margins are desired. The lumped  and distributed
              model controllers advanced in this research  are based on Lyapunov theory. This
              research studies the  fusion of the lumped and distributed Lyapunov techniques
              for  the full nonlinear, distributed model. Additionally, the  `low-pass
              filter-like` electrical dynamics tend to filter  out part of the high-frequency
              component of the controller.  While high-gain current feedback tends to
              partially null out  this filtering effect, this research targets the design of 
              backstepping-type controllers which exactly compensate for  the effects of the
              electrical dynamics. The specific  research objectives are to:i) develop
              saturation controllers  for the electrically-driven, nonlinear rigid cable
              model;  ii) investigate implementable boundary controllers for the  linear
              distributed model; iii) accurately model the  nonlinear, flexible cable system;
              iv) develop control theory  for nonlinear, distributed, mechatronic systems;
              and v)  implement the controllers on a small-scale experiment in the  Robotics
              and Mechatronics Laboratory and a fullscale  overhead crane (DEMAG 5 ton) in
              the new Engineering  Innovation Building at Clemson University.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
