Title       : SGER: Hierarchical Power Systems Control in a Changing Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9634255

Award Number: 9634255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marija D. Ilic ILIC@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634255  Ilic  Electric power systems in the United States and many other parts
              of  the world are undergoing drastic restructuring.  The trend is  toward
              deregulating an industry that has traditionally been a  regulated monopoly to
              allow for economic competition.         Much confusion arises in discussing
              technical and economic  concepts supporting the two extremes of industry
              structure.  At one  extreme, some advocate preserving and building upon the
              present  technical framework and standards for operating an interconnected 
              system while yet accommodating competitive non-utility-owned  generation.  At
              the other extreme are those who believe electric  power systems should be
              restructured based entirely on economic  competition.  A change of thinking is
              needed in both engineering  and economic circles to put the debate in a
              meaningful framework,  which is essential for ensuring that, whichever industry
              structure  prevails, basic principles of technical operation as well as the 
              free market economy are met.       This is a tall order for researchers
              concerned with large  dynamic electric power systems.  The issues are
              system-theoretic in  their basic nature.  True, researchers with a strong
              back-ground in  large systems could identify many new theoretical issues and
              their  solutions within the context of existing problems directly relevant  to
              the power industry.  But in order to avoid technical assumptions  that may not
              hold in all cases, one needs a systematic framework  for posing these problems.
                    In this project, we will use much of our acquired knowledge   as the
              starting point to further study the problems of hierarchical  controls in a
              changing electric power industry.  In what follows,  we describe the importance
              of the envisioned control structures in  a changing industry, and propose
              several specific problems that  will be studied.    ***
