Title       : Dissertation Research: The Effects of Raw Material and Land Use Patterns of
               Lithic Assemblage Variability in the Acheulean at Olorgesailie, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9634653

Award Number: 9634653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley H. Ambrose Ambrose@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Stanley Ambrose, Mr. Michael Noll will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze stone tools recovered from the
              archaeological site of Olorgesailie which is located in the southern Kenya Rift
              Valley. The site spans a period of from ca. 900,000 to 600,000 years ago and
              the large and well excavated samples of archaeological materials are
              representative of the Acheulean culture of Homo erectus. Dr. Glynn Isaac, the
              first archaeologist to conduct systematic research at Olorgesailie noted that
              that the assemblages recovered from different areas of the site varied
              significantly from each other but that they displayed no patterned change over
              either space or time. The variation seemed to be random with no discernible
              cause and reflected, therefore, patterns of thought uncharacteristic of modern
              humans. Mr. Noll will re-evaluate this hypothesis. He notes, as did Dr. Isaac,
              that the stone tools are fashioned from a wide variety of raw materials, some
              more amenable to flaking than others and he believes that changing availability
              of these materials over time and the physical constraints of the stones
              themselves may, to a large extent, explain the variation observed. To conduct
              this work, Mr. Noll will first locate raw material sites and determine the time
              intervals when they were geologically exposed. He will then conduct a series of
              flaking experiments and engineering analyses to elucidate flaking properties.
              In particular he wishes to learn whether some types of materials are more
              easily fashioned into tools than others. Finally he will examine the
              archaeological assemblages and attempt to explain observed variation in light
              of these factors.  Archaeologists wish to understand how hominid behavior
              changed and developed over time. While many Acheulean period sites have been
              excavated, and while it is evident that these people acted differently than
              their modern day counterparts, it has proven very difficult to gain insight
              into their thought processes. Because Acheulean lithics are widespread across
              the Old World, they provide the best source of data for such a study and Mr.
              Noll has developed a technique which hopefully will accomplish this goal. The
              results of his work will be of interest to many anthropologists. The project
              will also assist in training a promising young scientist.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
