Title       : GOALI/IUCP: Air Turbulence Interaction During Fiberization Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9634828

Award Number: 9634828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319917             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Munoz dmunoz@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yifang Cai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ivar E. Reimanis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea Knox-Kelecy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9634828  Munoz   Most of the fiber manufactured today is used for building
              and aircraft thermal insulation, ceiling tile, high-efficiency air filtration
              media, and commercial roofing systems.  One of the most exciting applications
              for fibrous materials are their current and potential uses in composites.  One
              advantage of short versus continuous fiber for reinforcing composite materials
              includes the rapid, low-cost composite manufacturability through compression,
              injection molding or extrusion.  The success of short or discontinuous fibers
              for implementation in the manufacturing of advanced composites depends on the
              control of fiber length and bulk fiber orientation.  In addition, small
              diameter (10m) fibers also result in improved thermal insulation
              characteristics.  Therefore, manufacturers of refractory, glass and polymer
              fibers are particularly keen on controlling the fiber diameter in the
              industrial fiberization processes.  In addition, improved control of fiber
              diameter may lead to significant energy savings in industrial furnaces.  This
              research project investigate the air turbulence interaction during the
              fiberization processes.  Experiments are designed to provide fundamental
              information regarding the air turbulence and fiber interaction.  Objectives of
              the experiments include developing a relationship between the characteristics
              of the turbulence, fiber stiffness, fiber deformation, and fiber tensile force,
              while controlling the turbulence characteristics.   This research project has
              strong collaboration between the Colorado State of Mines and Schuller
              International.  More importantly, the work will likely have direct implications
              to other industries by providing an improved understanding of less expensive
              manufacturing alternatives to the older, more conventional continuous fiber
              manufacturing processes.
