Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative Research for Advanced Modeling and
               Numerical Simulation of Surfactant Enhanced Aquifer Remediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9634325

Award Number: 9634325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Akhil Datta-Gupta datta-gupta@spindletop.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  DMS-9634325    The migration and fate of nonaqueous phase liquid
              (NAPL) organic contaminants in the subsurface has been the subject of intensive
              investigation in the past few years.  It is now generally recognized that the
              prevalence of NAPLs at contaminated sites is a significant impediment to
              aquifer restoration.  Based upon the perceived limitations of conventional
              pump-and-treat methods for aquifer remediation, considerable interest is
              currently focused on the development of alternative remediation strategies. One
              of these alternative strategies is surfactant enhanced aquifer remediation
              (SEAR).  There are three outstanding problems related to the design of
              successful SEAR projects.  First, relatively little attention has been focused
              on the mathematical modeling of fluid flow in SEAR.  Secondly, because of the
              limited sampling over the spatial extent of an aquifer, fluid flow and
              transport models will necessarily have large uncertainty in the presence of
              heterogeneity.  Thirdly, the very large computations involved in simulation of
              the SEAR process require algorithms that are both reliable and efficient.   
              Because of the complexities involved in the SEAR process, the proposed research
              will bring together the expertise from several disciplines, namely geosciences
              research, petroleum engineering and applied mathematics.  The investigators
              propose to develop models and numerical algorithms to simulate the initial
              dispersal of organic contaminants and later cleanup by means of' surfactant
              floods. These numerical algorithms will employ complex multi-phase flow models,
              state-of-the-art geostatistical methods and modem numerical techniques such as
              adaptive mesh refinement, dynamic upscaling of physical properties and
              object-oriented programming.  The computations will be performed on
              workstations, and on supercomputers employing parallel processing.  Graphical
              user interfaces and interactive visualization techniques will be developed.
