Title       : Biomimetic Integration of Organic and Inorganic Phases into Composite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9634396

Award Number: 9634396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Galen D. Stucky stucky@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1022,1504,1762,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      DMR-9634396  Stucky    A team of investigators from University of
              California, Santa Barbara, in collaboration with researchers at DuPont, 
              propose to develop methods for defining patterning in inorganic/organic
              composite materials in order to control  shape, strength, and thermal
              transport. The biomimetic patterning that is sought includes both the spatial 
              relationships between the organic and inorganic phases and the long-range
              hierarchical ordering of the resulting  macrostructures. A known method of
              creating composite materials with well defined patterning is the cooperative 
              assembly of organic surfactants and molecular inorganic species into
              mesocomposites. In this synthesis, the  patterning in the final product is
              under control of the inorganic/organic interface. The proposed research will
              address  the use of polymer-surfactant assemblies and polymerized inorganic
              phases to create materials with patterning on  longer length scales. Particular
              emphasis will be placed on using inexpensive calcium carbonate or calcium
              sulfate  as the inorganic phase. The exceptional fracture resistance of sea
              shells, which are a composite of calcium carbonate  and only 1-2% organic
              material, demonstrates that even inorganic materials that are inherently
              brittle can be used  to form tough composite materials. One of the major
              determinants of the toughness of shells is the long-range  pattering of tabular
              aragonite crystals in an organic matrix. The process by which the red abalone
              controls the  formation of this structure will be investigated to understand
              how this complex, tough composite material is  synthesized, and knowledge
              obtained from the biosynthetic system will be applied to the synthesis of
              composite  materials. While patterning on the micrometer length scale in
              biological systems is thought to be under control of  the templating organic
              species, patterning on longer length scales is believed to be due to a
              reaction-diffusion  mechanism. This research will address composite patterning 
              by nonlinear dynamic reactions, including clock  reactions and
              reaction-diffusion reactions, by tailoring the conditions to the growth of
              appropriate solid materials.  The results of these studies will provide methods
              for controlling the three-dimensional properties of  inorganic/organic
              composite materials by defining the patterning of the inorganic and organic
              phases over well  defined length scales.   %%%  One of the accomplishments of
              nature that has not been emulated by man is the simultaneous synthesis and
              shaping  of constructed objects. The spider and silkworm synthesize silk as
              they spin it; the molluscs prepare calcium  carbonate directly in the desired
              architecture. The research described in this proposal explores the integration
              of  organic and inorganic phases into patterned composite materials using
              inorganic/organic interfaces and  non-equilibrium chemistry. The premier
              polymer science and technology which has been developed over many  decades at
              DuPont Central Research and Development will be combined with the academic bio
              and materials science  capabilities at the University of California, Santa
              Barbara, to provide an industrial, high technology environment  for the
              training of students and execution of the research. In these studies,  in vivo
              biological studies are used to  guide the development of the in vitro
              biomimetic chemistry. The biomimetics approach is interpreted as being well 
              beyond visual similarities or the two-dimensional coating of surfaces, but is
              viewed in terms of the three-  dimensional, long range patterned control of
              composition, hierarchical structure and nanophase space properties.  Organic
              and inorganic cooperative control of composite assembly, polymer structure
              direction of patterned inorganic  organization, and space time nonequilibrium
              syntheses will be investigated to achieve this goal. The approaches  outlined
              above, taken in the context of a molecular level understanding of the often
              elaborate and highly long range  ordered assembly of biomateria ls, will lead
              to the practical design of technologically useful materials with specific 
              properties over sharply defined length scales.
