Title       : U.S. JGOFS Southern Ocean Process Study: Zooplankton Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1998  
File        : a9634052

Award Number: 9634052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Huntley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mai D. Lopez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Nordhausen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Meng Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634052  Huntley         This research project is part of the US Joint Global 
              Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at  (1) a better
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both  organic and inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2)  identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical 
              factors and processes which regulate the magnitude and  variability of these
              fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes  into the context of the contemporary
              global carbon cycle.       The work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment, a three-year  effort south of
              the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to track  the flow of carbon through its
              organic and inorganic  pathways from the air-ocean interface through the entire
               water column into the bottom sediment.   The experiment will  make use of the
              RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V  Thompson.       This specific project is
              a seasonal study of the  mesoscale spatial distribution of the carbon
              utilization by  zooplankton in the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone and the Ross 
              Sea.  There is strong evidence to indicate that the egestion  of pellets by
              zooplankton can contribute significantly to a  highly variable and episodic
              biogenic carbon flux in the  Southern Ocean.  The research approach used will
              quantify  the rate of total fecal production by the meso- and  macrozooplankton
              community at scales that dominate the  variability -- eddy-resolving spatial
              scales and seasonal  time scales -- in both the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone
              and  the Ross Sea study regions.  The process of quantification  will depend
              upon measurements of zooplankton abundance and  distribution using a
              SeaSoar-mounted Optical Plankton  Counter (OPC) in the Polar Frontal Zone, a
              net-mounted OPC  in the Ross Sea study area, and underway acoustic current 
              measurements in both regions.  Experimental measurements of  ingestion rate
              will be directed at developing empirical  relationships to body weight, food
              availability, and diel  periodicity for the p rincipal species of Antarctic 
              zooplankton grazers.  These relationships will then be  combined with
              measurements of biomass and distribution to  compute the rate of total fecal
              production.       The approach addresses those factors that are most  likely to
              give rise to the greatest variability in  zooplankton-produced biogenic flux: 
              (1) variability in  zooplankton biomass, and the food available to that
              biomass,  on scales of ten kilometers in the horizontal and ten meters  in the
              vertical, (2) seasonal variability, and (3)    variability that is attributable
              to the size-frequency  distribution of the zooplankton themselves.  The results
               will quantify the role of zooplankton in carbon flux  processes of the
              Southern Ocean, leading to a better  understanding of the Southern Ocean carbon
              cycle.  ***
