Title       : Optical Communication in the Quantum Limit: Noise-Free Optical Amplifiers and
               Taps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1999        
File        : a9634542

Award Number: 9634542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $629880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry A. Coldren coldren@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Atac Imamoglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634542  Coldren  The performance of fiber-optic communications systems is
              fundamentally limited by quantum mechanical fluctuations in the processes of
              amplification and tapping of light.  The minimum attainable total noise is
              limited by Heisenberg's minimum uncertainty product.    The goal of the
              proposed work is the development of optoelectronic devices that would
              circumvent the quantum mechanical limits.  This is done by the redistribution
              of the uncertainty in the observables such that the quantity of interest for
              the system performance exhibits a minimum noise.  At the same time the noise of
              the conjugate observable is enhanced.  By means of photon number amplifiers and
              taps, the information encoded in the intensity of an optical signal can be
              amplified and measured with very little uncertainty at the expense of phase
              information which is destroyed and becomes totally uncertain.  The proposed
              work will emphasize the fabrication of practical semiconductor devices that
              will allow for virtually noiseless amplification and information tapping and
              generation.  The success for this project relies on the ability to fabricate
              and integrate different configuration of high quantum efficiency semiconductor
              lasers.  In addition to the fabrication efforts, considerable work will reside
              in the experimental verification of  the low quantum noise properties of these
              devices.    Noiseless taps and amplifiers that we propose to demonstrate are
              expected to have a strong impact in applications where information needs to be
              shared among many subscribers.  This is the case in optical interconnects and
              local-area networks:  If the devices developed here are implemented, each
              subscriber will be able to measure, amplify, and regenerate the information of
              further use without degrading the signal quality.  Further, the versatility of
              these devices, which includes the possibility of cloning a signal into many
              quantum correlated copies, and the possibility  of choosing freely the emission
              wavelength of the latter, may  be attractive in space- and wavelength-division
              multiplexing applications.  ***
