Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Feedback Design for Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9634395

Award Number: 9634395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68862              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Lin linwei@nonlinear.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634395  Lin  This research program will develop a systematic methodology for
              the design of feedback  mechanisms for the robust control of nonlinear
              dynamical systems, operating in a  nonequilibrium environment.  Nonlinear
              feedback laws offer the potential to take  advantage of genuinely nonlinear
              effects, for example to track or to attenuate the effects  of, limit cycles. 
              The research will involve developing criteria for the existence of limit 
              cycles in nonlinear feedback systems, based on a synthesis of methods drawn
              from  algebraic and differential topology and from dynamical systems theory, as
              well as the  development of techniques for feedback stabilization about limit
              cycles and more general  attractors.  These techniques will be based on an
              extension of  previous work on zero  dynamics for nonlinear systems to the
              nonequilibrium case.  This wopk will also include  an extension of passive
              system theory  to systems which are not necessarily affine in the  control
              variables.  %%%  Dynamical systems can exhibit complexity for a variety of
              reasons; for example,  complexity arises in using microchip technologies to
              design devices for sensing, or  controlling, the position and speed in an
              airplane, an automobile, or a high-speed train.   Complexity can also arise in
              mathematical models of physical and industrial systems  because of the complex
              nature of the physical forces acting on a system. An example of  this
              phenomenon is windshear, caused by a microburst of air, which can be
              experienced  during take-off and landing of commercial aircraft.  The
              interaction of windshear forces  with the forces required to achieve lift an
              aircraft is quite complex, often producing  nonintuitive reactions to pilot
              induced forces.  The purpose of this research is to determine  ways to take
              advantage of the potentially dramatic, though nonintuitive, effects caused  by
              the complex interactions of physical forces with physical systems.   ***
