Title       : Research Planning Grant: Grammar-Based Designer Assistance Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9634704

Award Number: 9634704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda C. Schmidt lschmidt@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,9221,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9634704  Schmidt   This award provides funding for a planning project to assess
              the potential of   grammar-based design approaches in the development of
              designer assistance tools.  The project tasks are divided into categories of
              development and feedback.  The development tasks consist of extending work
              already completed on a graph-grammar design algorithm for the generation of
              simple rolling carts from small-scale mechanical mechanism components.  Devices
              designed by this grammar can be built, tested and evaluated.  The grammar will
              be augmented to include additional geometric reasoning and extended to a second
              mechanical design problem.  The feedback tasks outlined in this project are  
              established to gain insight from academic and industrial sources on the
              potential of and requirements for a generative designer assistance tool.
              Feedback from academic researchers in mechanical design will be gathered from
              conference presentation of results of using the grammar-based approach to
              design.  Feedback is also needed from future users of designer assistance tools
              to produce a vision of how generative designer tools can be tailored to meet
              their needs.  Individual meetings to discuss this issue will be conducted with
              selected area manufacturers who maintain positions in their markets as product
              innovators.    This award will enable researchers to focus future research
              efforts in development of grammar-based algorithms for mechanical design in
              ways that will provide solutions to problems of real interest to working design
              engineers.  Devices designed by the graph-grammar algorithm of this project are
              functioning scale-models of real-world mechanical devices.  Therefore, the
              successful use of the algorithm to generate physically-realized devices lends
              credibility to the idea of using a grammar to design real-world products.  The
              algorithm refined during this project will then serve as a learning tool and
              model for the creation of larger, grammar-based systems for product
              development.
