Title       : Dissertation Research: The Ethnoarchaeology of Gamo Artisans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9634199

Award Number: 9634199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Brandt sbrabdt@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Steven Brandt, MS Kathryn Weedman will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct ethnographic fieldwork among
              the Gamo people of southwestern Ethiopia. The Gamo are extremely unusual
              because the make flaked stone tools and use these in their production
              activities. Only in this portion of Ethiopia do present day groups retain this
              prehistoric practice. The Gamo are divided into ten intra-ethnic sections and
              MS Weedman will examine variation in tool production and utilization across
              them. In the early part of her study she will conduct an ethnographic survey to
              locate stone workers and record their background and geographical
              relationships. A sample of new, used and discarded tools will be collected from
              each worker. On this basis it will be possible to compare the geographical
              distance of hide workers against the similarities and differences manifest in
              their stone tools. Preliminary interviews will focus on kinship and other types
              of social relationships. In the next step of the work a selected sample of
              artisans will be studied in detail and the process of tool manufacture and use
              carefully documented. MS Weedman will attempt to construct the typologies which
              exist in the users' heads to discern variability in terms of style and
              function. Workers will be video-taped and photographed to record production and
              utilization in detail. The collected tools will be analyzed following
              techniques which archaeologists employ to study prehistoric specimens and the
              results will be compared to categories defined by the Gamo.  For all but the
              last few thousand years humans have lacked the ability to work metal and have
              relied on tools chipped from stone to accomplish a wide variety of tasks. The
              oldest known examples date to over two million years ago. Because stone tools
              have played such a crucial role and are abundant and well preserved in the
              archaeological record, archaeologists have relied heavily on them in their
              attempts to reconstruct past cultures. They have made many assumptions about
              how tools were used and have developed many analytic techniques to study them.
              However since so few modern day peoples use such implements, detailed
              ethnographic studies are lacking and archaeologists do not know how robust
              their assumptions and methodologies are. MS Weedman's research will permit her
              to test these archaeological approaches against an ethnographic reality and
              then work to refine and develop them. The results of this work will have
              important methodological implications.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            
