Title       : Intelligent Information Gathering Using Decision Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9634938

Award Number: 9634938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shlomo Zilberstein shlomo@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor R. Lesser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              To investigate coordinated information gathering. The vast amount of information
              available today on the National Information Infrastructure has a great
              potential to improve the quality of decisions and the productivity of consumers
              of this information. Rapid expansion of the amount of available information and
              the number of sources is expected over the next 5-10 years. Improved
              information retrieval and information extraction technologies will become
              available. The large number of information sources that are currently emerging
              and their different levels of accessibility, reliability, and associated costs
              present a complex information gathering coordination problem that a human
              decisionmaker cannot possibly solve without high-level filtering of
              information. To be able to exploit the great potential of the NII we propose to
              develop the next logical step in automation of information gathering tasks: to
              organize information gathering activity based on its marginal contribution to
              the quality of the user's decision or task. This approach emphasizes the fact
              that information gathering is an intermediate step of a decisionmaking process.
              This research will provide a system with an explicit representation of the
              user's decision model, so that information gathering activity can be organized
              on the basis of its effect on the quality of the decision. To automate the
              information gathering planning task, the research will investigate an
              innovative extension to the standard value-of-information theory, that
              addresses the problems of information reliability, retrieval costs, real-time
              operation, and uncertainty. When operating under resource constraints (related
              to the cost of communication and database access, limited computation power,
              and limited amount of time) this approach should achieve a significant
              performance improvement over current techniques
