Title       : Observational and Numerical Investigations of the Interaction of Synoptic Scale
               Weather Systems with the Orography of the Western United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1998   
File        : a9634191

Award Number: 9634191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206477             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. James Steenburgh jimsteen@met.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9634191  Steenburgh        It is well known that the Rocky Mountains have
              significant effects on  cyclonic weather systems as they cross the mountains. 
              The exact nature and reason  for this impact, however, is not well understood. 
                     The primary objectives of this project are (1) to describe the
              interaction of  extratropical cyclones and fronts with the complex orography of
              the western United   States and (2) to document the evolution and dynamics of
              convective snowbands  that form along the Wasatch Mountains of northern Utah. 
              These orographic effects  and features dominate the meteorology of the western
              United States and are  responsible for life threatening and economically
              disruptive snowstorms, windstorms,  and flash floods        One component of
              the investigation will examine how synoptic systems, such  as cyclones and
              fronts, are modified by their interaction with the Rocky Mountains.  The
              project will develop regional climatologies of such interaction and perform a 
              series of observational case studies utilizing a variety of mesoscale data
              sets.   Numerical simulations utilizing an advanced mesoscale numerical model
              will be  used extensively to supplement observational analyses and examine how
              orographic  processes alter the structural evolution and dynamical balances of
              these systems.        The second part of the investigation will describe the
              structure and dynamics  of post-frontal convective snowbands that form along
              the Wasatch Mountains of  Northern Utah.  These features produce heavy snowfall
              in the Salt Lake City  metropolitan area and appear to form as a result of the
              interaction of the synoptic  flow with local orographic features, including the
              Great Salt Lake.  Observations  from a local mesoscale network and WSR-88D
              Doppler radar, coupled with numeri-  cal simulations, will be used to document
              the evolution and dynamics of these snow-  bands.  In order to improve local
              forecasting, a climatology of post-frontal  snowstorms along the Wasatch Front
              will also be devel oped.        This project will advance the understanding and
              forecasting of terrain induced  phenomena of the western United States.  It
              will describe the interaction of cyclones  and fronts with the complex
              orography of the region and evaluate the ability of  numerical models to
              simulate mesoscale features produced by such interaction.  ***
