Title       : Electrostriction in Ceramics and Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9634101

Award Number: 9634101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Newnham bobnewnham@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9634101  Newnham    The  electrical,  mechanical,  and  thermal  properties   of
               packaging  materials have been investigated thoroughly  over  the   years, 
              but  reliable  data  on  the  electrostriction  coefficients  of 
              low-permittivity oxides and  nitrides  are  scarce.   Electrostriction is a
              fourth rank tensor  property  relating  mechanical strain to the square  of 
              the  electric  field.   The principal goal of this project is to carry  out 
              electromechanical  measurements  on  ceramics  and   glasses  representative of
              the inorganic materials used in multilayer  packaging,    metal-on-silicon  
              devices,    high    voltage  insulators,  optical  fibers,  micro-electrical  
              mechanical  systems,  and thick film substrates. Among the materials  to  be 
              studied  are silica, silicon nitride, alumina,  aluminum  nitride,  forsterite,
              spinel, mullite, cordierite,  silicate  glasses,  mica,  and porcelain.  The PI
              and his  group  have  developed  two techniques for measuring the
              electrostriction  coefficients  of ceramics and glasses.  The 'direct'  method 
              involves measuring the field-induced strain with a carefully  calibrated 
              optical interferometer.  The  'converse'  method  entails monitoring the
              dielectric constant as a function  of  mechanical stress.  The principal
              purpose of this project is  to formulate structure-property relationships
              describing the  dependence  of  the electrostrictive coefficient  on  atomic 
              bond  type,  atomic  bond  length,  crystal  structure,  and  chemical   
              composition    of    the    material.      Since  electrostriction  is the
              primary coupling mechanism  between  electric polarization and mechanical
              strain, the PI hopes to  identify correlations between electrostriction
              coefficients,  elastic compliance, and dielectric permittivity.  %%%  The 
              electrical,  mechanical,  and  thermal  properties   of  packaging  materials
              have been investigated thoroughly  over  the   years,  but  reliable  data  on 
              the  electrostriction  coefficients  of low-permittivity  ceramics and  glasses
               are  scarce.  The goal of the proposed research is to measure the 
              electrostriction  coefficient of a variety  of  ceramic  and  glass  materials.
                Electrostriction is a fourth rank tensor  property  relating mechanical
              strain to the  square  of  the  electric field.  It is present in all
              insulators and becomes  especially important in the ferroelectric ceramics 
              used  as  capacitors  and transducers, and in electronic  and  optical  devices
               where  extremely  high  fields  are  present.  This  includes  optical 
              fibers,  high voltage  insulators,  laser  windows,   multilayer   electronic  
              packages,   thin   film  components and thick film substrates. In these
              materials the  stresses  and  strains caused by electric fields  are  often 
              surprisingly  large,  making electrostriction  an  important  degradation  
              mechanism.   If  materials   having   a   zero  electrostrictive coefficient
              could be found, the reliability  of  electronic  and optical devices based on 
              that  material  could be significantly improved.  ***
