Title       : Measuring the Effects of Thunderstorms on Upper Tropospheric Trace Gases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1999  
File        : a9634125

Award Number: 9634125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Poellot   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Stith  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634125   Stith     A one month field experiment will be carried out to study
              the formation of nitrogen oxides (NOx) by lightning and the transport of air
              and trace gases by thunderstorms, as a part of the Stratosphere Troposphere
              Experiments: Radiation, Aerosols, and Ozone (STERAO) experiment in June and
              July of 1996. The main facilities of STERAO are the NCAR WB57F high altitude
              aircraft, the NOAA WP3D aircraft with a tail Doppler radar, and the Colorado
              State University CHILL multiparameter Doppler radar. Both of these aircraft
              will collect aerosol, trace gas and kinematic data on thunderstorms. However,
              neither of the two aircraft are able to penetrate the upper portions of the
              anvil cloud from thunderstorms. This project will add the University of North
              Dakota Citation fanjet aircraft to STERAO, so that penetrations of anvil clouds
              can be made during the project. These are thought to be a critical part of the
              experiment, because previous measurements of NOx in thunderstorms found that a
              significant portion of the NOx produced by lightning was in the upper portion
              of the anvil cloud and not in the clear air around the cloud which will be the
              region sampled by the WB57F. If the same holds true for thunderstorms in
              STERAO, the lack of an anvil penetrating aircraft may render calculations of
              the NOx production by lightning difficult or impossible.   The Citation will
              carry wind and turbulence instrumentation, trace gas instruments, and cloud
              microphysical probes. In particular, a fast-response chemiluminescence-based
              instrument for NOx measurements will be used. The experimental data along with
              storm kinematic data from the radars will be used to study the storm features
              that are responsible for the transport and redistribution of trace gases. These
              results will also be compared with proposed numerical cloud modeling studies of
              convective redistribution.
