Title       : An Analytical Synthesis of Empirical Research on U.S. University-Industry and
               Federal Laboratory-Industry Research Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9634695

Award Number: 9634695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99087              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Roessner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the past two decades, economic and political forces worked together to
              increase the amount and intensity of cooperative research activity in the U.S. 
              A sizable literature, attempting to classify, document, monitor, analyze, and
              evaluate these activities, has also appeared, as outputs from research
              sponsored by federal agencies and foundations.  To date there has been no
              significant effort to perform a critical synthesis of this literature from and
              analytical, policy-oriented perspective.  This project will begin to address
              this need.  To make the initial effort manageable, the review will be
              restricted to empirical studies based on original or archival data, rather than
              theoretical, normative, or policy analyses; studies of research cooperation
              among U.S. institutions; published or at least readily available reports and
              studies; and materials published or printed in the last ten years.  The primary
              purpose is to extract from the empirical literature a set of policy-relevant
              results based on multiple studies using different methodologies or measures. 
              The investigators will prepare structured summaries of all the studies that
              meet the criteria for inclusion.  These will comprise an electronic data base
              that can be accessed via keywords, and will be one of the primary outputs from
              the study.  The results will also include a critical synthesis of the
              literature on cooperative research in the U.S., organized around policy
              questions of interest to both the policy and research communities.  The review
              will address methodological and measurement issues and produce a set of
              conclusions about what has been learned from the studies collectively, what
              level of confidence can be placed on each conclusion, and why.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
