Title       : Dissertation Research: Climatic Effects on the Nasal Complex in Macaca
               fascicularis and Macaca mulatta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9634519

Award Number: 9634519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8173               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey T. Laitman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research proposal seeks to understand the effects of climate on the
              structure of the nasal  complex by examining the crania of two similar
              non-human primate groups, Macaca  fascicularis and Macaca mulatta, that inhabit
              different environments.  A deeper understanding  of the nasal complex (nose,
              nasal cavity, and paranasal sinuses) is essential for the testing of 
              hypotheses regarding its functional adaptation and evolution in primates. 
              Previous studies on  the effects of climate have usually been limited to
              external craniofacial landmarks.  This study  approaches the question by
              assessing data from both internal dimensions and volumes in  combination with
              more traditional external measures.  It is hypothesized that there will be 
              significant osteological differences in nasal complex morphology for macaques
              inhabiting  different climates.  These differences may reflect the
              accommodation of respiratory mucosa, the  primary modifier of inspired air. 
              Methods to be used will include: 1) linear measurements using  traditional
              anthropological techniques; 2) a seed-filling method that permits volumetric 
              assessment of the maxillary sinus and nasal cavity to yield estimates of the
              respiratory mucosal  area; and 3) the application of new advances in CT-imaging
              which will allow both for precise  visualizations of internal nasal components,
              and permit measurements of their surface areas.    This study will provide new
              insight for understanding the functional adaptations of the nasal  complex in
              primates, especially in regard to interactions between climate and respiratory 
              demands. The use of new methodologies for assessing nasal volume and
              CT-scanning for  determining internal surface areas, coupled with traditional
              craniometric measures, will provide  a more in depth, multidimensional approach
              than attempted previously.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
