Title       : Adaptive Observations: A Modeling Study and Fastex Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1996  
File        : a9634239

Award Number: 9634239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry A. Emanuel emanuel@texmex.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward N. Lorenz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9634239  Emanuel   Numerical weather prediction has advanced to the stage
              where further improvements are increasingly limited by the observational base. 
              Numerical weather prediction models depend on the assimilation of observational
              data collected mostly form fixed locations.  However, in certain extreme
              weather situations such as hurricanes or severe winter storms, additional
              observations are obtained by specially deployed platforms under the supposition
              that additional observations will improve the forecasts.  This strategy
              certainly has been successful for hurricane track forecasting.  It is then
              logical to explore whether the strategy of targeted observations could be
              applied more generally to weather forecasting and how such a strategy could be
              optimized.    The principal investigators will investigate the possibility of
              improving forecasts by selectively observing the atmosphere at the locations
              and times where the forecast would most benefit from additional information. 
              These locations are determined by real-time estimates of the likelihood of
              error in the analysis at the time of data assimilation and estimates of the
              sensitivity of forecast error to the presence or absence of observations.  As
              an a-priori estimate of the likelihood of analysis error,  a measure of the
              spread among members of an ensemble of 6- or 12-hour forecasts would be used. 
              Such  measure is the amplitude of the so-called "bred modes."  Preliminary
              modeling studies show that targeting observations based on the amplitude of
              these modes leads to a significant reduction in the forecast error compared
              with randomly locating the same number of observations.  Further improvements
              may be gained by targeting observations based on a model adjoint-derived
              measure of the sensitivity of forecast error to data in the next assimilation
              cycle.  Thus, the primary goal of this research is to find the optimal
              observation targeting strategy based on both a-priori analysis error estimate
              and adjoint-derived forecast error sensitiv ities.  These strategies will be
              tested using a hierarchy of numerical models and as part of a field experiment
              in conjunction with the international Fronts and Atlantic Storm Track
              Experiment (FASTEX).  ***
