Title       : Methods and Models for Integrating Economy, Agriculture, Hydrology, and Climate
               Change in an Integrated Assessment Model of Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1996 
File        : a9634290

Award Number: 9634290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J A. Edmonds   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh M. Pitcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman J. Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : BMI Battelle Nthwst Labs
	      
	      Richland, WA  99352    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634290  Edmonds  Battelle, Pacific Northwest Laboratories (BNW), Texas A&M
              University and the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research will develop
              techniques for modeling the interactive impacts of climate on agriculture,
              water resources and the economy and techniques for estimating the economic
              value to the agricultural sector of early identification of climate change.
              These techniques will be developed in two sequential tasks: Task 1: Develop
              techniques for modeling the interactive impacts of climate on agriculture,
              water resources and the economy; and Task 2: Develop techniques for estimating
              the economic consequences to the agricultural sector of varying modes of
              reaction to climatic change. The techniques to be developed address two of the
              major weaknesses in current integrated assessment frameworks, i.e., the
              treatment of individual economic sectors as though insulated and isolated from
              the economy as a whole and the treatment of impacts as 'snapshots' fixed in
              time rather than as transient or 'moving-pictures' of events occurring over
              decadal and century-length time spans in which not only climate changes but
              demographic, technological, political, social and economic conditions change,
              as well. Under Task 1, the HUMUS model that simulates the hydrologic cycle and
              the EPIC model of  that simulates crop productivity and water requirement will
              be employed in BNW's Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM) for integrated
              assessment of the effects of climate change. In the research project these
              models will be linked interactively with one another and with a computable
              general equilibrium model.  Regional distributions of climate change in the 48
              contiguous United States will be drawn from a set of General Circulation Model
              equilibrium and transient experiments by means of the MAGICC/SCENGEN model.
              These models will be modified to include the regional implications of sulfur
              aerosols on climate, and the SCENGEN GCM library will be updated. Under Task 2,
              methods will be developed to assess  the economic consequences and the value of
              early detection of climate change. These methods will utilize the tools
              developed in Task 1.
