Title       : Importance Sampling and the Impact of the Protection System on Power System
               Reliability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9634823

Award Number: 9634823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139679             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Thorp thorp@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9634823  Thorp    The study of North American Reliability Council reports over a
               five year period indicates that protection systems frequently  play a role in
              the sequence of events that lead to power system  disturbances.  It is likely
              that reliability will be treated as a  commodity in the deregulated systems of
              the future.  For example  the failure of the Independent Systems Operator (ISO)
              to  facilitate a negotiated sale of power between a producer and a  load
              because of a false trip of a key transmission line could  result in the payment
              of a penalty or otherwise effect the price  of transmission services.  In spite
              of its importance, the impact  of protection system malfunctions on overall
              system reliability  has not been well studied.  The existing protection system
              with  its multiple zones of protection and redundant systems is biased  toward
              dependability, that is a fault is always cleared by some  relay.  Present day
              relaying systems are designed to be  dependable at the cost of security. While
              it is generally  believed that the self-monitoring and self-checking feature of
               digital relays will reduce the probability of undetected or  "hidden failures"
              in relays, the number of installed  microprocessor relays is still small. 
              Further, there has been no  qualitative evaluation of the effect on system
              reliability of the  installation of large number of digital relays.         The
              proposed research is to develop techniques to evaluate   the impact on system
              reliability of the protection system and to  appraise the value of the
              installation of new digital relays with  built in self-monitoring and
              self-checking or other modifications  of the protection system.  It seems
              possible that the new  paradigm for power system operation will provide the
              impetus for  a more modern protection system. That is, the economics of 
              transmission system reliability will require that the relaying  system be
              modernized.  The two key elements of the proposed  approach are the use of
              "importance sampling" and th e generation  of large data bases of power system
              operating conditions such as  those used for training of various artificial
              schemes and  evaluation of the performance of new control schemes.  The 
              "importance sampling" technique is a simulation technique to  study "rare"
              events such as major power system disturbances. The  generation of data bases
              of power system operating conditions for  training of various artificial
              intelligence schemes has become a  subject of recent study.  They have been
              used for preventive  control for transient stability, for prediction of
              instability  from real-time phasor measurements, or the control of DC lines 
              using real-time phasor measurements.  The essence of the proposed  research is
              to combine the two techniques i.e., to create a  database biased toward the
              unlikely events as the probabilities  are based in importance sampling.  Data
              base generation has been  recognized as a statistical approach where the data
              base could be  generated by randomly sampling the parameters that describe 
              system operation.  The work proposed here would use the data base  as a
              surrogate for the underlying probability space.  The data base  would be biased
              toward the unlikely events just as the  probabilities are altered in importance
              sampling so that the impact  of reducing "hidden failures" can be studied
              through simulation.    The specific tasks involved in the proposed research
              are:       *    Investigation of probability models for the dependence         
                of hidden failures on system conditions..       *    Modifications of
              importance sampling to make it more            appropriate for power system
              applications       *    Examination of performance indices appropriate to the  
                       importance sampling approach       *    Generation of data bases using
              the Cornell Production            Super Computer  ***
