Title       : Collaborative Research: Seasonal Contribution of Nano- and Microzooplankton to
               Antarctic Food Web Structure in the Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9634241

Award Number: 9634241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darcy J. Lonsdale dlonsdale@ccmail.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9634241  Lonsdale    This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
              Flux  Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better  understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical factors and
              processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and
              (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global  carbon
              cycle.    A major role for nanoplankton (2-20 um) and microplanktonic (20-  200
              um) protozoa in pelagic food webs of the world ocean has been  firmly
              established in recent years.  Neritic and coastal ocean  ecosystems have been
              extensively studied in this regard, and  considerable information is also
              accumulating on the microbial  processes of tropical and temperate oceanic
              ecosystems.  In  contrast, the role of nano-and microzooplankton in the flow of
               energy and elements through polar communities is less clear  because of the
              difficulties associated with sampling and working  in these environments, and
              because of the prevailing dogma that  microbial processes may be overshadowed
              by `classical'  phytoplankton-zooplankton-fish food webs in these environments.
               Clearly, there is now a great deal of information that is  contradictory to
              this dogma, and numerous studies in recent years  have documented an abundant
              and active protozoan fauna in polar  ecosystems.  Nevertheless, there are still
              substantial gaps in  our understanding of the overall importance of the
              microbial loop  in polar environments.  This research project will examine 
              questions concerning the ecological role of nano- and  microplanktonic protozoa
              in the water column of the Ross Sea:  (1) Do nano- and microplanktonic protozoa
              constitute a  significant fraction of the zooplankton community in the Ross 
              Sea?  (2) Are these protozoa responsible for maintaining low  phytoplankton and
              bacterial standing stocks in this environment?  (3) Is mixotrophy (i.e.,
              combined phototrophic  and phagotrophic  nutrition) an important adaptive
              behavior for the survival of  protists in this planktonic Antarctic ecosystem? 
              Studies will be  conducted over an annual cycle in the Ross Sea in order to 
              examine the expected strong seasonal variability in these  features of
              protistan ecology.  These studies constitute both  "core" JGOFS measurements
              and supplementary studies designed to  establish the seasonal contribution of
              protozoan biomass and  grazing activity to the overall structure of the pelagic
              food web  of the Ross Sea.
