Title       : Partial Support for the U.S. National Committee for the Committee on Data for
               Science and Technology (CODATA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9634342

Award Number: 9634342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Blanpied                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Uhlir puhlir@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5984      OFFICE OF TRANS-REGIONAL AFFAI
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9217,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9634342  Uhlir    The globalization of science is occurring in parallel with
              a rapid extension in the speed and sophistication of information and data
              handling technologies and in their uses for scientific purposes.  Developments
              in these areas permit the planning and execution of large scale scientific
              programs.  Such programs, in turn, frequently require sophisticated data
              handling and processing techniques.  In view of the multilateral character of
              many large scale scientific programs, the handling, processing, and
              transmission of scientific data has become a major international enterprise in
              its own right, one that is vital to those scientific programs.  The Committee
              on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) is a non-governmental, multilateral
              body affiliated with the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). 
              CODATA's principal objective is to facilitate worldwide communication on
              problems relevant to scientific data.  Like other members of the ICSU family,
              CODATA is comprised of non-governmental National Member Organizations.  The
              National Academy of Sciences (NAS) fulfills this function in the United States.
               A U.S. National Committee for CODATA, which is comprised of non-governmental
              scientists, coordinates U.S. participation in the international body, with NAS
              serving as its secretariat.  This award will provide partial support to the NAS
              to continue to manage U.S. participation in CODATA, including partial payment
              of dues and partial support for the activities of the U.S. National Committee. 
              Additional support is also being sought from several other Federal agencies:
              DoE, NASA, NIH and NIST.
