Title       : CRI: Neuronal Ensembles as Encoding and Processing Probability Density Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9634314

Award Number: 9634314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Clark jwc@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1054,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN:  9634314  PI: John Clark    The research will seek a deeper understanding
              of how neural systems   represent and process information about the world, by
              applying   established principles of information theory and statistical
              inference   in the context of a large body of neurobiological observations. 
              The   basic hypothesis to be explored is that probabilistic information about  
              meaningful variables (such as measures of visual depth, optical flow,   limb
              orientation, etc.) is encoded in the firing rates of an ensemble   of neurons. 
              Bayesian inference then provides an optimal framework for   inference in the
              presence of uncertainty, given certain prior knowledge   that may be determined
              genetically or through learning processes.  This  approach leads in a natural
              way to neuronal circuits that are computationally   more general than the
              standard input-output maps of neural-network theory.   For example, an
              explanation of experiments demonstrating contextual or   attentional influences
              on neuronal responses may be formulated in terms  of a network involving
              multiplicative synaptic interactions.  Specific   thrusts of the research will
              include (i) the study of small-scale neuronal   circuits that illustrate the
              computational power of the model and furnish   prototypes for large-scale
              simulation of important brain subsystems and   (ii) the incorporation of
              learning rules that permit naive circuits to   modify their structure and
              optimize task performance.  Cross-disciplinary   in nature, the project will
              join the expertise of a computational   neuroscientist and a theoretical
              physicist in work to be performed   primarily in the laboratory of a prominent
              neurophysiologist.  Central  to the project is the involvement of physics
              graduate students in a   new interdisciplinary training program in
              computational neuroscience.
