Title       : Microwave Measurements of Structures and Other Properties of Transition Metal
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9634130

Award Number: 9634130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251240             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Kukolich kukolich@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stephen Kukolich of The University of Arizona is supported by the   Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to perform high resolution   fourier-transform
              microwave (FTMW) spectroscopic studies of transition   (TM) hydrides,
              metal-olefin complexes, non-rigid complexes, dinuclear   complexes and
              organometallic radicals.  In the first case, TM complexes   containing two
              hydrogen atoms will be investigated, with an eye towards   distinguishing
              between `dihydrogen` complexes (the hydrogen-hydrogen bond   remains intact)
              versus dihydrides (hydrogen atoms bond independently to   the metal, and are
              separated by much larger distances).  Data will be   analyzed to provide
              information on the three-dimensional structures,   internal motion, quadrupole
              coupling constants and dipole moments of the   molecules under study.   Most of
              the systems that will be investigated were chosen to help in   modeling and
              understanding the chemistry and interactions of transition   metals in
              catalytic and enzyme systems.  Metal hydrides are often quite   reactive and
              play important roles in many industrial processes.  The   electronic and
              structural changes in olefins on complexation to metals   play an important
              part in catalytic processes.  Efficient production of a   large fraction of
              industrial chemicals depends on one or more catalytic   processes.  The active
              sites of many enzymes which are essential for   living systems involve various
              transition metal complexes.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
