Title       : CISE Educational Innovation: A Distributed Collaborative Learning Environment
               for Effective Intellectual Teamwork Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9634485

Award Number: 9634485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harry G. Hedges                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark K. Goldberg goldberg@cs.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ephraim P. Glinert  (Principal Investigator former)
              Edwin H. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl Geisler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew V. Champagne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2888,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9634485  Glinert, Ephraim  Champagne, Matthew  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
                CISE Educational Innovation:  A Distributed Collaborative Learning
              Environment for Effective Intellectual Teamwork Across the Curriculum.    This
              CISE Educational Innovation award supports the integration of research into the
              undergraduate curriculum through the development of a Distributed Collaborative
              Learning Environment (DCLE), a hybrid physical and electronic space which will
              enable teams of students to meet and learn in flexible configurations, across
              the computer science curriculum.  The project will include development and
              delivery of courses that exploit the new capabilities, formal assessment of the
              effectiveness of the new learning environment, and wide dissemination of
              concepts, architecture, and prototype systems developed.    In the DCLE
              environment, the students comprising a team may be in one room, even seated
              around the same table.  At other times, they may be seated around two or more
              tables, or some may be located elsewhere on campus (even geographically
              remote).  Whatever the physical layout may be, each student's computer is
              linked to those of all other teammates, and innovative system software provides
              powerful support for collaborative information development, sharing and
              exchange, through a variety of flexible and natural interfaces suited to the
              task and the individual user.    This project is part of an overall effort
              jointly supported by the Office of Cross Disciplinary Activities (CDA) in CISE
              and the Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE) in EHR with the DUE funding
              supporting an emphasis on distance learning, utilizing the developed DCLE in a
              virtual classroom and with instruction delivered on an experimental basis from
              University of California/Davis to RPI.
