Title       : Measurement of the Hydrate Phase via Raman and NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1997       
File        : a9634899

Award Number: 9634899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336613             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Dendy Sloan esloan@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    CTS-9634899   Sloan, E.D.   Colorado School of Mines          PROJECT
              SUMMARY       A new state-of-the-art protoype for hydrate experiments is
              proposed by measurements of the hydrate phase structure and composition, using
              Raman and NMR spectroscopy.  In this work we propose to do the following six
              things:  1.  Measure the relative cage occupancies of  129Xe and 13C (methane)
              in sI hydrate via NMR, for calibration with data of Ripmeester and our Raman
              work,  2.  Use the hydration numbers and cavity occupation measured via NMR and
              Raman methods to assess the van der Waals and Platteeuw statistical theory,  3.
               Determine the kinetics of solid phase transitions between hydrate structures(
              e.g. sI to sH ) using our existing 400 MHz  NMR, and a new Raman instrument, 
              4.  Design, fabricate, and test a new type of apparatus which combines a Raman
              devices (to measure the solid) with a regular macroscopic phase equilibria
              instrument,  5.  Assess the viability of Raman spectroscopy for kinetic hydrate
              studies, and  6.  Assess the viability of a Fiber Optics Raman device as an
              in-line hydrate monitor.                      The work will have three major
              impacts:    1.  The hydrate structure is virtually never measured but
              predicted.  There are multiple                                                 
                                      instances in which the incorrect hydrate structure has
              been predicted.  With at least                      three common hydrate
              structures, the incorrect structure(and associated formation        
              conditions) is predicted more frequently than commonly realized.  The proposed 
                    work will demonstrate how this problem may be corrected.    2.  The
              hydrate phase composition( cavity occupation, guest-to-host and guest-to-guest 
                    ratios) is also predicted rather than measured.  However, such
              measurements are         necessary to correct the existing thermodynamic model
              since hydrate formation        conditions depend not only on structure but also
              on the phase composition.    3.   The advent of Fiber Optics technology enables
              measurement of hydrate phase         composition simultaneously with the
              macroscopic measurements of phase          equilbria.  This technology not only
              has the potential to change the method of hydrate        measurements in the
              laboratory, it also has the potential to be used as an in-line        monitor
              for hydrate formation in process streams.  To date industry only has pressure  
                    drop to determine the initiation and growth of hydrate in a pipeline.    
                                      The proposed work should be done now in our laboratory
              because:    1.  We have experimentally validated the concept of the Raman
              measurement of hydrate   structure and guest composition for sI, sII, and sH.  
               2.  A recent NSF matching-funds equipment grant has provided a 400 MHz   NMR 
              instrument capable of solid or liquid measurements.    3.    We have expert
              personnel available to supervise the work.  Mr. Ben Bloys (ARCO) will be
              industrial liaison with our consortium of 10 companies to the project.  Dr. Bob
              Burruss.  (USGS) will provide Raman expertise and apparatus availability.  Dr.
              John Ripmeester will act as an adjunct professor in supervising the proposed
              NMR work.
