Title       : Physical Switching in Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9634901

Award Number: 9634901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul G. Longoria r.longoria@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research develops a generalized methodology for modeling,  simulation and
              design of systems that intentionally or inherently  involve switching
              phenomena. Physical switches are ubiquitous in  physical and engineering
              problems, and their effects are realized  in stick-slip friction, clutching
              processes, power electronic  switching, hydraulic valving, and other critical
              processes. The  research methodology integrates bond-graph representations and 
              wave-scattering formalisms. The wave-scattering approach makes  possible a
              formulation for a physical switching element that  includes the ideal switch
              behavior as a special case. Further,  integration of switching system
              representations with distributed-  parameter elements and thermodynamic
              considerations is made  possible as well. Because the scattering formulation
              can be  integrated seamlessly with a bond graph approach, a methodology  can be
              developed for representing the physical topology of a wide  class of
              multi-energy domain systems. The results from this work  will make a
              significant impact on computer-aided modeling,  simulation, and design of a
              large class of systems and physical  processes. Small-scale laboratory testing
              will be used to qualify  and evaluate the approach and methods. In addition, a 
              collaboration with the Center for Electromechanics at the  University of Texas
              at Austin and the center's industrial and  federal partners will make available
              experimental and research  development resources for  testing these techniques
              in high-  performance switching controllers for traction motors. Ongoing 
              collaboration with research personnel in the automotive industry  provides
              another opportunity to tailor and assess the capability  of the research
              results to industrially significant problems.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
