Title       : Process Dissociations in Perception and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1995     
File        : a9421459

Award Number: 9421459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Jacoby   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research has three primary goals:  (1) to investigate the
              relationship between objective measures of cognitive control, and self-report
              measures of awareness, (2) to contrast different assumptions concerning the
              relationship between automatic and controlled influences of perception and of
              memory, and (3) to explore a variety of manipulations that may selectively
              affect the two types of influence.  Research aimed at examining the relation
              between automatic and controlled processes has the additional goal of further
              examining the assumptions that underlie the process-dissociation procedure, a
              procedure developed to separate the contributions of automatic and controlled
              influences to overall task performance.  What is the relation between
              subjective experience and effects of perception and memory on task performance?
               Results of recent research provide striking examples of perceptual analysis in
              the absence of `seeing` and effects of the past in the absence of
              `remembering.`  For example, amnesics show effects of practicing a task in
              their later performance even though they are unable to remember having
              practiced.  Similar dissociations are shown by people with normally functioning
              memory.  The proposed research extends previous work done to develop a
              process-dissociation procedure that allows one to separate the contributions of
              controlled (conscious) and automatic (unconscious) components to performance of
              a task.  Among the topics investigated are unconscious perception and
              unconscious influences of memory.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
