Title       : CEAS: Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9421535

Award Number: 9421535
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10466986           (Estimated)
Investigator: Omer J. Reichman reichman@nceas.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Murdoch  (Principal Investigator former)
              Michael F. Goodchild  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9421535  Murdoch  The University of California, Santa Barbara, proposes to
              establish a Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (CEAS). The rational
              for the CEAS is to carry out collaborative research on the major fundamental
              and applied problems facing ecology, as defined by the nation's ecologists. The
              Center will develop new techniques, especially in mathematical modeling,
              intensive computation, visualization of ecological systems, and digital
              representation of geographic variation in complex ecological phenomena. It will
              provide special educational opportunities in new techniques and advances to
              students and young scientists, and will disseminate the results of its research
              to a broad class of potential users, including decision-makers and those
              involved directly in resource-management and other environmental areas. The
              Center will accomplish these goals by fostering individually based and
              collaborative research projects, and by conducting workshops and conferences.
              It is estimated that approximately 150 research ecologists will spend extended
              periods of time at the Center, and a further 600 researchers and students will
              participate in its conferences, workshops and training courses each year. The
              CEAS will be managed by a Director, a Scientific Advisory Board comprised of
              active members of the ecological community, and an External Liaison Committee
              with membership drawn from academia, state and federal agencies, and the public
              sector. Cost sharing with the California Trade and Commerce Agency and the
              University of California is approximately $4.03 million over five years.  The
              University of California, Santa Barbara is an ideal setting for the CEAS
              because it provides an intellectually stimulating environment, exceptional
              technical expertise and facilities, and a physically attractive location and
              facility. In addition, the UCSB proposal provided the strongest vision for a
              creative, forward-looking Center that was designed to be highly flexible in
              order to meet the needs of, and be high ly responsive to, the nation's
              ecological community.
