Title       : Collaborative Research: Comparative Breeding Structure of Four Species of
               Sonoran Desert Columnar Cacti
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1998    
File        : a9421673

Award Number: 9421673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore H. Fleming tfleming@umiami.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9421673  FLEMING   The Sonoran Desert is the lushest, most species-rich
              desert in the world.  Conspicuous among its uniquely drought-adapted plants are
              four species of columnar cacti:  saguaro (Carnegia gigantea), organ pipe
              (Stenothereus thurberi), senita (Lophocereus schottii), and cardon (Pachycereus
              pringlei).  These species often occur in high densities, represent much of the
              living plant biomass in their communities, and serve as sources of food
              (nectar, pollen, fruit, and seeds) and shelter for a large number of desert
              animals.  Despite the obvious ecological their reproductive biology and the
              importance of different kinds of pollinators for their reproductive success. 
              In this study, we will conduct experiments to document the relative
              contribution of bats, moths, birds, and bees to the pollination success of
              columnar cacti and will analyze the genetic composition of seeds in the fruits
              produced by these pollinators.  Our overall goal is to understand how different
              kinds of pollinators affect the genetic structure of populations of their food
              plants.   Studies of the breeding system of desert plants are of particular
              importance because their extremely episodic recruitment (cactus populations
              gain new individuals in only one year in ten, on average) can have long-lasting
              effects on the genetic composition of individuals in their populations.  Thus,
              the examination of four species of columnar cacti whose flowers are visited by
              different combinations of bats, birds, and insects will serve as a model system
              for studies of pollination biology as well as provide new insights into the
              processes that shape the genetic diversity of desert plant species.  Our study
              will be the most detailed picture of the contributions of different kinds of
              pollinators to the breeding systems of flowering plants to date.  Such
              knowledge is critical if we are to understand the role of pollinators in plant
              speciation, the origin of plant-pollinator interactions, and the potential
              genetic consequences to plants o f the loss of pollinators through human
              disturbance.
