Title       : NSF/ONR: Proximity Effects, Tunneling and Spin-Injection in
               Yttrium-Barium-Copper-Oxide Films as a Function of Crystallographic Orientation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1999       
File        : a9421957

Award Number: 9421957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura H. Greene lhg@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1055,1764,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9421957  Greene    Non-Technical Abstract:  This is an experimental research
              project  directed at measuring electronic and spin transport across  interfaces
              to high-temperature superconductors as a function of  crystallographic
              orientation.  High-quality, superconducting  films of
              yttrium-barium-copper-oxide are grown in-situ in four  different
              crystallographic orientations, and layered, in most  cases in-situ, with normal
              metals ( superconductors above their  superconducting transition temperature),
              insulators and  ferromagnetic metals.  Our primary goals are to establish the 
              existence and magnitude of a proximity effect in these materials,  perform
              proximity electron tunneling spectroscopy to extend our  knowledge of the
              intrinsic gap parameter properties and to study  the spin transport across the
              superconducting interface.  The  latter measurements will be performed in
              collaboration with  scientists at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.
              C.  %%%  Technical Abstract:  This is an experimental research project 
              directed at measuring electronic and spin transport across  interfaces to
              high-temperature superconductors.  These  experiments will be performed on four
              different crystallographic  orientations of the high-temperature superconductor
              yttrium-  barium-copper-oxide.  High-quality, crystallographically oriented 
              superconducting films are grown and layered with a variety of  materials,
              including insulators, normal metals and magnetic  materials.  Our primary goals
              are to understand the leakage of  superconducting pairs into a juxtaposed
              normal metal, determine  details of the intrinsic superconducting state and to
              measure  spin transport across the superconducting interface.  The spin 
              injection experiments will be done in collaboration with  scientists at the
              Naval Research Laboratory.  ***
