Title       : Transition Metal Catalyzed Carbon-Nitrogen Bond Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9421982

Award Number: 9421982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Buchwald sbuchwal@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  The focus of this research is the development of new methodology for the
              synthesis of aromatic  and heteroaromatic amines from the corresponding aryl
              and heteroaryl halides, triflates and  related compounds using transition metal
              catalysts.  A wide variety of different catalysts types,  including both
              homogeneous and heterogeneous ones, will be studied.  While the initial system 
              will utilize stoichiometric aminostannane reagents, a major emphasis will be
              the development  of more environmentally benign reagents, or to utilize only
              catalytic quantities of the  aminostannanes.  The application of this approach
              to several areas of organic synthesis will  include: the synthesis of
              polysubstituted indole derivatives, the use in conjunction with Heck-type 
              arylation processes, and the preparation of enantiomerically pure N-aryl amino
              acids and other  N-aryl amines.  Also mechanistic studies will be conducted to
              investigate the process of  reductive-elimination to form aromatic
              carbon-nitrogen bonds.    With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program is
              supporting the research of Dr. Stephen L.  Buchwald of the Department of
              Chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   Professor Buchwald
              will focus his work on the development of new synthetic methodology for  the
              synthesis of aromatic and heteroaromatic amines using transition metal
              catalysis.  This  approach offers an attractive alternative to currently used
              methods and will be of significant  utility both in academic and industrial
              laboratories where these amines are used as intermediates  in the preparation
              of a vast number of compounds of biological and industrial importance.
