Title       : Analysis and Use of Excluded Volume
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9421152

Award Number: 9421152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Serwer Serwer@uthscsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC San Antonio
	      7703 Floyd Curl Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782293900    210/567-2333

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421152  Serwer  The excluded volume of macromolecular solutes has dramatic
              effects on the biochemical activities, conformation and assembly of  biological
              macromolecules.  Analysis of   in  vitro excluded volume effects is performed
              to both understand  in vivo excluded volume   effects and enhance the  in 
              vitro  yield of several biochemical processes of practical interest.  In
              previous work by the PI and coworkers, the first quantitative analysis has been
              performed of the excluded volume of DNA-polymer interaction in mixtures that
              consist of both double-stranded DNA and electrically neutral polymers.   Both
              biomolecular joining and cyclization of DNA were studied.  These studies have
              revealed the reason for a dependence of excluded volume  on the molecular
              weight of the neutral polymers.  They have also revealed excluded
              volume-induced protection of  high  molecular weight DNA from hydrodynamic
              shear-induced breakage.  Incompletely explored areas include statistical
              analysis of the excluded volume induced changes  in the conformation of single
              DNA molecules.  Incompletely explored practical applications include use of
              excluded volume to either prevent the hydrodynamic shear-induced breakage of
              double-stranded DNA or increase the rate of  in  vitro  biochemical reactions. 
              The specific aims are the following: (1) By use of video light microscopy, 
              statistical analysis will be performed by the dimensions of single DNA
              molecules after excluded volume-induced condensation.       Results will be
              obtained for several concentrations and types of polymer.  Tests will be made
              of our current theoretical framework for understanding excluded volume effects.
               (2) By use of both pulsed and  constant field quantitative gel
              electrophoresis, the extent will be determined to which manipulation of
              excluded volume can be used to both ligate long DNA and prevent the
              hydrodynamic shear-induced breakage of  long DNA.  The research proposed
              contributes to both fundamental understanding of   in vivo  biochemistry and 
              the practical use of  in vitro  biochemistry for the purposes of 
              biotechnology.  %%%  Addition of chemically nonreactive macromolecules
              (polyethylene glycol's are often used) to solutions of biological
              macromolecules (such as DNA) has dramatic effects on both the biochemical
              activity and the conformation of the biological macromolecules.  Some of these
              effects are caused by restriction of  the volume available  (excluded volume
              effects).  For double-stranded DNA, some excluded volume effects can be
              visualized by light microscopy of single DNA molecules; these effects include
              collapse of a random coil of DNA.  The goals of our research  are the
              following: (1) By use of light microscopy, statistical analysis will be
              performed of  the dimensions of single DNA molecules after excluded volume
              induced collapse.  (2) By  use of gel electrophoresis, the extent will be
              determines to which manipulation of  excluded volume can be used to both
              promote the joining of DNA molecules and prevent breakage of DNA that occurs
              when long DNAs are handled by pipeting.  Tests will be made of our current
              theoretical framework for understanding excluded volume effects.  The research
              proposed contributes to both fundamental understanding of  the  in vivo
              excluded volume effects of cellular macromolecules and the practical use of  in
              vitro  biochemistry for the purposes of biotechnology.  ***
