Title       : NSF/ONR: In-Plane Aligned Buffer-Layer Interfaces for High Temperature
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1997       
File        : a9421911

Award Number: 9421911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Shaw dshaw@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jui H. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1055,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9421911  Shaw   This three-year study of high temperature oxide superconductor
              (HTS) thin-film growth on polycrystalline and amorphous substrates will further
              understanding of the biaxial alignment of a-b planes and the related nucleation
              and growth mechanisms in two HTS thin films, Y-Ba-Cu-O and Tl-Ba-Ca-Cu-O (1223
              phase), selected for this study. Two methods, ion-beam assisted deposition and
              graphoepitaxial growth, will be used to fabricate integrated
              film-buffer-substrate composite systems.  The ultimate goal of this project is
              to develop and optimize processing techniques for the fabrication of long HTS
              thin films with high critical current densities on both metallic and glass
              substrates using ion-beam assisted deposition.  Initially, biaxially aligned
              buffer layers of yttrium-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) will be deposited on
              Hastelloy.  The orientation of the YSZ film will then be studied as a function
              of ion-beam angle, ion/atom flux ratio, ion-beam energy and chamber pressure. 
              The effect of ion-beam assisted deposition on alignment and etching will be
              investigated:  and scanning and transmission electron microscopy will be used
              to establish the relationship between the deposition conditions and the
              film-growth mechanism.  Graphoepitaxial methods will also be employed to
              produce biaxially aligned HTS films on Hastelloy.  As critical length is a
              crucial parameter of biaxial alignment, the relationship between critical
              length and interfacial shear strength, surface film thickness, and fracture
              strength will also be addressed.  Results will be compared to theoretical
              prediction.     Improvements in crystalline growth and alignment resulting from
              this work are expected to significantly improve the electric and magnetic
              properties of high temperature superconductor thin films.  Further, by gaining
              better insight into the physical processes and by optimizing the deposition
              parameters, this work should foster the development of practical applications. 
              Discovery of high temperature superconductors  years ago promised major
              commercial applications in electrical machineries and electronic devices due to
              enormous increase in the efficiency of transmission of electricity.  However,
              progress has been hampered by two features:  (1) superconducting temperatures
              are still well below room temperature and (2) processing of practical devices
              remain relatively slow and its impact on properties are not fully understood. 
              This research offers the opportunity to bring the technology a little closer to
              larger scale commercialization of superconductors.  ***
