Title       : Social Power as a Regulator of Caregiving Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9421460

Award Number: 9421460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne B. Bugental bugental@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9421460        The proposed research, using concepts and theories drawn from
              social psychology, tests hypotheses regarding factors that create risk for
              family violence and other dysfunctional caregiving.  The ways in which parents
              and children interact and  process social information are expected to be
              influenced by interpersonal power perceptions. Parents who perceive children as
               having more social power than self are predicted to be highly reactive to
              apparent "challenge" from children--responding with negative affect and
              defensive arousal. These responses, in turn, mediate (a) information-processing
              deficits and biases, and (b) defensive interaction strategies, e.g., power
              assertion or social   derogation. Adult "power repair" efforts subsequently
              lead to elevated arousal, avoidance responses, and performance deficits in
              children. Predictions are tested within studies that include both naturalistic
              and experimental designs. The first study  focuses on information-processing
              patterns of high and low power  adults attempting to teach responsive versus
              unresponsive children. The second study focuses on spontaneous interaction 
              between high and low power parents and their own children. The  third study
              assesses the responses (emotional, behavioral, and cognitive) of children to
              the teaching style of adults with high or low perceived power.                 
                   The proposed research tests predictions regarding factors that create risk
              for family violence and other types of family conflict. Parents who believe
              that they have low power or  control in their caregiving role are expected to
              be at risk for  more conflictual interactions. When confronted with "difficult"
              child behavior (e.g., slow response to parental directives), "low  power"
              parents react maladaptively  (e.g., they show increasing  heart rate, they
              interpret the child's behavior as deliberately defiant, and they attempt to
              regain control by verbal derogation of the child or physical threats to the
              child). Children, in  turn, react to  this parenting style with responses that
              lead to escalating conflict. For example, they avoid or "tune out" the parent
              as a way of managing their own distress. Additionally, they show signs of
              internal distress (e.g., higher heart rate and other signs of fear).  These
              child responses are likely to have a  negative impact on their ability to
              understand or comply with  parental directions. Ultimately, then, a vicious
              circle emerges   in which parents become increasingly coercive and children
              become  increasingly unresponsive. These predictions are tested by observing
              spontaneous interactions of parents and their own children, as well as by
              observing teaching interactions between  adults and unrelated children.
              Findings will have implications  for the design of programs designed to prevent
              and remediate  family violence.
