Title       : Seasonality Determinations from Archaeological Oyster Shells: An Experimental
               Evaluation of Incremental Shell Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9421140

Award Number: 9421140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113024             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Waselkov   (Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Abbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erich M. Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie C. Steponaitis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Waselkov    With National Science Foundation support Dr. Waselkov and his 
              colleagues will study the growth patterns in Eastern oysters  (Crassostrea
              virginica) to determine the relationship between  growth and seasonal changes
              in water temperature. The goal of the  work is to determine whether analysis of
              oyster shells will  permit determination of the season when the oyster was
              collected.  Preliminary evidence indicates that such an approach is possible 
              in temperate waters where significant seasonal variation in  temperature
              occurs. It is less clear whether the same pattern  holds in warmer areas such
              as the Gulf of Mexico. The  investigators will examine oyster growth from two
              locations,  Alabama and Maryland, with several methods. Oysters will be  marked
              and grown under known conditions for two years before  being harvested.
              Temperature will be electronically logged. Both  wild and hatched spawned
              oysters (of known) age and will be  stained with tetracycline in a sequence
              that will allow spatio-  temporal identification of growth patterns throughout
              the annual  cycle. Analytic methods will include traditional optical 
              micrometry, digital image analysis with time series analysis and  use of a
              scanning proton microprobe.    The successful development of this technique
              will have important  archaeological implications. Oysters formed a major
              dietary item  in many areas of prehistoric North America and are widely found 
              in archaeological sites where they are well preserved. Scientists  wish to
              understand how prehistoric peoples with simple  technologies subsisted in a
              wide range of environments and made  use of available natural resources. To do
              this, they attempt to  determine the seasons and length of time individual
              sites were  occupied. This can be extremely difficult to do and the proposed 
              oyster shell study will, hopefully, provide a technique to  accomplish this.
