Title       : The Role of Anthropogenic Emissions in the Oxidizing Capacity of the Troposphere
               (AEROCE III)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9421079

Award Number: 9421079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell R. Dickerson russ@atmos.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce G. Doddridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9421079  Dickerson    Bordered by two of the Earth's major industrial regions,
              the North Atlantic Ocean (NAO) is one of the remote areas of the Earth most
              likely impacted by air  pollution.  The overlying marine troposphere is also an
              ideal laboratory in which to study the chemical and meteorological mechanisms
              leading to the long-range transport of pollution, and the consequent
              perturbation of the radiative properties and oxidizing capacity of atmosphere. 
              The overall goal of this work is:    To understand the role of anthropogenic
              emissions and natural processes in the ozone budget and oxidizing capacity of
              the troposphere over the North Atlantic Ocean.     The primary data set for
              this project will be collected in the spring of 1996 when we conduct a
              carefully planned airborne experiment with the University of Wyoming King Air
              supported by surface intensive experiments and ozonesonde launches from the US
              east coast and Bermuda.  The King Air has the payload and range to carry the
              essential instruments on flight paths near fronts and out to Bermuda.  Its crew
              is also experienced with research in convective conditions.  This work will be
              supplemented with collaborative surface measurements made on Bermuda, and in
              Maryland by the NOAA Air Resources Laboratory.  Detailed meteorological
              guidance for the field programs will be provided by colleagues.  For example,
              the ozonesonde launches will be triggered by forecasts of interesting transport
              conditions.     Flights will coordinate as far as possible with other
              experiments conducted in our area at the same time.  We will work with the NOAA
              Aeronomy Lab and their P-3 flights to assure that compatibility of analytical
              methods, and share results.     We will incorporate experimental results into
              global, hemispheric, and regional models to show the large-scale impact of
              anthropogenic emissions.  Initial model results will, in turn, help direct the
              next phase of experiments.
