Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The MOS Transitor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9421889

Award Number: 9421889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Mahoney Mike@PUCC  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the early 1970s the advent of large scale integration using the MOS
              (metal-oxidesemiconductor) transistor made possible the entry of semiconductor
              electronics into whole new fields--semiconductor memories for computers,
              electronic watches, and inexpensive electronic calculators which led to the
              microprocessor. But when the MOS transistor was first described in 1960 by
              Kahng and Atalla of Bell Labs, it had attracted little attention, apparently
              because it violated a number of tenets of the junction paradigm for
              transistors, of which William Shockley's bipolar junction transistor was the
              outstanding example. Mr. Bassett, under the direction of Professor Mahoney, is
              examining how the MOS transistor came to occupy a central place in
              semiconductor electronics by the early 1970s will concentrate on three themes.
              The first is the relation between the MOS transistor and the dominant bipolar
              transistor. While the MOS transistor was different enough from the bipolar
              transistor to make engineers and scientists think in new ways about what
              transistors were and how they were to be fabricated, at the same time the MOS
              transistor was close enough to the bipolar transistor to be able to take
              advantage of the large knowledge and skill base that had developed around it.
              Furthermore, the MOS transistor will be used as a way to study the nature of
              technical knowledge and skills in post-World War II America and how they were
              diffused. Finally this study will examine the institutions involved in the
              development of the MOS transistor--large corporations and their industrial
              research laboratories, startup companies, universities, and the military--and
              show what role each of them played in shaping the development of this new
              technology.
