Title       : Synoptic and Mesoscale Analyses of Heavy Precipitation Events During TAMEX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1997   
File        : a9421060

Award Number: 9421060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235331             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi-Leng Chen dave@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9421060  Chen         In this project, the synoptic-scale, mesoscale and local 
              processes favorable for the development of heavy precipitation  during TAMEX
              will be studied based on the results form numerical  models and the data
              collected during the Taiwan Area Mesoscale  Experiment (TAMEX).  As the Mei-Yu
              front approached the island of  Taiwan, the prefrontal southwest monsoon flow
              (or the low-level  jet) brought in the warm, moist unstable air from the south.
               In  addition to the low-level lifting (orographic and frontal), the  presence
              of upper-level forcings (the upper-level divergence  related to diffluent
              airflow or the frontogenetical forcing  associated with a jet-front system) is
              required for the development  of widespread rainstorms in the subtropics.  In
              this study, we will  diagnose a LLJ based on the model generated high
              resolution data.   In particular, the link between the cyclongenesis and the 
              development of LLJ will be further investigated.  In addition, we  will study
              the coupling between the upper-level and low-level  circulations leading to the
              development of widespread  precipitation.         The synoptic-scale
              circulations regulate whether or not  widespread precipitation will occur,
              whereas mesoscale  circulations, local circulations and orographic effects
              govern the  details of precisely when and where the convection will occur.  We 
              will study the prefrontal mesoscale airflow over the Taiwan area  based on
              radar, aircraft and conventional data as well as a nested  grid model.  In
              particular, we will focus on the airflow on the  windward side as the
              upper-level trough/low-level jet approached.   In the prefrontal southwesterly
              flow, the deflected southerly jet  along the coast and results in a localized
              convergence zone  favorable for the development of deep convection.  As the
              front  moved over the northern Taiwan, the deflected southerly flow may  merge
              with the undeflected southwesterly flow in the Taiwan Strait  off the
              northwestern coast and results in a localized  convergence  zone favorable for
              the development of deep convection.  As the  front moved over the northern
              Taiwan, the deflected southerly flow  may converge with the postfrontal
              northeasterlies and results in an  enhanced frontal convergence zone along the
              coast.  To assess the  effects of thermally driven circulations caused by the
              diurnal  heating cycle  on precipitation, we will study the rainfall 
              characteristics during  the diurnal cycle at different parts of the  island. 
              In addition, we will conduct a case study of local  circulations over the
              island under the prefrontal southwest monsoon  flow based on the data collected
              during IOP #11.
