Title       : Collaborative Research: Extinction Dynamics and Population Bottlenecks in an
               Annual Plant with a Seed Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9421781

Award Number: 9421781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Kalisz kalisz@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise A. Thiede  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9421781  KALISZ   Many organisms inhabit environments in which ecological
              conditions fluctuate greatly from year to year.  In some years environmental
              conditions may be benign and therefore foster favorable conditions for
              population growth, while conditions in other years may be inhospitable and
              consequently result in declining population growth rates.  By forcing a
              population to very small sizes in some years, such variability will heighten
              the chances of total population extinction and promote the loss of genetic
              variation.  Species inhabiting chronically variable environments often possess
              adaptations which should buffer these detrimental effects of environmental
              variability.   The proposed research will test the effectiveness of one of
              these adaptations, the soil seed bank of annual plants.  Seed banks are the
              presence of dormant, viable seeds stored in the soil.  Since all seeds produced
              in one year do not germinate in the following growing season, seed banks create
              age structure which effectively spreads the regenerative effort (and thus the
              risk of extinction) over multiple years.   Two studies will be performed.  In
              one, experimental seed banks will be constructed to evaluate the demographic
              and genetic dynamics of seeds germinating from the seed bank over five years. 
              In the other study, the investigators will establish multiple replicate
              populations, experimentally impose adult extinction on half, and leave the
              other half unmanipulated.  The demographic and genetic dynamics will be
              quantified for these experimental populations over five years.  From these two
              studies a complete description of the genetic and demographic consequences of
              large environmental perturbations will be constructed.   This research
              represents one of the first empirical evaluations of the effects of seed banks
              on the demographic and evolutionary processes in natural plant populations. 
              The results of this study will have important implications for future
              theoretical development of the effects of seed banks an d for the conservation
              of rare and endangered species, both plants and animals, living in chronically
              variable and unpredictable environments.
