Title       : Regulation of Neutrophil Secretion by Cyclic GMP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9421731

Award Number: 9421731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Pryzwansky KBP@med.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             > G                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      F      
              F                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                           0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8 
               9   :                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9421731
              Pryzwansky  Neutrophils are white blood cells which contain an assortment of
              chemicals which are packaged in granules inside the cells.  When neutrophils
              are activated, a signal is transmitted which tells the cell to release these
              chemicals to the outside of the cells.  These chemicals are important in
              maintaining a healthy state for most living systems.  In previous studies it
              was shown that one signal, cGMP, transmits its information to the cell by
              activating a protein which changes the organization of the framework which
              controls granule movement.  This framework, which is similar to a skeleton
              (cytoskeleton), is composed of structures called intermediate filaments which
              rapidly change in organization when cGMP signals are in place.  The goal of
              this project is to determine if cGMP is responsible for regulating granule
              release by changing the organization of intermediate filaments.  This goal will
              be accomphlised by investigating the changes in the structural organization of
              the cyskeleton and granules by electron microscopy, and by investigating the
              biochemical and physiological functio n of cGMP.  This information should
              advance our understanding of the signaling mechanisms which control granule
              release as well as provide insight as to the physiological function of
              intermediate filaments. %%%  Neutrophils are important for defense against
              microorganisms which they kill.  These cells receive signals which are
              essential for them to respond, and cyclic GMP (cGMP) has been found to be a
              signal for neutrophil activation.  One of ways neutrophils respond is by the
              release of chemical substances which can destroy or inactivate noxious
              substances.  This investigation is to study the mechanisms of granule release
              by cGMP using electron microscopy to observe changes in the neutrophils at this
              time.  Since the proposed mechanism involves changes in the structural
              organization of the cell, the studies will also provide information on the
              physiological function of these structural elements (intermediate filaments).
              ***                         ;                                                  
                            Oh     +'  0                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i
              o n                           (                                                
                /                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                $       H       l                                            
                D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       9421731    
                                      Shirley Parker                      Shirley Parker     
                      @    3 ,                            @                                  
              @    3 ,                                                                       
                                           @    F #                                   
              Microsoft Word 6.0                                                      1      
                                                                                             
              ;                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        e 3       e                                                          
                                  j       j   j       j       j       j       j              
                                                                      @   1                  
                                                                                             
                              "       q   T       7   @                       j              
                                                                        @               j    
                j                                                                       j    
                        j                                       ~               j       j    
                j       j                           :                                        
                                                                       9421731 Pryzwansky 
              Neutrophils are white blood cells which contain an assortment of chemicals
              which are packaged in granules inside the cells.  When neutrophils are
              activated, a signal is transmitted which tells the cell to release these
              chemicals to the outside of the cells.  These chemicals are important in
              maintaining a healthy state for most living systems.  In previous studies it
              was shown that one signal, cGMP, transmits its information to the cell by
              activating a protein which changes the organization of the framework which
              controls granule movement.  This f
