Title       : Ontogeny of Immunity in Frogs/Metamorphic Changes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9421349

Award Number: 9421349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise A. Rollins-Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9421349  Rollins-Smith    Metamorphosis in the South African clawed frog,
              Xenopus  laevis, results in significant changes in the immune system.  It is
              characterized by a striking involution of the thymus  and spleen followed by
              significant lymphocyte expansion in  the postmetamorphic period.  Thymus
              involution is observed  seasonally in some other amphibian and reptilian
              species,  and with aging in a number of vertebrate species.  In most  of these
              examples of thymus involution, the causes are not  well defined. 
              Corticosteroid hormones (CH) have been  implicated, but careful studies with
              physiological  concentrations of natural hormones and specific hormone- 
              receptor antagonists have not been done.  To determine  whether CH are
              responsible for thymus involution and the  decline in numbers of lymphocytes at
              metamorphosis in  Xenopus, two specific CH receptor antagonists will be 
              tested.  In vitro studies will establish the effectiveness  of these compounds
              in this system and determine effective  concentration ranges.  In vivo studies
              are designed to  inhibit binding of CH to their receptors and thus inhibit 
              possible steroid-induced cell death.  The likely mechanism of CH-induced cell
              death is programmed  cell death or apoptosis.  To examine this question, the 
              rates of spontaneous apoptosis in the thymus and spleen cell  populations of
              control frogs and frogs treated with CH-  antagonists will be determined at
              several stages before,  during, and after metamorphosis.  If CH-induced
              apoptosis is  a mechanism of cell decline, it should be inhibited by the 
              CH-antagonists.  If the decline in thymocyte and splenocyte  numbers in not due
              to CH-induced apoptosis, it may be due to  a decreased rate of precursor
              immigration and expansion  during metamorphic climax.  To examine this
              question, the  rate of immigration and expansion of diploid (2N) precursors 
              into an implanted triploid (3N) thymus will be studied at  climax and compared
              with that observed at premetamorphic and  postmetamorphic stages.  C
              ollectively, these studies will  more precisely define the dynamics of cell
              death and  replacement in the thymus at metamorphosis.  Survival of young
              postmetamorphic frogs might depend on  their ability to mount a memory response
              to a pathogen  encountered as a tadpole.  Therefore, we would like to know  to
              what extent tadpole lymphocyted persist in the  postmetamorphic period. 
              Tadpole T cells differ  phenotypically from T cells because they do not express
               class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens.  Several experiments
              are designed to learn whether tadpole T  cells persist through metamorphosis
              and retain their tadpole  phenotype or become adult-like and express class II
              MHC.  %%%  These experiments will provide information about the  regulation of
              the immune system during development as well  as the role of corticosterid
              hormones in programmed cell  death  ***
