Title       : Molecular Analysis of a Drosophila Growth Factor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9421740

Award Number: 9421740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amanda Simcox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421740  Simcox  A signal transduction pathway involving intracellular Ras is
              highly conserved and used by a number of receptor-tyrosine kinases including
              the Drosophila EGF receptor (DER).  The long term goal of this work is to
              understand how signal transduction mediated by ubiquitous DER results in a
              tissuespecific response.  DER has multiple roles in development and is involved
              in cell survival, differentiation and proliferation.  Tissue-specific signaling
              via the receptor is likely to involve localized aomponents, including ligands. 
              The candidate ligand defective dorsal discs (ddd) is the focus of this
              proposal.  The ddd activity is required for ventral patterning in the embryo
              and growth of the imaginal wing and haltere discs; ddd transcripts are
              spatially localized in these tissues.  The genetic characterization of ddd
              shows it functions nonautonomously and interacts with DER.  DER is epistatic to
              ddd which suggests ddd acts upstream of the receptor.  Both the nonautonomy and
              the data also support this idea.  The predicted ddd protein has an EGF-like
              domain, which is characteristic of EGF receptor ligands.  Ddd also has an
              Iglike domain.  The neuregulins share this combination of domains.  These
              ligands bind vertebrate Neu, an EGF-receptor relative.  Interestingly, DER is
              equally similar to Neu and the EGF receptor.  Thus, the genetic and molecular
              evidence suggest Ddd is a DER ligand.  Here it is proposed to extend the
              molecular-genetic characterization of ddd and test the hypothesis that Ddd is a
              DER ligand.  The objectives are: (1) To determine the phenotypic effects of
              expression of ddd transgenes.  Constructs based on ddd cDNAs will be used to
              rescue ddd mutants and to determine the developmental consequence of ectopic
              ddd expression.  (2) To describe the tissue and cell distribution of Ddd
              throughout development. Polyclonal antisera directed against a Ddd-fusion
              protein will be used in antibody staining in animals of all developmental
              stages.  The temporal and spatial expression dom ain and subcellular or
              extracellular location of Ddd will be determined.  Ddd expression in other disc
              mutants will be examined.  (3) To test the hypothesis that Ddd is a DER ligand
              using cell-culture experiments.  The ability of Ddd and DER to interact
              molecularly will be tested in ligandbinding and immunoprecipitation assays. 
              The ability of Ddd to activate DER will be tested by monitoring receptor
              autophosphorylation.  The highly conserved EGF receptor pathway regulates cell
              multiplication and differentiation. Not surprisingly, genes in the pathway have
              oncogenic forms. Thus this research on ddd, a candidate ligand for the
              Drosophila EGF receptor, which is related to both Neu and the EGF receptor,
              will contribute to the understanding of abnormal, as well as normal, growth
              control and pattern formation.
