Title       : Molecular Biology of Circadian Oscillations in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1998     
File        : a9421475

Award Number: 9421475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Weitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421475    Organisms as diverse as fungi, flies, and humans exhibit circadian
              rhythms, daily rhythms in physiology and behavior that are generated and
              coordinated by an internal timekeeping system, referred to as a 'circadian
              clock'.  Circadian clocks in virtually all organisms examined to date share
              certain fundamental properties.  These include an intrinsic rhythm that is
              slightly different than the natural 24-hour day, the exact value depending on
              the species, the ability to synchronize to the natural day by exposure to
              light-dark cycles, and a highly-regular rhythmicity that does not change in
              rate at different temperatures, unlike simple chemical reactions.    The
              genetic and biochemical basis of the circadian clock is only poorly understood,
              despite its importance in organizing physiology and behavior in humans and
              other organisms.  The most sophisticated information to date has been obtained
              from genetic studies in the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster, which have led to
              the cloning and characterization of a circadian clock gene called period. 
              Recent genetic and biochemical experiments have confirmed that the protein
              product of the period gene is a key component of the circadian clock. 
              Accumulating evidence suggests that the 'works' of the clock consist of a
              precisely-timed oscillation in the abundance of the period protein.  This
              molecular rhythm results from a highly-regulated rhythmic synthesis of the
              period protein, a process in which the period protein itself and at least
              several as-yet uncharacterized proteins are involved.    The objective of these
              investigations is to identify novel proteins that play a role in the genesis or
              regulation of circadian oscillations.  The strategy being employed is to
              identify the as-yet uncharacterized proteins that interact with the period
              protein and which are involved in regulating its biological activity.  The
              long-range goal is to understand quantitatively how a small set of genes and
              their protein products can form a precise, self-sustaining d aily timing
              mechanism.
