Title       : Categorical Timing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9421243

Award Number: 9421243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell M. Church Russell_Church@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Collyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Evidence both from time production experiments (in which a person attempts to
              respond at an appropriate time) and time perception experiments (in which a
              person attempts to accurately estimate a duration) will be obtained to provide
              data regarding the small, but systematic, deviations from perfect accuracy that
              occur. These discrepancies are likely to be related to the duration being
              timed, and to be similar for various different timing tasks. The quantitative
              features of this nonlinear representation of time (which is called the
              `oscillator signature`) will be used to identify a multiple-oscillator
              mechanism for time perception and production. The effects of various
              independent variables (such as perturbations and adapting stimuli) on the
              oscillator signature will be identified; the oscillator signatures obtained
              with various perceptual and motor tasks will be compared.  In addition,
              individual differences in oscillator signatures will be assessed; periodic
              phenomena that may be responsible for the oscillator signature will be
              identified; and alternative quantitative models of the oscillator signature
              will be evaluated.  Although psychological time appears to change in an
              approximately linear way with physical time, the small systematic deviations of
              psychological time from exact linearity with physical time provide a way to
              identify the biological mechanism responsible for time perception. The major
              hypothesis is that timing is made possible by many normally occurring periodic
              biological phenomena.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
