Title       : Cellular Components of Androgen's Action in Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1997      
File        : a9421759

Award Number: 9421759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Roselli rosellic@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9421759  Roselli  Gonadal steroids have profound sex-specific effects on
              reproductive  function and behavior.  For instance, testosterone, which 
              stimulates a repertoire of masculine sexual behaviors in males, is  much less
              effective in eliciting these behaviors in females.  This  sex difference in
              androgen responsiveness is established during  early life and is believed to be
              related to sex differences in  brain structure as well as the concentrations of
              neural androgen  receptors.  Less attention has been paid to the possible 
              contribution of sex differences in neural androgen metabolism.   Aromatization
              of testosterone to estradiol by the brain is required  to activate male
              copulatory behaviors.  The levels of aromatase  activity are sexually dimorphic
              in medial preoptic area of the  brain which is essential for the display of
              male sexual behaviors.   Dr. Roselli proposes a model to explain the role of
              aromatization  in the development of sex difference in behavior.  The model 
              predicts that the aromatization pathway of androgen metabolism is  more active
              in the male than in the female brain because of  increased capacity to
              up-regulate aromatase activity.  Thus, when  adult males and females are given
              identical stimulation with  testosterone, more estrogen is produced in the male
              medial preoptic  region which contributes the greater behavioral response in
              males.   Dr. Roselli will investigate whether perinatal androgen exposure 
              increases aromatase activity and androgen receptor binding in the  brain of
              females, establish whether testosterone increases neural  estrogen receptor
              binding more in males than females, determine if  androgens increase brain
              aromatase synthesis and activity more in  males than females, and examine if
              estradiol stimulates male  behavior in females to the same level as males
              treated with  testosterone alone.  The proposed studies have the potential to 
              further our understanding of brain-related sex differences in  behavior in
              mammals, including man.
