Title       : Stoichiometry in Consumer-Resource Interactions Links Between Nutrient Dynamics
               and Population Demographics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9421925

Award Number: 9421925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Sterner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0511300   Nutrition                               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9421925  Sterner   Consumers and their food resources, imbedded in a complex
              ecological web, do not have identical chemical composition. This, in the
              conversion of biomass from resources to consumers, considerable chemical
              rearrangement takes place. Stoichiometry, or mass balance, constrains
              consumer-resource ilteractions in important ways. The proposed research will
              extend upon the results so far obtained with an experimental system consisting
              of nutrient-limited algae and freshwater zooplankton. Results so far indicate
              that P-limited algae are much inferior to algae from other growth conditions as
              food for upper trophic levels. Herbivore growth correlates with algal P
              content.    There are several major goals for this renewal project. For one,
              direct tests for mineral limitation in zooplankton growth will be performed
              using microencapsulated phosphorus. Tests will be performed under laboratory
              diets using field algae. Next, the research will compare the results so far
              limited to Daphnia to other species of zooplankton. Stoichiometry, in the form
              of the chemical content of different zooplankton consumers, provides a means to
              make a priori predictions about which species will be most affected by reduced
              P content in their food. If P content is indeed the important dietary factor in
              these studies, freshwater copepods, with a low P content in their tissues
              compared to Daphnia, should be less affected by low P food than Daphnia. A
              final major goal of this project will be to gather a large amount of data on
              the internal stoichiometry of the consumer, and develop that into a model of P
              balance in the animal analogous to bioenergetics models. Elemental contents of
              somatic tissue, amictic eggs, ephippia (resting eggs), and mots will be
              measured for several zooplankton species differing in N:P ratio. These results
              will be compared to current models of bioenergetics to see how differing
              chemical composition might influence the animal's partitioning of energy and
              other substances under different food cond itions.  %%%  This research
              represents a unique approach to consumer dynamics and food web structure. The
              chemical basis of resource distribution is poorly known. By focusing on how
              resource supply and composition within the food base affects the consumer
              populations, the PI will provide valuable information regarding species
              interactions in aquatic communities. This kind of information, however,
              provides an important framework for understanding chemical composition of food
              resources and nutrition, in general.
