Title       : Deductive Composition of Software from Component Libaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9421098

Award Number: 9421098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Waldinger waldinger@ai.sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 This award supports research in deductive methods, applied  to  automate the
              synthesis of software built from component  libraries.  Software is constructed
              from relatively large-scale  components, rather than  from the primitive
              instructions of a  programming language.  Theorem-proving  techniques are
              invoked to  identify the relevant components and to compose them  to solve the 
              problem at hand.  The goal is to put computing  power in the hands of a broader
              segment of the population and to  increase the  productivity and accuracy of
              the expert  practitioner.    The software is  constructed to meet
              specifications expressed in a  logical or graphical  notation.  Specifications
              are elicited from  the user via a dialog with a  graphical user interface.  The
               specification is phrased as a mathematical  theorem, which is  proved by an
              automatic deduction system. The proof is  conducted  in an application domain
              theory, which describes the components  in  the software library, the
              constructs of the specification  language, and the  background knowledge
              necessary to glue the  components together to meet the  specification.    The
              theorem is proved by the automatic deduction system Snark,  which has been
              implemented for applications in software  engineering and  artificial
              intelligence.  A program that meets  the original specification is  extracted
              from the proof and  translated into the desired target language.  Software is 
              produced with high assurance of correctness---it is verified by  the proof from
              which it is extracted.    This research is expected to make  subroutine
              libraries, component  libraries, and software reuse libraries  accessible to
              users who  are largely ignorant of the contents of the libraries,  their 
              conventions and terminology, or even the target programming  language.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
