Title       : Specification of Two Classes of Sympathetic Preganglionic Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9421448

Award Number: 9421448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Forehand   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421448  Forehand  Homeostasis is the process by which the body maintains
              temperature,  blood pressure, digestion, and a variety of other physiological 
              functions necessary for life.  Homeostasis is controlled  unconsciously through
              connections of the autonomic nervous system.   Control centers in the brainstem
              regulate organ function via their  connections with neurons in the spinal cord
              and peripheral ganglia.   It is clear that optimum organ function can be
              achieved only by a  fine matching of command neurons with their targets, yet it
              is  unclear how cells in the developing autonomic nervous system convey  to one
              another critical information about their position and  destinations.  Recent
              studies have begun to elucidate the  organization of embryonic preganglionic
              thoracic neurons into  discrete groups of cells.  These neurons are located in
              the spinal  cord and send information from the brain to a series of autonomic 
              ganglia via processes called axons.  This research is designed to  determine
              how these axons find the appropriate autonomic ganglia so  that the message is
              received by the correct ganglion cells.   Preganglionic axons must contact a
              number of ganglia located at the  rostral end of the body (towards the head) or
              at the caudal end of  the body (towards the tail or feet).  Some preganglionic
              axons  project rostrally and others project caudally; no axon splits to 
              project in both directions.  The immediate goal of the proposed  research is to
              determine the way in which these axons make this  choice.  One set of
              experiments will determine the way in which the  appropriate numbers of axons
              that are to project in each direction  are established.  In other experiments,
              the way in which the axons  bundle together to project to the ganglia will be
              examined to  determine if axons destined to project one direction selectively 
              bundle with like axons.  The results of these experiments will  elucidate
              factors that lend a unique identity to individual pools  of preganglionic
              neurons.  Ultima tely, this research will define  functional cell groups of the
              preganglionic cell column relative to  their topographic targets and the organs
              they regulate.  This  experimental paradigm has the potential to provide a
              unique  situation for studying the general way in which topographic maps of 
              the body are matched to various levels of the nervous system .
