Title       : Transcriptional Regulation of Steroid Gene Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9421604

Award Number: 9421604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Miesfeld RLM@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421604  Miesfeld    Steroid hormones control cell function by turning on and
              turning off specific sets of genes.  The genes controlled by testosterone and
              other androgenic hormones are androgen-dependent tissue.  To better understand
              how androgens control the expression of specific genes in the rat ventral
              prostate, Dr. Miesfeld has developed an in vitro model system using a novel rat
              prostate cell line that was isolated during the course of NSF support.  One of
              the paradoxical observations that he has been studying is how similar steroid
              hormones elicit such distinct cellular responses in vivo given that the steroid
              receptor proteins are capable of binding to the same gene sequences when
              studied in vitro.  He has proposed that prostate cells contain special androgen
              receptor "adaptor" proteins which aid in discriminating between androgen action
              and that of glucocorticoids which bind to a related steroid receptor.  By
              understanding more about these cell-specific steroid responses, it should be
              possible to uncover the molecular basis of gene-selective transcription.  In
              this proposed research, Dr. Miesfeld  intends to focus his efforts on three
              specific aims.  First, he will use two model androgen regulated genes, and
              either liver cells or prostate cells, to map promoter- and cell-specific
              requirements for androgen receptor sequences that may interact with putative
              adaptor proteins.  These proteins may act as "activators" in prostate cells or
              as "inhibitors" in liver cells based on earlier observations that androgen
              receptors function 10-20 times better in prostate cells.  Second, he will use
              yeast cells to set up a genetic screen to identify new mutations in the
              androgen receptor that affect these promoter- and cell-specific responses.  One
              prediction from the hypothesis is that different proteins will interact with
              the modulatory domain of the androgen receptor in distinct ways such that
              mutations should be able to distinguish between them.  Third, he will use
              biochemical techniques to physica l isolate proteins from prostate cells that
              specifically interact with the androgen receptor modulatory domain.  The
              characterization of these proteins should provide new information regarding
              mechanisms of steroid-regulated gene expression.  ***
