Title       : Neural and Chemosensory Control of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9421208

Award Number: 9421208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146331             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Edwards edwards@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9521208  Edwards  Reproductive behaviors are essential for the survival of all 
              species.  Testicular hormones are required for reproduction, and  hormones
              activate mating in males by actions that increase the  sexual responsiveness of
              males to females.  For many species,  sexual status is communicated by odors,
              and olfaction makes an  important contribution to sexual arousal in males.  Dr.
              Edwards  proposes to examine the neural pathways through which the olfactory 
              system and populations of hormone-sensitive neurons in the brain  regulate male
              reproductive behavior.  Neuroanatomical techniques  will be used to identify
              androgen-sensitive neurons and neurons  active during mating.  Special
              attention will be given to a brain  region that includes the zona incerta and
              central tegmental field.   Restoration of mating in castrate males by
              incerta/tegmental  testosterone implants can show the importance of the region
              for the  hormonal regulation of copulation.  Large lesions of the 
              incerta/tegmental continuum eliminate mating.  Studying the effect  of small
              lesions to this region can help identify neuronal cell  fields essential for
              copulation, and provide a foundation for  studies designed to reveal the
              projection systems through which  androgens exert their effects on reproductive
              behavior.  Because  the studies include measures of sexual behaviors (erection,
              sexual  approach towards a female), they have relevance for understanding  how
              male reproductive behavior is represented in the organization  of the brain in
              many species, including man.
