Title       : Studies of Carbon-Sulfur Bond Cleavage by Homogeneous Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9421727

Award Number: 9421727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Jones jones@chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9187,EGCH,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9421727  Jones  University of Rochester  Dr. William D. Jones, Chemistry
              Department, University of Rochester, is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to
              explore the mechanistic pathways for the hydrodesulfurization of thiophene and
              related sulfur containing derivatives. The studies will involve physical
              organometallic experiments designed to probe the nature of the carbon-sulfur
              bond breaking step. The structures of intermediates that are involved will be
              elucidated and the kinetic and thermodynamic parameters that control the
              reactivity and selectivity will be determined. New complexes will be examined
              that not only break C-S bonds, but also have the potential to do further
              chemistry resulting in the total elimination of sulfur from the organic portion
              of the molecule. Substituted dibenzothiopenes will be examined in some detail,
              these compounds prove the most difficult to desulfurize. Several binuclear
              metal systems will be assessed for HDS activity.    The refining of petroleum
              is one of largest scale chemical processes being carried out in the world
              today. The removal of sulfur, a minor constituent in all crude oils which is
              converted to environmenally harmful sulfur dioxide during combustion, is an 
              important step (called hydrodesulfurization or HDS) in the refining procedure.
              While a great deal of work has been done in trying to understand the salient
              features of the HDS process, many questions remain to be answered. In the
              project the details of how metal species interact with the sulfur containing
              compounds found in crude oil will be investigated. This will provide the
              background information needed to improve the design of the industrial process
              and to obtain new more efficient catalysts for sulfur removal.
