Title       : Interdependence and Category-based Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9421480

Award Number: 9421480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan T. Fiske   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This program of research tests the PI's theory  that powerful perceivers are
              vulnerable to stereotyping others because: (a) their outcomes are not so
              contingent on those subordinate others; (b) their capacities are limited by
              overload; and (c) they can be personally motivated by a dominance orientation. 
              The powerful perceiver's  control motivations (lack of contingency on others
              and possible dominance orientation) make them less careful and combine with
              overloaded capacity to encourage stereotyping.  These dynamics have practical
              significance because the use of stereotypes by powerful decision makers has
              more impact than their use by the less powerful.  They have theoretical
              significance because the lowered social contingency (lack of  reciprocal
              outcome dependency) of powerful people paves the way for more autonomous
              motives to guide their impression formation (e.g., values, individual
              differences,  relationships external to the power relation).  The relative lack
              of contingency of the powerful also creates a greater challenge for influencing
              them. Six studies will test the PI's theor y utilizing two paradigms supported
              by preliminary data.  These paradigms  employ both manipulations of power and
              individual differences and include a range of stereotyped targets varying in 
              ethnicity, race, and gender.  The first three studies test the hypothesis that
              the powerful do not need to attend to their subordinates.  One  implication of
              this perspective is that the powerless may become anxious, a prediction
              supported by  previous work. To examine this implication, three additional
              studies investigate the dynamics of power  and control feelings to test a
              related hypothesis:  Some kinds of power do not make the powerless  anxious,
              and so avoid the debilitating interpersonal effects of anxiety.  Together,
              these six studies  examine situational and personality dynamics of the
              relationship between power and stereotyping, as  mediated by control feelings
              and capacity limitations.      Studies of power and stereotyping are  critical
              to the nation's effective use of its human capital.  Stereotypes ignore the
              merits of the  individual.  Thus, powerful decision makers who stereotype their
              subordinates will make uninformed,  inefficient, and ineffective  decisions. 
              Yet the PI's theory, tested in this program of research,  suggests that the
              powerful are especially vulnerable to stereotyping.  It also suggests that a 
              dominating, stereotypic leadership style undermines subordinate performance. 
              This research will  reveal how the powerful can avoid the debilitating effects
              of stereotypes and make the best use of the  available human resources.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
