Title       : Collaborative Research: Comparision of Below-Ground Productivity Across LTER+
               Sites and Developing Applications Software for Research in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1994 
File        : a9421974

Award Number: 9421974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jordan T. Hastings jordan@maxey.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9421974  Hasting    This project focuses on synthesis of below-ground
              productivity by plant roots at a number  of sites in North America (LTER sites
              and other sites with significant root biomass information).  Below-ground
              productivity is a key part of net primary productivity (NPP), yet there have
              been few efforts to compare below-ground productivity across different sites
              and develop synthetic hypotheses which might explain factors which control root
              growth and death and allocation of carbon to roots.   This information is vital
              in understanding NPP, as well as in predicting effects of global change on NPP.
               The below-ground ecosystem has been neglected, essentially.    The project has
              a dual objective: first, to develop a computer system which is suitable for
              intersite/synthetic research in root ecology; and second, to actually use that
              system for new scientific research.  Specifically, the following below-ground
              productivity questions will be addressed:    1. How do abiotic variables
              (primarily climate and soil) affect below-ground root biomass in different
              ecosystems?    2. How does above-ground vegetation type affect below-ground
              root biomass in different ecosystems?    3. What relationships exist between
              above- and below-ground biomass parameters (density, health, resilience, etc.)
              in different ecosystems?    The project is organized around a series of
              workshops in which ecologists (primarily root   scientists) collaborate with
              information engineers (computer systems professionals with   expertise in
              data-bases, application software, and networking).  One pilot and two  
              production workshops are planned.  For each workshop the activities are
              similar:  (1)   design and prototyping of a root data-base and an associated
              application software-suite  relevant to the ecosystem of interest: (2)
              validation of the prototype data-base and   application  software in a
              pre-workshop (limited to the organizers), followed by   refinements to the
              system, as necessary; (3) collection of real-world data and  metadata   sets
              for topic ecosystem, and loading these data into the data-base with appropriate
              quality   controls; (4) hosting of a formal workshop at which participants are
              challenged to make   use the collected data-base and application
              software-suite, actually accomplishing   intersite/synthetic science.    The
              significance of the project is the information technology assistance it offers
              scientists   in understanding how root ecology varies spatially and temporally
              across sites, and how it   is affected by climate, soils, above-ground
              vegetation and other site-specific factors.   Further, the project will evolve
              a series of data-bases and associated application software   suites for
              intersite/synthetic work in ecology, to be published across the Internet, which
                hopefully will stimulate interest for similar efforts in other ecological
              disciplines.
