Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: High-Speed Cluster of Workstations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9421978

Award Number: 9421978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120651             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ambuj Singh ambuj@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Bruno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan G. Konheim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amr El Abbadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Divyakant Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9421978  Singh     This award is to purchase an ATM network which will be used
              for several research projects: design of a platform for evaluating shared
              memories and coherence protocols, networking research, image databases, and
              high performance transaction processing.  The proposed research on distributed
              shared memories will extend an existing simulation and evaluation platform by
              providing efficient interfaces, implementation of objects, fault tolerance, and
              simulation using semantic information.  The networking research will deal with
              a number of critical issues in ATM network design, modeling, and applications:
              traffic shaping, heterogeneous traffic modeling and measurement, the delivery
              of IP traffic over ATM, and the design and construction of native-mode ATM
              protocol stacks to support multimedia applications.  The project on image
              databases will explore efficient content-based image retrieval mechanisms with
              the help of dynamic and adaptive index structures.  The overall goal is to
              support efficient similarity queries as well as to develop fast browsing
              techniques.  Finally, the proposed research on high performance transaction
              processing will implement and study the performance of a shared nothing system
              using weak memories and data partitioning techniques.  ***
