Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Public Culture of Science in Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1995   
File        : a9421963

Award Number: 9421963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann F. La Berge alaberge@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As was demonstrated by the recent decision to end funding for the
              super-conducting super collider, scientists--even physicists--can no longer
              assume public support for their scientific endeavors.  Scientists must capture
              the interest of the public.  And, as Ms. Moira Rogers is investigating in her
              dissertation under the direction of Professor Ann LaBerge, scientists cannot
              expect that the public will passively accept everything that scientists pass on
              to them.  Ms. Rogers is carrying out her investigation in the context of the
              German Enlightenment; but as she is discovering there, the public interest in
              science is aroused in extremely complex, dynamic ways.  Understanding of this
              complex dynamic is essential for the continued public support of what may seem
              to be esoteric scientific research.  Ms. Rogers is studying the culture of the
              Enlightenment which was marked by the public ascendance of science to a
              position of cultural authority. Complex literary and socio-political processes
              converged in the excitement and satisfaction of a public taste and curiosity
              for science. "It is from Saxony that the light of science has spread through
              Germany and other countries" was a common contemporary opinion. The fairs,
              publishing industry, and the university made of Leipzig a key center for the
              German Enlightenment.  Records of public meetings, periodicals for lay publics,
              advertisements diaries, popular science books, poetry newspapers, letters,
              invitations to public performances and many others, if subjected to careful
              historical analysis, can help to portray the public face of science as seen by
              a variety of social groups within the reading and listening publics.  Science
              spread through society as the result of the common efforts of printers and
              servants, philosophers  and instrument-makers, Clergyman and ladies, children
              and censors etc. The processes that made science transcend the boundaries of
              academies and universities were not merely "transmission" of ideas to
              essentially passive and receptive audi ences, but complex dynamics that
              contributed to the promotion of broader Enlightenment interests in German
              culture. This study will provide with an account of the cultural status of
              science in the German Enlightenment
