Title       : The Development of Orbital Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9421789

Award Number: 9421789
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Nauenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Science, especially physics, can be extraordinarily difficult for the average
              person to understand.  Historians of science coming with their expertise in
              historical methodology are able to analyze many of the motivations and actions
              taken by scientists, but they are not always able to follow the extremely
              technical mathematics which scientists use to produce their theories. Yet
              scientists who have the technical expertise to follow the mathematics
              frequently do not have the historical understanding to place the scientific
              work within a rich historical context.  Consequently, it is critically
              important that scientists with both mathematical sophistication and historical
              sensitivities bring these combined skills to bear on the major issues in the
              development of science.  Professor Nauenberg, a physics professor at the
              University of California, Santa Cruz, brings this combined technical and
              historical skill to bear on one of the central issues in the development of
              modern physics:  orbital dynamics.  From Ptolemy in the ancient world through
              Copernicus and Newton up to the twentieth century efforts of Albert Einstein,
              orbital dynamics has been a critical factor in the acceptance or rejection of 
              theories of physics.  Indeed, it was Einstein's explanation of the peculiar
              orbit of Mercury that physicists found far more convincing for support of his
              theory of relativity than the more famous prediction of the gravitational
              bending of light.      Professor Nauenberg is examining this history of the
              study of planetary orbits.  In this part of his research, he is looking at the
              work of Newton and Hooke to trace the development of their work in orbital
              dynamics.  Among other issues, he is examining the degree of validity of
              Newton's application of his principles of dynamics and gravitation to the
              anomalies in the orbit of the moon and Hooke's role in the early development of
              dynamics.  The results of these studies promise to elucidate in ways previously
              not possible how these extraordinarily technical issue s developed.   The
              ultimate solution to these planetary orbital anomalies took until Einstein to
              achieve.  How scientists worked toward this ultimate solution provides us with
              an extraordinary picture of how extremely difficult scientific problems are
              attacked and finally resolved.
