Title       : SGER: Biomolecular Analysis of Microscopic Trophis Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1994 
File        : a9421427

Award Number: 9421427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Banks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neo D. Martinez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1228,9104,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421427  Banks  Rapidly advancing biotechnology affords new opportunities for
              increasing the power and productivity of environmental biology. This research
              will apply cutting-edge biotechnology towards the resolution of previously
              insoluble environmental problems. Specifically, advanced DNA-based biomolecular
              techniques will be developed to identify and quantify cryptic species and
              trophic interactions at an unprecedented level of precision. Quantitative
              estimation of DNA concentration using the polymerase chain reaction (QPCA) is
              currently being incorporated into a highly replicable automated technique which
              facilitates application to difficult questions. This research will test whether
              recent developments in this technique, already being successfully applied to
              biomedical questions, enable reliable estimation of population sizes of two
              strains of bacteria (Escherichia coli). Density estimates will be evaluated for
              E. coli populations on plates with known different ratios of two strains. These
              will be compared with results obtained from gut extractions of a bactivorous
              nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans) fed on replicate E. coli plants. Positive
              results would indicate that these procedures not only estimate population
              sizes, but also estimate trophic flows from different prey species to their
              predators. When possible, estimates such as these are currently extremely
              difficult and involve radioactive reagents. This development will avoid such
              hazardous reagents and use the latest equipment and procedures to increase the
              ease and the statistical power in such determinations.  %%%   Recent work has
              employed more highly resolved trophic data to overturn several long held
              beliefs about food-web structure and offers more successfully predictive
              hypotheses in their place. These novel analyses of microscopic trophic
              interactions will assist further advances in trophic ecology. Beyond trophic
              interactions, this technique will likely have broader application since they
              may be used to quantify DNA extracted  from water, soil, and other ecologically
              important environments. The species-specific population and biomass estimates
              that these procedures may enable will greatly enhance our ability to address
              new and long-standing basic and applied issues concerning ecosystem, community,
              and population ecology of microbes, fungi, and micrometazoans.
