Title       : Management of Technological Innovation: Hierarchical Decision-Making in
               Life-Cycle Processing and Planning for Computer and Electronic Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1996  
File        : a9421194

Award Number: 9421194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Sheng psheng@euler.me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522400   Information Systems                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9148,9197,ENVI,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Proposal# 9421194  University of California at Berkeley    The recent trend of
              more stringent government legislation and growing consumerism for "green"
              product features have driven manufactures to consider a proactive approach
              towards minimizing the environmental impact of their products and processes. 
              Computer and electronics manufactures have been leading this paradigm shift
              through efforts in solvent substitution and selections of packaging materials. 
              However, these efforts have occurred largely through uncoordinated local
              efforts, with only limited transformation into corporate wide environmental
              strategies.  This proposal presents an multi-disciplinary, integrated analysis
              of hierarchical decision-making for the manufacture of computer and electronics
              products.  A key issue in this analysis is the development of process, product
              planning and firm level metrics for measuring environmental performance.  At
              the process level, analytical models will be developed to evaluate trade-off
              between effluents, energy utilization, production rate and quality for metal
              forming, interjection molding, board assembly, chassis assembly, disassembly
              and regrind operations.  The process models and metrics can be combined to
              evaluate alternative manufacturing / recycling paths, as well as changes in
              material selection and geometric features.  Finally, using engineering data,
              the development of overall organizational metrics for environmental performance
              will be explored.  The proposed research will also examine the impact of
              vertical integration and influence on vendor environmental performance in
              decentralized manufacturing and recycling.  The analytical modeling will be
              complemented by field studies at production sites of our industrial partners,
              Sun Microsystems Inc. and Hughes Aircraft Company, as well as sites of their
              manufacturing and recycling vendors.  Deployment of research will occur through
              both on-site case studies of industrial products and creation of curriculum
              material in the College of Engi neering, Haas School of Business Administration
              and the School of Public Health.
