Title       : Target-Induced Regulation of Neuronal Synapse Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9421372

Award Number: 9421372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Zoran zoran@mail.bio.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421372  Zoran  How complex patterns of synaptic connections are formed during 
              nervous system development and regeneration is a fundamental  concern of
              neuroscience.  Developing neurons must make a series of  choices, including the
              differential recognition of appropriate and  inappropriate pathways and
              targets, that result in highly  stereotyped patterns of connectivity.  Once a
              growth cone at the  tip of a neuronal process arrives at its appropriate target
              region,  it forms potential synaptic contacts and initiates synapse  formation.
               The idea that growth cones derive specific recognition  signals from targets
              and that these signals regulate decisions of  synaptic target choice has been
              considered for some time; however,  the molecular nature of these
              target-derived cues and the  mechanisms of their presynaptic transduction
              remain largely  undefined.  Cell-cell interactions, between neurons and their 
              synaptic partners, govern critical steps in the formation of  synaptic
              connections during nervous system development and  regeneration.  This project
              will focus on early inductive events  that govern the acquisition of
              presynaptic secretory function  during the selective synapse formation of
              identified motor neurons  in cell culture.  Motor neurons,gain the ability to
              release  neurotransmitter only following contact with their appropriate  muscle
              targets.  A major goal of these studies is to determine the  cellular
              mechanisms governing these inductive events.  Neurons make  a series of
              choices, including pathway and target selections,  during development that
              result in highly stereotyped patterns of  connectivity.  These selection
              processes likely involve the  differential recognition of appropriate pathways
              and targets.  This  work will provide insights into the molecular nature of
              retrograde  synaptic signals, the cellular basis of synaptic target 
              discrimination, and the role of cellular processes in the  development of
              synaptic specificity.
