Title       : The Dynamics of Phase Inversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9421580

Award Number: 9421580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles A. Garris                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. McHugh a-mchugh@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9181,9197,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421580  McHugh, Anthony    Phase inversion refers to the process by which a
              concentrated polymer solution is converted into a solid gel network with
              desirable, end-use properties.  This process plays a central role in a number
              of polymer material fabrication technologies, the most important of which is
              membrane formation.  The long-range goal of this research iq to advance the
              fundamental understanding of the generic, dynamic aspects of phase inversion,
              and, thereby, provide a more quantitative basis for its application in the
              development of new materials.  The proposed work is an experimentally-based
              study which capitalizes on unique methodologies recently developed in the
              P.I.'s laboratory for in-situ observation of the diffusion and gelation
              dynamics which occur when a polymer solution is contacted with a nonsolvent
              medium.  In-situ visualization techniques will be used to monitor the
              crystallization, macroscopic, homogeneous diffusion, gel growth, interfacial
              structuring kinetics, and bath-side mass transfer processes which take place in
              nonsolvent-quenched films.  Dynamic small-angle scattering experiments will
              also be carried out on thermally-quenched solutions to gain new information on
              the interplay of the various phase separation processes (liquid-liquid phase
              separation - by spinodal decomposition or nucleation and growth mechanisms,
              glass transition, and physical gelation) which control the kinetics of
              formation and morphology of the phase-separated, gel structure.  The
              nonsolvent-quenching experiments will be analyzed in terms of phenomenological
              models for the diffusion and gelation processes.  In the latter case, analysis
              of the effects of non-equilibrium at the film-bath interface will be carried
              out to quantify the conditions under which spilodal decomposition,
              vitrification, and/or nucleation and growth phenomena may be involved in the
              gelation, and, structure formation processes.  Systems to be studied will
              include amorphous and crystallizable polymers in solvent/nonsolvent co
              mbinations corresponding to rapid and delayed precipitation quench conditions. 
              Morphological studies of the formed structures will also be carried out using
              electron microscopy.  The experimental and modeling studies of this project
              will provide important, new information on the structure formation behavior of
              quenched polymer solutions.  It is expected that the results will have a direct
              carryover in the prediction and control of the processing conditions necessary
              for the formation of gas separation reverse osmosis and ultrafiltration
              membranes.
