Title       : Exploring the Time-Series Implications of Dynamic Models in Economics and
               Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1993    
File        : a9110015

Award Number: 9110015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars P. Hansen l-hansen@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project carries out work on three topics pertaining to the                
              time series implications of a variety of dynamic models in                     
              economics and finance.  Research under the first topic is aimed                
              at developing and applying new methods of estimation and                       
              inference for nonlinear continuous time processes.  These methods              
              will be used to study alternative continuous time models of asset              
              pricing.  Research under the second topic will assess the                      
              performance of a variety of stochastic discount factor models of               
              asset pricing.  New diagnostics for dynamic asset pricing models               
              will be developed, new measures of the magnitude of specification              
              errors for a variety of such models will be provided, and new                  
              methods of identification and estimation will be explored.  The                
              third topic will continue development of model solution methods                
              for and quantitative analysis of a rich class of recursive linear              
              models of dynamic economies.  Within the context of these models,              
              there will be investigations of optimal dynamic taxation,                      
              seasonality, aggregation-over-time and income distribution.                    
                                                                                             
              This project has had an enormous influence on the way empirical                
              research is conducted in economics.  The investigator, in                      
              collaboration with others, has developed new methods for using                 
              data to rigorously estimate dynamic economic relationships that                
              now dominate most empirical research in economics.  This project               
              builds on the results of past research by developing better                    
              methods for studying dynamics in such areas of research as asset               
              pricing, taxation and income distribution.  The project                        
              undertakes a new line of research on nonlinear models of                       
              continuous time processes.  This is important because econometric              
              and statistical methods designed for estimating or testing the                 
              extensive body of theoretical research on these models have been               
              slow to develop.  This project will expand the existing set of                 
              methods and use them to obtain important new substantive insights              
              into the performance of security markets.
