Title       : RIA: Modeling of Multilayer Nanostructure Magnetic Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9110119

Award Number: 9110119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69756              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Gang Zhu jzhu@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Recent experimental studies have shown that many                               
              extraordinary magnetic properties can be achieved                              
              in multilayer nanostructure polycrystalline thin                               
              films, e.g. high coercivities.  In this proposal, a                            
              computer modeling study is proposed to simulate                                
              the microscopic magnetization processes and                                    
              structures in the multilayer nanostructure film.  The                          
              main objective of the study is to understand the                               
              mechanisms for those extraordinary magnetic                                    
              properties and to be able to suggest new film                                  
              nanostructures for developing more advanced                                    
              magnetic thin films.  Important physical quantities                            
              and intrinsic material properties, such as crystalline                         
              structure and interfacial properties are included in                           
              the model.  Ferromagnetic exchange and                                         
              magnetostatic interactions are included.                                       
              Microscopic magnetization configurations and their                             
              dynamic behavior are obtained by solving coupled                               
              Landau-Lifshitz equations.  In this study, small size                          
              magnetization structures are to be discovered and                              
              behavior of these structures which determines the                              
              film magnetic properties will be characterized.                                
              Correlations between film magnetic properties and                              
              film nanostructures, intrinsic material properties,                            
              and interfacial properties will be obtained.                                   
              Superparamagnetic constraint on the film                                       
              microstructures will be investigated.  In this study,                          
              we will also search for optimum film structure and                             
              material properties in developing the film for ultra-                          
              high density magnetic storage applications.  This                              
              modeling study will be combined with experimental                              
              research on the same type of films.  Available                                 
              experimental results and information on material                               
              and microstructure will be used to verify and                                  
              improving the modeling at all stages of the study.
