Title       : On the Complexity of Algorithms for Approximately Solved Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1991       
File        : a9110882

Award Number: 9110882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anargyros Papageorgiou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              The project addresses the complexity of algorithms for approximately           
              solved problems.  In contrast to discrete complexity theory this               
              investigation deals with problems that are continuous in nature and            
              which cannot be solved exactly in finite time.  The cost of an                 
              approximate algorithm depends on its quality (error), and on the form          
              of its input, which is composed by a number of observations of some            
              otherwise unknown quantity.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The problems to be investigated include the "average case" solution of         
              nonlinear equations, the effects of various kinds of sampling in the           
              approximation of linear operators, and the development and                     
              implementation of Monte Carlo-type of algorithms for various classes           
              of integrands.  The analysis of these problems involves the derivation         
              of an optimal error algorithm followed by its complexity analysis.             
              Often, techniques from complexity theory, approximation theory and             
              results for other similar, or related, problems can be combined to             
              obtain tight error and complexity estimates.  Nevertheless, in some            
              cases the only possibility is to modify a known algorithm in order to          
              obtain another with an improved performance.  The derivation of lower          
              bounds in usually difficult, and the modifications aim to expose               
              characteristics of the problems and properties of the algorithms.              
                                                                                             
              The problems of interest here and the techniques that will be applied          
              for their solution are important not only to complexity theory but to          
              other areas of applied science as well.
