Title       : Informational Imperfections and Economic Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9110211

Award Number: 9110211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160558             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Douglas Bernheim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This project attempts to expand our understanding of social and                
              economic behavior in environments with imperfect information.  The             
              project consists of two main parts.  The first part of the project             
              examines clustering, while the second studies incomplete                       
              contracting.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              "Clustering" refers to situations in which people act similarly,               
              even though their preferences are different.  Examples include herd            
              behavior (for example, the formation of cultural or sub-cultural               
              standards of behavior), the common practice of dividing estates                
              equally among heirs, and the proliferation of "me too" political               
              candidates.  This project explores a theory of clustering based on             
              two key assumptions: decision-makers desire popularity or esteem,              
              and actions are observable but true characteristics are not.  In               
              a class of mathematical models, these assumptions produce                      
              clustering of choices, even when true characteristics are not                  
              clustered.  This part of the study will lead to novel predictions              
              about consumption behavior in various markets.                                 
                                                                                             
              "Incomplete contracting" refers to the fact that contracts often               
              fail to cover many contingencies.  This project explores a theory              
              of incomplete contracts based on two assumptions: certain actions              
              are not observable by those who enforce contracts (for example,                
              courts or arbitrators), and parties to a contract will interact                
              again in the future.  In a class of mathematical models, these                 
              assumptions imply that parties to an explicit contract may leave               
              some provisions ambiguous in order to improve the implicit aspects             
              of their agreement.  This part of the study will provide insights              
              concerning why contracts leave out certain contingencies even when             
              including them does not seem very costly.
