Title       : Research Initiation: Dynamic Dielectric Monitoring of In-situ Consolidation of
               Thermoplastic Filament Winding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9110185

Award Number: 9110185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Y. Liang steven.liang@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The project will study the fundamentals of monitoring in-situ             
              consolidation of thermoplastic composites in filament winding based            
              on dynamic dielectric analysis.  In spite of its demonstrated                  
              advantages in production rate, cost, and process flexibility,                  
              thermoplastic filament winding with in-situ consolidation has not              
              been widely accepted for industrial applications because of the                
              high void content of the wound part resulting from the variation               
              of consolidation at the filament lay down point.  The investigation            
              aims at identifying the degree of thermoplastic resin consolidation            
              at the lay down point through analyzing its resin rheology                     
              properties by frequency-dependent electromagnetic sensing                      
              methodology.  The uniqueness of the research is the concept of                 
              imbedding dynamic dielectric measurement in the compaction process             
              to provide a near-field, non-destructive, and non-intrusive sensing            
              technique which enables the in-process assessment of the critical              
              material properties that directly contribute to the part quality               
              and productivity.  The work will formulate the analytical basis of             
              the technique, establish the fundamental understanding of the                  
              relationship between dynamic dielectric parameters (namely the                 
              permittivity, loss factor and conductivity) and the in-situ                    
              consolidation process, demonstrate the concept feasibility through             
              simulation testings, and explore the advantages and limitations of             
              the methodology through prototype system implementation on a                   
              filament winding station.                                                      
                   The successful completion of this research is expected to                 
              remove a major obstacle in the advancement of filament winding                 
              technology by the establishment of a much needed in-process                    
              monitoring methodology.  The investigation will also open up new               
              opportunities for feedback control and optimization research in the            
              critical area of intelligent processing of advanced composites.
