Title       : Research Initiation Award: System Identification for ProcessControl: Control
               Relevant Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1991      
File        : a9110528

Award Number: 9110528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Rivera daniel.rivera@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Process control systems enable plants to meet objectives such                  
              as maintaining product quality and minimizing energy                           
              consumption, which in turn maximize the plant's profitability                  
              and rate-of-return or investment.  Because they enable a rapid                 
                                                                                             
              response to change, process control systems play a vital part                  
              in a company's ability to remain profitable in an uncertain                    
              economic climate.  The first step in the design of an advanced                 
                                                                                             
              control system is to build a model that represents the                         
              dynamics of the plant.  Most plants are too complex or the                     
              underlying processes too poorly understood to be adequately                    
              modeled using first principles.  The most reasonable way to                    
              obtain reliable dynamic models is from data generated through                  
              well designed experiments.  In the petrochemical and refining                  
              industries, black-box models obtained from experiments are by                  
              far the most common means of obtaining dynamic models.  The                    
              task of obtaining dynamic models from data is referred to as                   
              system identification.                                                         
              Control-relevant system identification is motivated by the                     
              desire to increase the utility and acceptance of advanced                      
              identification concepts in the process industries.  It takes                   
              into consideration the closed-loop control objectives and the                  
              skill level of the user.  Control-relevant identification                      
              therefore offers the opportunity for the migration of advanced                 
                                                                                             
              identification concepts to nonexpert users and for the                         
              development of computer-aided design tools for identification                  
              that can be used by practicing engineers with a B.S. level of                  
              education.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The main objective of this project is to investigate the                       
              subject of control-relevant identification.  The basis for the                 
                                                                                             
              control-relevant approach is the relationship between the                      
              design variables of the identification problem and the                         
              performance objective of the control problem.  To obtain this,                 
                                                                                             
              bias and variance expressions in the frequency domain and                      
              representations of the control problem in terms of linear                      
              fractional transformations are used.  This analysis leads to a                 
                                                                                             
              systematic procedure for prefilter design that substantially                   
              improves the performance of prediction-error algorithms                        
              without demanding substantial increases in skill from the                      
              user.  In addition, use of the Structured Singular Value leads                 
                                                                                             
              to a model validation procedure for identified models that                     
              provides a clear picture of model limitations to achievable                    
              control performance.  By providing the theoretical basis for                   
              improved computer-aided design tools, these results should                     
              make the application of advanced identification concepts a                     
              more commonplace practice by engineers in the process                          
              industries.
