Title       : Nuclear Mechanisms of the Regulation of Tyrosine HydroxylaseGene in Adrenal
               Medullary Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9110000

Award Number: 9110000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michal K. Stachowiak mstacho@mha.chw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Josephs Hosp Med C/BNI
	      350 West Thomas Rd
	      Phoenix, AZ  850134409    602/285-3006

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A primary function of the nervous system is to help organisms                  
              adapt to external and internal conditions, by generating the                   
              appropriate adaptive response.  A major cause for adaptation, in               
              the nervous system, is due to changes in the biosynthesis of                   
              neurotransmitters, chemicals responsible for communication                     
              between nerve cells.  These effects are accomplished through                   
              alterations in gene activity which are expressed specifically in               
              neurons controlling the biosynthesis of neurotransmitters.  This               
              research project will focus on the regulation of the tyrosine                  
              hydroxylase (TH) gene, the gene responsible for the synthesis of               
              catecholaminergic neurotransmitters.  The mechanisms through                   
              which environmental and internal signals induce adaptive changes               
              in the expression of neural genes are unknown.  Previous studies               
              conducted by the PI indicate that signals may be conveyed to the               
              TH gene through the stimulation of two types of receptors, the                 
              acetylcholine receptor and the hormone, angiotensin II.  The PI                
              will determine whether neural and hormonal signals activate and                
              regulate later stages of gene expression such as processing and                
              maturation of gene products.  Regions of the TH gene that are                  
              stimulated by neural and hormonal signals will be identified.                  
              This gene has been linked to many fundamental functions of the                 
              nervous system including learning, regulation, mood control and                
              motivation.  This research offers a model to explore how these                 
              functions are controlled at the molecular level.
