Title       : Context and Classification Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1991   
File        : a9110245

Award Number: 9110245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 28,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52047              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Medin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is concerned with how people learn about, use, and                
              update their concepts and categories.  Categorization is                       
              fundamental to reasoning, because human language and thought is                
              made up of and organized around concepts.  A particular focus of               
              the project is to understand more fully how previous knowledge                 
              and experience are integrated with new information to determine                
              concepts.  For example, much of science education involves                     
              learning new terms and concepts, and there is considerable                     
              evidence that previous knowledge sometimes leads to                            
              misconceptions and misinterpretations of new information.  In                  
              other cases, prior knowledge is unambiguously helpful.  Clearly                
              we need to know much more about how knowledge and experience                   
              combine to determine what is learned.                                          
                                                                                             
              The research project has several distinct aims.  One goal is to                
              evaluate what makes some categories easy and natural to learn and              
              what makes other categories unnatural and difficult to learn.  A               
              related goal is to develop further and to test quantitative and                
              computational models of category learning.  One set of studies                 
              will evaluate these models in contexts where the learning                      
              examples have a complex, hierarchical structure.  A second line                
              of work will study the effects of different perspectives on the                
              perceived depth or centrality of different properties of                       
              concepts.  A third set of experiments will study how abstract                  
              advice or theories is combined with concrete examples in category              
              learning.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The category descriptions associated with theories (or diagnostic              
              criteria in psychodiagnostic classification) are often much more               
              abstract than the properties or behaviors of individual instances              
              of a category.  The overall goal of the project is to understand               
              how these abstract knowledge sturctures become linked with                     
              specific, contextualized experience to determine concept                       
              formation.  Potential applications of this work range from                     
              science education to any of a number of situations where                       
              diagnostic classification is an important activity.
