Title       : RIA: Optically Interconnected Wafer Scale Synchronous Processor Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MIP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1991     
File        : a9110276

Award Number: 9110276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul T. Hulina                          
	      MIP  DIV OF MICROELECTRONIC INFOR PROCESS SYS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Drabik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4732      MICROELECT FABRICA & PACKAGING
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4732,
Abstract    :
              This research studies the feasibility of using free-space optics               
              to interconnect large, monolithic arrays of electronic processing              
              elements (PEs), fabricated at or near the wafer scale, into                    
              topologies that are commonly characterized as having "high wire                
              area".  Two long-standing problems are addressed in this project.              
              (1) Conventional approaches to wafer-scale integration must forfeit            
              considerable area to provide defect tolerance in the form of                   
              redundant or programmable interconnects and a sufficient density               
              of spare PEs.  (2) The poor performance of cross-wafer electrical              
              interconnects and the dominance of wire area in the 2-D layout of              
              highly connected topologies strongly favor mesh-like, essentially              
              two-dimensional, locally connected networks.                                   
                                                                                             
              In this research, electronic PEs are provided with optical inputs              
              for all signals entering or leaving the PE.  Light signals emitted             
              perpendicularly from the substrate constitute the input to an                  
              imaging system which, by virtue of specifically designed                       
              diffractive elements, realizes a mapping from the optical source               
              locations to the detector locations that implements the desired                
              interconnect.  Because inter-PE connection are optical, the                    
              additional complexity required to support defect tolerance is                  
              absorbed into the imaging system instead of the circuitry.  Areas              
              of investigation include systems and architectural aspects of                  
              optically interconnected parallel machines, optimal design                     
              procedures and fabrication technology for diffractive elements,                
              technology for light modulators on silicon, and imaging system                 
              engineering.  A prototype system comprising a butterfly machine for            
              computing fast transforms will serve as an experimental vehicle for            
              investigation of technological and systems aspect of optically                 
              interconnected wafer-scale processor arrays.
