Title       : Non-Equilibrium Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9110004

Award Number: 9110004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $573700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark O. Robbins mr@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There has been growing interest in non-equilibrium phase                       
              transitions, yet our understanding of them is far from complete.               
              The proposed research will explore transitions far from equilibrium            
              in several specific systems: fluid invasion, magnetic domain wall              
              motion, fluid spreading, friction, and shearing of solids and                  
              fluids.  In addition to allowing insight into basic features of                
              non-equilibrium transitions, the work will address systems of                  
              technological importance.  The first three processes are                       
              prototypical examples of interface motion through disordered media.            
              Disorder impedes interface motion and a finite force is needed to              
              initiate flow.  Two types of critical phenomena have been                      
              identified at the onset of motion: depinning and percolation.  One             
              goal of the research will be a complete characterization of these              
              transitions for specific models.  The variation of the depinning               
              force, the critical exponents, and the interface morphology with               
              the spatial dimension and nature and strength of the disorder will             
              be explored.  Phase transitions between different universality                 
              classes will also be studied.  Studies of friction and sheared                 
              systems will explore the role of internal degrees of freedom in                
              producing discontinuous phase transitions.  One focus will be the              
              shear-induced melting transition in colloidal suspensions.  This               
              work will also provide information about flow of solids under high             
              shear stresses.  A second focus will be stick-slip friction -                  
              alternate sticking and sliding between two surfaces.  Stick-slip               
              motion leads to squeaks in hinges and to wear of moving parts.  The            
              proposed research will extend recent studies which indicate that               
              stick-slip friction is caused by periodic non-equilibrium phase                
              transitions.
