Title       : Designing Multilevel Relational Databases for Security-Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9110709

Award Number: 9110709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Oscar N. Garcia                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sujeet Shenoi sujeet@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6855,
Abstract    :
              A well-designed database must balance security-control and                     
              operational efficiency.  Consequently, the principal objective is              
              to develop a design theory for multilevel databases unifying                   
              security (access-control and inference-control) and efficiency                 
              aspects in a dynamic environment.  This project identifies the                 
              key constraints imposed by these aspects and formulates practical              
              guidelines for database design.  Emphasis is placed on data                    
              dependencies fundamental to inference-control and anomaly-                     
              elimination. The approach employed deals with a lattice-theoretic              
              relational model enforcing database security by abstracting or                 
              clouding sensitive information in user views.  The model uses                  
              "contexts" constructed from natural equivalences. Contexts induce              
              multilevel relations capable of holding abstraction, and support               
              a rich and highly secure data language.  Contexts also                         
              incorporate semantics in abstraction; this helps balance user                  
              convenience and database security.  The lattice-theoretic                      
              framework simplifies the investigation; classical design issues                
              are also readily mapped to their multilevel formulations.  The                 
              investigation also focuses on an Oracle implementation of the                  
              security-control model.  Special consideration is given to                     
              implementing the query-handling facility.  The results of this                 
              research will have a significant impact on the design of                       
              databases handling abstract information, and particularly those                
              supporting AI and expert systems applications, as robust and                   
              efficient security-control is a critical issue facing database                 
              and knowledge-base designers.                                                  
                //
