Title       : Nonparametric Estimation of Econometric Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9110039

Award Number: 9110039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Whitney K. Newey wnewey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Semiparametric estimators are used intensively in applied work as              
              a way of avoiding detailed assumptions on model specifications and             
              as a way of avoiding difficult computational problems.  The                    
              contribution of this project comes from developing a general                   
              asymptotic theory for semiparametric estimators, investigating                 
              methods for nonparametric estimation of structural equation models,            
              and using nonparametric estimators of consumer surplus for an                  
              empirical analysis of gasoline demand.                                         
                                                                                             
              Knowledge of the asymptotic variance of an estimator is important              
              for large sample inference, efficiency, and as a guide to the                  
              specification of regularity conditions.   This research develops               
              a general formula with a relatively simple set of regularity                   
              conditions for the asymptotic variance of semiparametric                       
              estimators.  This is an important contribution because at present              
              asymptotic variance calculations for semiparametric estimators are             
              model specific and usually involve a great deal of tedious detail.             
              This project will make semiparametric estimators much easier to                
              use.                                                                           
                                                                                             
              Nonparametric estimators have gained wide attention in the past                
              few years in econometrics because they impose even fewer                       
              restrictions than semiparametric estimators.  But nonparametric                
              models are difficult to interpret and their usefulness in applied              
              research has been demonstrated in a limited number of cases.  This             
              project applies nonparametric regression models to                             
              estimation of demand curves of the types most often used in applied            
              research.  Estimators of exact consumer surplus and deadweight loss            
              will be derived from the demand curve estimators.  The research                
              includes an application to gasoline demand.  This represents an                
              important contribution because estimators of                                   
              consumer surplus and deadweight loss are the most widely used                  
              welfare measures in applied areas of economics such as public                  
              finance.  The results from the empirical research will provide new             
              insights into the magnitude of welfare loss from carbon taxes that             
              are currently being considered as one of the policy tools for                  
              reducing emissions of greenhouse gases.
