Title       : The Timing of Control of Stock Externalities in the Presence of Learning with an
               Application to Global Warming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1991    
File        : a9110325

Award Number: 9110325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44619              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Kolstad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              A major issue that has arisen time and time again in managing the              
              environment is how to regulate emissions where there are                       
              potentially important irreversible environmental consequence and               
              where there is great uncertainty about the magnitude of the                    
              consequences.  The tension is often between controlling pollution              
              now in order to avoid potential irreversible effects, versus                   
              waiting to learn more about the potential irreversibilities and                
              better mitigation technologies.  Global warming is the most recent             
              in a long series of environmental issues characterized by the                  
              debate of whether to take immediate action or wait until there is              
              more information.  Other recent environmental issues would include             
              acid rain and the use of pesticides and herbicides.  The purpose               
              of this research is to analyze the effect of the rate of learning              
              about a global warming, or alternatively about the rate at which               
              uncertainties about the problem a resolved, on optimal decisions               
              regarding emissions of greenhouse gases.  Various theoretical                  
              models will be developed and tested to answer this question,                   
              focusing on different ways uncertainty and learning can be                     
              represented.  While this project focuses on theory and in advancing            
              our understanding of these learning processes, an ultimate                     
              application of the research is in allowing the development of                  
              better policy models to help shape U.S. and world options and                  
              strategies for managing global warming.
