Title       : Improvement in the Condition and Management of the Records at the Kampsville
               Archeological Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9110734

Award Number: 9110734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99351              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Buikstra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Conner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr For Amer Archeology
	      P.O.Box 22
	      Kampsville, IL  620530022    /   -

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant permits the Center for American Archaeology (CAA) to                
              improve the accessibility and condition of approximately one-                  
              quarter million documents, photographs and maps produced and                   
              acquired by them during archaeological investigations conducted                
              from 1958-1977.  This large archive, housed at the CAA center in               
              Kampsville, Illinois, is widely used by archaeologists who work                
              in the region and it has never been properly archived.                         
              Therefore, materials can be difficult to find and are subject to               
              deterioration through use.  With the assistance of two                         
              professional archivists, an initial records survey will be                     
              conducted.  Materials will be arranged and described by record                 
              type; indices and inventories will be produced.  The condition of              
              all records will be assessed and conservation measures carried                 
              out.  Documents and maps will be copied onto microfilm and                     
              microfiche and these working copies will greatly extend the                    
              lifespan of original records.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Over the last several decades, extensive archaeological research               
              has been conducted in the upper midwestern U.S. and the CAA has                
              played a prominent role in this.  The prehistory of the region                 
              covers a span of ca. 12,000 years and shows how human societies                
              adapted at different levels of technology to a changing post-                  
              glacial environment.  Within this area, early experiments in                   
              plant domestication took place and Native American chiefdoms                   
              arose.  For these reasons, the excellent CAA data base is of                   
              interest to large numbers of archaeologists.  Because of storage               
              and conservation conditions, however, the archive is difficult to              
              use and in danger of further deterioration.  This NSF award will               
              remedy these conditions.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project is important because it will preserve important                   
              scientific data - much of it collected with U.S. government funds              
              - and make it available to the scientific community.
