Title       : Research Initiation: Solid-Liquid Interface Morphology During Welding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1994      
File        : a9110923

Award Number: 9110923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. (Cheena) Srinivasan                  
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucien N. Brush brush@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The goals of this research are to understand the reasons for              
              the appearance of different solid-liquid interface morphologies                
              during the autogenous full penetration welding of single and                   
              polycrystalline thin plates.  The research will identify the role              
              that heat flow, surface tension, interfacial kinetic effects and               
              grain boundaries play (which include the effects of                            
              crystallographic anisotropy) in the development of the weld pool               
              shape and the resultant properties of the fusion zone.  Methods of             
              research include numerical calculation of solid-liquid weld pool               
              interfaces modeled as nonlinear free or moving boundaries, that                
              account for heat flow and are coupled with the interfacial                     
              properties, by using finite difference, finite element, spectral               
              and/or boundary integral techniques.  Furthermore, numerical                   
              calculation of sharp transitions in classes of weld pool shapes                
              using analytical (both linear and nonlinear) asymptotic analysis               
              will be performed whenever applicable; the analysis will be helpful            
              in gaining a clearer knowledge of special limiting cases and for               
              comparison with the numerical results.  The results will be                    
              compared to existing experimental results, and the goal is to                  
              ultimately provide a correlation between a set of welding                      
              conditions and final material properties.  This would provide an               
              understanding of the types of welding methods that might eliminate             
              or circumvent deleterious weld pools shape features which give rise            
              to sites for defect generation and textured fusion zones.                      
                   The project has potential to improve the quality and control              
              of the welding process.
