Title       : Knightian Uncertainty, General Equilibrium Theory and Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9110139

Award Number: 9110139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93471              (Estimated)
Investigator: Truman F. Bewley truman.bewley@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The behavior of labor markets seems extremely puzzling from the                
              point of view of economic theory and especially the theory of                  
              competitive equilibrium.  Perhaps the biggest puzzle is the                    
              insensitivity of wages to the unemployment rate.  High                         
              unemployment should represent an excess supply of labor, yet the               
              unemployed do not seem to bid down wages very effectively.  If                 
              labor markets acted like truly competitive markets, then wages                 
              should plunge in the face of high unemployment, just as stock and              
              commodity markets sometimes do.  Yet wage cuts in recessions seem              
              to be moderate and infrequent.  Another puzzle is that wages do                
              not always respond immediately and completely to changes in the                
              consumer price index, whereas most theories of wages determine                 
              real, not nominal wages.  A third puzzle is the occurrence of                  
              strikes.  Strikes seem to cause an unnecessary loss to both                    
              employer and employees, since it should be possible to anticipate              
              the consequences of a strike and reach an agreement without one.               
              The thesis of this project is that these and other puzzles in                  
              economics can be best explained by a new theory of decision                    
              making under uncertainty that captures the instability or                      
              fragility of expectations.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This grant also supports theoretical research on general                       
              equilibrium models which express macroeconomic phenomena.  The                 
              distinctive feature of these models is that firms are able to                  
              compete effectively only in the long-run; in the short-run firms               
              have difficulty invading each others markets.  This difficulty                 
              would make firms have a low short-run elasticity of demand for                 
              labor.  The rivalry among firms would be expressed by a non-                   
              cooperative equilibrium.  The conditions under which such an                   
              equilibrium will exist are rigorously defined.  Unemployment is                
              shown to exist and fluctuate.  The determinants of the average                 
              growth rate of the economy are analyzed and shown to offer a                   
              plausible explanation of the wide variation of growth rates among              
              countries.  The welfare losses resulting from unemployment and                 
              from the monopoly power of businesses are estimated.  The project              
              compares the costs and benefits of wage controls within such a                 
              theoretical framework.  The project also analyzes government                   
              policies controlling inflation.
