Title       : Structure and Conformation of Biopolymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9110742

Award Number: 9110742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Callahan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The adsorption of proteins to solid surfaces is encountered in                 
              many fields of science and technology.  In many cases, protein                 
              adsorption is a favorable, if not a necessary component of the                 
              application and yet the exact nature of the adsorption                         
              mechanisms and interfacial structures has not been determined.                 
              The outstanding questions in the area of protein adsorption to                 
              solid surfaces include: 1) the determination of the surface                    
              conformation and preferred orientation of adsorbed molecules,                  
              2) an understanding of competitive adsorption effects, and 3)                  
              the ability to predict surface properties based on the chemical                
              components of the solid and protein alone.  This project will                  
              answer several of these questions by application of the fairly                 
              young technique of waveguide Raman spectroscopy to the study of                
              interfacial protein conformations.  The specific applications                  
              are to understand protein adsorption to polymer filtration                     
              membranes encountered in bioprocessing and solid-phase                         
              immunoassays.  In conjunction with macroscopic adsorption                      
              studies, e.g., adsorption isotherms and the determination of                   
              adsorbed thicknesses, the waveguide Raman studies will provide                 
              detailed molecular structure information concerning the                        
              adsorbed states of proteins on these types of biopolymer                       
              surfaces.  One of the advantages of waveguide Raman                            
              spectroscopy is that structural information can be obtained                    
              from both the adsorbed protein layers and the underlying                       
              polymer substrates.  Another advantage lies in its ability to                  
              determine orientational information about adsorbed layers.  By                 
              correlating the data obtained in the macroscopic and molecular                 
              level experiments, it will be possible to gain predictive                      
              ability in the understanding of protein-polymer interactions.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior                   
              independent Federal research support to develop a competitive                  
              research project.  This project involves the use of waveguide                  
              Raman spectroscopy for the study of interfacial interactions of                
              proteins with solids.  Such interactions occur throughout                      
              nature but are not well understood.  This project will lead to                 
              a better understanding of these processes.
