Title       : Digestive Enzymes and Digestive Physiology in Deposit Feeders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1991    
File        : a9110819

Award Number: 9110819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : July 1,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473                (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Penry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Deposit feeders ingest bulk sediment and digest associated                     
              organic components, and they thus can affect rates and extents                 
              of organic matter degradation and burial in the sediments.  How                
              deposit feeders make a living by exploiting a food resource,                   
              the bulk of which is mineral grains, is as yet poorly                          
              understood.  Within the framework of digestion theory and gut-                 
              reactor models can provide a rigorous framework for quantifying                
              digestive processes.  However, quantitative application of the                 
              theory and models requires description of digestive reaction                   
              kinetics, and the enzymology of digestion in deposit feeders is                
              poorly known.  I thus propose to develop a research program to                 
              describe and quantify enzymatic digestion in deposit feeders,                  
              i.e. to identify and quantify the digestive parameters that ate                
              represented in gut-reactor models by the variable, -rA, the                    
              expression for digestive reaction rate.                                        
                                                                                             
              The ultimate goal of my research is to determine the ranges of                 
              digestive performance exhibited by deposit feeders as food                     
              resources vary.  The specific goals of this planning proposal                  
              are to determine the suites of digestive enzymes present in                    
              deposit feeders' guts and to determine the potential for                       
              changes in enzyme complements and activities in response to                    
              changes in food resources (physiological acclimation).                         
              Identification of the types of enzymes present in deposit                      
              feeders' guts is a necessary starting point for studies of                     
              digestive performance.  I also propose to conduct several                      
              simple digestive acclimation experiments to determine how the                  
              types and amounts of enzymes present in a deposit feeders' gut                 
              may vary with food resources.  The combination of a descriptive                
              survey with experimental examinations of digestive acclimation                 
              of food resources will provide the foundation for future                       
              studies of digestive performance.
