Title       : TOGA: Determination and Impacts of Surface Radiative Fluxes for TOGA COARE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1991 
File        : a9110536

Award Number: 9110536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $483850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Curry   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Webster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Ackerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1577,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   In support of the TOGA COARE objectives, this project is a                
              study of the surface radiative processes in the western Pacific                
              warm pool region.  The objective of the program is to provide                  
              analyses of:  sea-surface "skin" temperature, precipitable water,              
              cloud properties, and components of the surface longwave and                   
              shortwave radiative fluxes, with spatial resolution of 30 km and               
              temporal resolution of 3 hours for the entire TOGA COARE primary               
              domain.  The data for the analyses will be obtained principally                
              by satellite remote sensing, with the ISCCP data set and                       
              algorithms playing a substantial role.  Available surface and                  
              aircraft data will be utilized to validate the remote sensing                  
              algorithms and will also be blended with the satellite retrievals              
              for the final analysis products.  An aircraft sub-program is                   
              proposed specifically to investigate cloud-radiative properties,               
              and to validate the satellite-derived surface fluxes.                          
                   The proposed research will be accomplished in three stages:               
              i) remote sensing pilot study to develop and compare satellite                 
              algorithms; ii) validation of remote sensing algorithms using                  
              TOGA COARE IOP surface and aircraft observations and preparation               
              of high-resolution analyses for the IOP; and iii) diagnostic and               
              modelling studies utilizing the analyzed fields.  Diagnostic                   
              studies of the modulation of the analyzed surface radiative                    
              fluxes                                                                         
              by synoptic and mesoscale atmospheric forcing will be conducted.               
              The temporal response of the ocean mixed layer to fluctuations in              
              the surface radiative fluxes will be examined using an ocean mixed-            
              layer model.  The ocean mixed-layer model will be coupled to an                
              atmospheric radiative-convective model to assess the radiative and             
              cloud feedbacks occurring between the atmospheric and oceanic                  
              boundary layers.                                                               
                   This research is important because it serves as one of the                
              principal TOGA/COARE studies of the processes responsible for the              
              coupling of the ocean-atmosphere in an especially climate sensitive            
              region of the world, the western Pacific Ocean, the field site of              
              TOGA/COARE.
