Title       : Research Initiation: Computer Generated Computer NumericallyControlled Machining
               Feedrates with In-Process Tuning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9110747

Award Number: 9110747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry K. Fussell barry.fussell@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 1463,
Abstract    :
                   This research effort is focused on a computer system for                  
              automatic generation of feedrates for improving the efficiency of              
              Computer Numerically Controlled (CNC) machining.  Reliability is               
              also improved by in-process adjustment of the feedrates to handle              
              material property and cutter geometry changes.  The goals are to               
              be accomplished through:  (1) integration of geometric and                     
              mechanistic end milling models for volume calculations and                     
              automatic selection of feedrate for milling sculptured surfaces;               
              (2) in-process adjustment of the programmed feedrate by comparing              
              the actual cutting force (power) to the predicted force (power).               
              A program to automatically select the feedrates for complex                    
              sculptured end milling cuts is to be developed from experimentally             
              verified mechanistic and geometric models of the end milling                   
              process.  The program will be experimentally tested using                      
              Numerically Controlled (NC) programs supplied to the research team             
              by an industrial partner.  The programs are used for machining                 
              stamping dies for complex sculptured surfaces.  The results in                 
              terms of cutting time, tolerances, and surface finish will be                  
              compared to industry results, where feeds and speeds are set                   
              manually.  On-line adjustment capability of the programed feedrates            
              will be added to the University of New Hampshire CNC machine to                
              provide a method to adapt the feedrates to different workpiece                 
              materials and cutter wear.                                                     
                   This project should lead to four advances in the state-of-the-            
              art: (1) an improved mechanistic model of the end milling process;             
              (2) integration of mechanistic and geometric models into one                   
              system; (3) method to calculate the necessary end milling cutting              
              feedrates based on geometric tolerance information; (4) an                     
              experimentally proven on-line feedrate adjustment method.
