Title       : Toward Semantically Founded Programming Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1991      
File        : a9110954

Award Number: 9110954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67169              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Ballance   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2875,9264,
Abstract    :
              Existing tools for program development are based on a perceived                
              requirement to support programming in conventional languages -                 
              languages often biased toward batch translation.  Yet integrated               
              development environments can hide many of the idiosyncrasies of                
              conventional programming languages, provided only that the emphasis on         
              conventional languages is relaxed.                                             
                  Semantically founded programming environments emphasize the                
              semantic aspects of computations and descriptions of computations              
              (programs).  A semantically founded environment provides for direct            
              manipulation of semantically interesting objects and structures                
              without requiring a user to manipulate a syntax-based representation.          
              The environment is organized as a collection of interacting                    
              components.  Each component packages a well-defined aspect of a                
              language or program with appropriate user-interfaces and editing               
              models.  This approach capitalizes on an environment's ability to              
              stimulate or hide many idiosyncrasies present in textual                       
              representations of programs.                                                   
                   This program is a two year investigation of the principles and            
              technologies underlying semantically founded development environments.         
              The research is expected to bring new advances in the fields of                
              environment architecture, program development paradigms, semantic              
              description methods, and the use of logic to support programming.
