Title       : Getting Down to Basics:Using University and Corporate Patents to Identify Basic
               Inventions and Trace Their Diffusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1992    
File        : a9110516

Award Number: 9110516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73052              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Fogarty   (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam B. Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel Trajtenberg  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              It is a widely-held view that the United States remains preeminent             
              in the world in the performance of basic research, but does an                 
              inadequate job of commercially exploiting that research.  In                   
              particular, it is feared that publicly-funded research at                      
              universities and other nonprofit institutions is not yielding the              
              highest possible benefits, because of the failure of American firms            
              to commercialize the fruits of that research.                                  
                                                                                             
              This project has two fundamental objectives.  One is to develop a              
              methodology for quantifying the "basicness" of inventions, based               
              on the pattern of patent citations.  The other is to trace the                 
              geographic pattern of diffusion and subsequent commercialization               
              of inventions, particularly basic ones, again using patent citation            
              data.  All patents assigned to universities based on applications              
              from the years 1975-1980 will be identified.  In addition, samples             
              of U.S. corporate patents will also be identified as a control.                
              The research will test whether university patents are, indeed, more            
              basic than corporate patents according to these measures, and                  
              whether patents that are generally basic as measured by their                  
              citation patterns are perceived to be basic by people knowledgeable            
              about the research. The citation data will also be used to trace               
              the geographic location of any subsequent commercialization of both            
              university and corporation patents.  This research is important                
              because it will provide a better understanding of the process of               
              technological change and diffusion.
