Title       : TOGA: Convective Rainfall in COARE Cloud Systems: Integrating the Upper
               Tropospheric Aircraft Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1995     
File        : a9110479

Award Number: 9110479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar-Rao Mopidevi                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126839             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Zipser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   This research will center on integrating certain data from                
              upper tropospheric aircraft, primarily the NASA DC-8, into the                 
              composite data set for the intensive observing array for TOGA-                 
              COARE (Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere; Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere              
              Response Experiment).  There is a great need for quantitative                  
              data on particle size distribution, temperature, moisture and                  
              wind data from the interior of the tropical cloud systems in                   
              COARE.  The contribution of these data will be maximized by close              
              coordination with the flight plans of the other aircraft, which                
              will be obtaining simultaneous Doppler radar data.  The DC-8 will              
              be used first for quantitative description of the upper                        
              tropospheric characteristics of the COARE cloud clusters.  These               
              data sets will be used in combination with data from the COARE                 
              ship away and from the other aircraft to test the hypothesis that              
              small differences in convective updraft strength may be                        
              associated with profoundly different vertical profiles of                      
              hydrometeor content and particle size distribution.  If true,                  
              latent heating and radiative heating profiles would be greatly                 
              affected.  It will be important to place the findings in the                   
              context of the type of mesoscale convective system, and stage of               
              life cycle.  The results of this work will help provide "ground                
              truth" for cloud models and radiative transfer models.  The                    
              research will also take advantage of the unprecedented                         
              opportunity presented by the active and passive microwave sensors              
              on the DC-8 operating within the intensive array of observations               
              from the other platforms.  The research includes interpreting the              
              passive microwave radiometer data from the DC-8 in terms of rain               
              rate and providing these rainfall estimates to the other COARE                 
              investigators.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                   This research is important because it is one of the TOGA                  
              COARE studies of convective scale physical processes that can be               
              linked to larger scales that impact variability in an especially               
              climate sensitive region of the world, the western Pacific Ocean,              
              the field site of TOGA COARE.
