Title       : Medicinal Plants and Land-Use Change in a Tropical Moist Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9110306

Award Number: 9110306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21448              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Voeks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                 In addition to reducing vegetation that may mitigate the effects of         
              increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, the clearance of large             
              tracts of forest also is feared because it may reduce the diversity of         
              plant and animal species.  One facet of declining biological diversity         
              is the loss of plants that have medicinal qualities.  It is generally          
              assumed that undisturbed, old-growth forests in tropical areas represent       
              more plentiful locales for plants used by native healers.  Because many        
              modern pharmaceuticals have been developed from tropical medicinal             
              plants, preservation of old-growth forests therefore is believed to be         
              especially important.  This project tests the validity of the assumption       
              that underlies this belief by testing the hypothesis that areas from           
              which old-growth vegetation has been removed in order to establish             
              second-growth forests, cocoa plantations, or degraded pastures may             
              actually be more significant sources of medicinal plants for native            
              healers than are old-growth stands.  Working in carefully selected             
              sample sites near the Pau Brasil Ecological Reserve in eastern Brazil,         
              the investigator will identify medicinal plant species in each plot with       
              the help of local healers.  Complementary inventories of plant species         
              in each plot will permit generalization of the impacts of four general         
              land-use regimes on the diversity of medicinal plant species.                  
                 This project will provide new data and understandings of value in a         
              number of different ways.  It will expand information about native             
              medical practices and about the uses of different types of plants by           
              healers with different medical traditions.  It also will provide a             
              direct test of hypotheses dealing with the number and types of plants          
              found in undisturbed forests and in sites that have been altered in            
              different ways by human activity.  The project therefore should enhance        
              understandings of the impacts of human activity of biological diversity        
              in an important environmental setting.
