Title       : Optimal Macroeconomic Policy in General Equilibrium Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1992  
File        : a9110236

Award Number: 9110236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83565              (Estimated)
Investigator: Varadarajan V. Chari chari@res.mpls.frb.fed.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Christiano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A fundamental question in macroeconomics is how should fiscal and              
              monetary policy be set, both on average, and in response to                    
              business cycle shocks.  This question is addressed in                          
              quantitative, general equilibrium models of business                           
              fluctuations.  This project studies models with shocks to                      
              technology and government consumption, models of nominal wage                  
              contracting and models with heterogeneous agents.  Models are                  
              also analyzed in which the government cannot commit to its future              
              policies.  The optimal policies in these models provide                        
              quantitative guidance on how fiscal and monetary policy should be              
              conducted over the business cycle.  For example, the results will              
              indicate how big the government deficit should be and how                      
              stimulative monetary policy should be in a recession.                          
                                                                                             
              Economic growth rates are substantially affected by the rate of                
              adoption of new technologies and the rate of displacement of old               
              ones.  Typically, there is a long lag between the availability of              
              a new technology and the time when its use becomes widespread.                 
              This phenomenon is known as diffusion.  This project examines                  
              some of the principal factors determining the rates of diffusion               
              of technology.  The research provides a deeper understanding of                
              the forces determining growth, the diffusion of new technologies               
              and the decay of old ones.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The properties of models of the monetary transmission mechanism                
              are also investigated.  This part of the project should improve                
              our understanding of the key features of the interest rate,                    
              output and employment effects of monetary shocks.
