Title       : Architecture of Hybrid Decision Support Sytem for Risk Management of Offshore
               Platforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9110462

Award Number: 9110462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91646              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Elisabeth Pate-Cornell mep@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Claude Latombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Risk management on offshore platforms requires real-time adaptation            
              of procedures to existing conditions.  These conditions can be                 
              caused either by environmental factors(e.g., storms or ice),                   
              on-board incidents(e.g., a fire), boat collisions, or degradation              
              of the platform or its capacity(e.g., by corrosion.)  In situations            
              of risk, the operators generally follow procedures that have been              
              predesigned, but some specific circumstances may not have been                 
              foreseen in the design of the procedures.  An experienced operator             
              can generally estimate the severity of a situation similar                     
              to one he has experienced previously and take appropriate measures.            
              In some instances, however, more information is needed about the               
              current risk situation, potential deterioration of this condition,             
              applicable procedures, and alternative options before appropriate              
              actions can be taken.  The object of this research is to combine               
              the powers of analytical methods (probabilistic risk assessment                
              based on systems analysis) and artificial intelligence (expert                 
              systems based on recommendations of experienced operators and on               
              operating/emergency procedures) in a hybrid real-time decision                 
              support system for risk management on board platforms.  A key                  
              theoretical issue is the aggregation of these two types of                     
              information.  A prototype will be developed.  One possible option              
              for this prototype is to address the problem of safety management              
              for a redundant platform when the weather conditions make both                 
              delayed and immediate maintenance hazardous.
