Title       : Research Initiation Award: Adaptive Control System Redesignfor Improving
               Transient Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1992  
File        : a9110984

Award Number: 9110984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jing Sun   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Motivated by the observation that most existing results                        
              on adaptive control are qualitative in nature and                              
              address only asymptotic performance (such as stability                         
              and robustness), the main focus of the proposed project                        
              is to develop constructive design approaches for                               
              adaptive systems which take into account both the                              
              transient response and the steady-state response.                              
              A standard adaptive control system is designed by                              
              incorporating an identification scheme into the control                        
              system and replacing the unknown parameters with                               
              their estimates.  Such design methodology is referred to                       
              as the "certainty equivalence principle"(CEP) in                               
              adaptive literature.  It does not guarantee good                               
              transient performance of the resulting system since it                         
              passes on the error of identification to the design stage.                     
              In this project, we will redesign adaptive control                             
              systems to overcome the inherent constraint due to                             
              CEP design, and thus improve performance.  A new                               
              design technique -- modeling error compensation                                
              (MEC) -- is proposed to achieve this goal.  To                                 
              accommodate the error due to misidentification and                             
              CEP design, we will use the information about the                              
              quality of the identification to introduce an additional                       
              control signal on top of the CEP design.  This strategy                        
              provides a compensation mechanism that cannot be                               
              obtained via CEP design -- it compensates the effects                          
              of misidentification.  We propose to study both                                
              theoretical and design aspects of the proposed adaptive                        
              scheme.  We will also study the application of MEC to                          
              a class of nonadaptive designs, to find answers for the                        
              question whether and when an adaptive system will                              
              outperform a nonadaptive system.
