Title       : Rhetorical Function in Large-Scale Technological Disaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1991 
File        : a9110344

Award Number: 9110344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63934              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly A. Sauer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Ethical studies in technical communication underscore the importance           
              of teaching students about effective communication, but much teaching          
              material uses hypothetical case studies to demonstrate ethical                 
              issues.  Historical research suggests that communication errors play           
              a major role in large-scale technological disasters, but                       
              rhetoricians have not studied actual documentation in detail.                  
              Preliminary research into mining disasters that were the subjects of           
              Congressional oversight suggests that problems in documentation,               
              guidelines and specifications contribute to disasters.  The                    
              evidence raises questions about the consequences of writing practice           
              and the use and interpretation of technical documents.  This study             
              will examine documentation in two disasters to (1) define categories           
              and functions of different kinds of documents affecting technological          
              development and management, (2) determine the codes and conventions            
              that govern the production of documents and allow management to use            
              and interpret them, (3) describe how writers select or exclude evidence        
              to accept, assign or avoid responsibility and determine how those              
              decisions affect disasters; (4) determine whether writers see their            
              role as observers, recording objective facts, or active problem                
              solvers; (5) compare expert and non-expert testimony to understand             
              how agencies influence the production of texts; and (6) determine              
              the function of individual documents in influencing decisionmaking             
              about complex technologies.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The topic of this proposal is of high priority for Ethics and Values           
              Studies.  The qualifications and track record of the investigator              
              are good.  The project provides an important impetus to rhetorical             
              studies of technical writing in the development and management of              
              complex technologies.  Besides their utility for scholarship in                
              this field, results will be useful for scientists, engineers,                  
              policy analysts, decisionmakers and citizens concerned about                   
              these issues.  They will also be useful in courses and curricula               
              in technical writing.  The proposal is recommended for support.
