Title       : RIA: Development of a Low-Cost, Near-Optimal Detector for Magnetic Data Storage
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9110568

Award Number: 9110568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69843              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Moon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  The use of advanced signal processing techniques is becoming               
              increasingly important as a cost-effective means to achieve high               
              storage density in data storage systems.  The Principal                        
              Investigator's research on pragmatic sequence detection algorithms             
              for magnetic data storage channels has resulted in the successful              
              development of a computationally efficient detection algorithm,                
              which achieves a near-optimum performance under modulation code                
              constraints that are important in magnetic recording.  In this                 
              project, the Principal Investigator addresses several important                
              issues related to the application of the proposed detection                    
              algorithm to practical recording systems.  These are the issues                
              related to: 1) the inherent error propagation problem associated               
              with the proposed detection scheme, 2) code and detector                       
              sensitivity against the types of disturbances often encountered in             
              real magnetic recording channels, 3) different options available               
              for hardware implementation, and 4) adaptive formulation of the                
              algorithm and the development of an advanced timing recovery                   
              scheme necessary for time-varying channel environments.                        
                   The goal of this project is to carefully examine these                    
              issues, determine favorable hardware design options under real                 
              time-varying channel environments and provide solutions whenever               
              potential problems exist.  Potential benefits and limitations of               
              the proposed method in comparison with conventional approaches                 
              will be thoroughly understood.  In addition to providing                       
              information that is directly related to hardware implementation,               
              the results of the proposed research help us understand code and               
              detector behaviors under different types of channel disturbances.              
              This will provide a basis for pursuing the challenging problem of              
              designing codes and detectors which are immune to a selected type              
              of channel disturbance.
