Title       : CAREER: Markets, Institutions, and Households in Historical Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9983749

Award Number: 9983749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maristella Botticini maristel@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to develop a research and education plan whose main
              objective is the integration of economic models and economic history.  The
              research plan strictly consists of extensive data collection effort combined
              with a theoretical framework and quantitative analysis. Although in the
              pre-modern context of medieval and Renaissance Florence, Genoa, and Venice,
              this research project intends to analyze important issues for contemporary
              developing economies that share features of a pre-modern economy. Four
              integrated projects will be implemented. These projects build on the
              investigator's previous work on medieval and Renaissance Tuscan marriage
              markets, but greatly expand this work in terms of both the theoretical
              framework and the historical and contemporary evidence used to test the
              models.

The first issue is explaining why in some societies parents transfer
              wealth to their daughters through dowries and to their sons through bequests.
              The custom of dowries is costly to the family. If it is efficient for parents
              to transfer resources to their children at the time of marriage, they should do
              so. If it is not efficient for them to transfer resources to their children at
              the time of marriage, they should be able to choose otherwise. What is the
              benefit of this custom?  A theoretical framework is built in which dowries are
              the optimal solution to the tradeoff between family wealth creation and
              distribution faced by altruistic parents. Second, some historians have argued
              that dowries disinherit women; when receiving dowries, daughters would receive
              a smaller share of their family's wealth with respect to their male siblings.
              However, the evidence presented to support this claim is thin. Given the
              adverse effects of dowries on women in places such as contemporary India, this
              question is brought out in sharp relief. Preliminary evidence on early
              Renaissance Tuscany indicates that dowries did not disinherit women. Parents
              used dowries to solve a free riding problem between their married daughters and
              sons, but at the same time they transferred fair shares of wealth to their
              daughters and sons.  Another important issue is the intertemporal variation in
              dowry prices. The median dowry value in Florence from 1260 to 1435 increased
              ten times and a dowry inflation also occurred in contemporary India. It remains
              an open question whether population growth and the marriage squeeze determined
              this increase, or whether economic growth and a greater wealth can explain it.
              The study of the intertemporal variation of dowries in medieval and Renaissance
              Florence, Genoa, and Venice will also offer the opportunity to analyze the
              effects of public finance and capital markets on parents' bequest behavior.
              This can provide interesting insights for contemporary developing countries in
              which the dowry system is alive and capital markets are imperfect or sometimes
              missing. Preliminary evidence shows that investments in shares of the
              public-funded debt played a major role in dowry funding in medieval and early
              Renaissance Florence.  A significant part of this research will involve the
              extensive collection of data from Italian archives. The wealth of data partly
              justifies the focus on the three Italian city-states that were vibrant and
              leading economies in medieval and Renaissance Europe. More important, the
              Florentine, Genoese, and Venetian economies are great case studies because by
              sharing features of both contemporary developing and developed countries they
              can shed new light on the transition from the former to the latter type of
              economies.

The main goal of the education plan is to establish economic
              history as a major component of both the undergraduate and graduate curricula
              at Boston University. Given the strong interest by the Department of Economics
              in research focusing on development economics, the study of past economies,
              whether they failed or succeeded in developing and growing, is particularly
              enticing for students. The expected outcome of this education plan is the
              expansion and improvement of the two economic history courses offered for the
              first time this past year by Boston University's economics department.  To
              enrich the courses in economic history, the investigator will also organize
              each year a lecture series similar to the one realized this past year-made
              possible by a grant from the Humanities Foundation of Boston University-in
              which economists and historians working on similar topics presented their
              work.

