Title       : CAREER: Development, Analysis, Implementation, and Application of Innovative
               Structure Preserving Integrators for Constrained Systems in Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9983708

Award Number: 9983708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurent O. Jay ljay@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9983708
Jay

This work is supported by a National Science Foundation Faculty
              Early Career Development Award.  This project is concerned with the numerical
              solution of differential-algebraic equations (DAEs) of constrained systems in
              mechanics.  The model equations of numerous problems in mechanics take the form
              of DAEs, not of ordinary differential equations (ODEs).  The numerical
              integration of these DAEs is notoriously difficult, mainly due to the presence
              of geometrical and/or kinematic constraints.  The main research and development
              objectives of this project are to develop, analyze, implement, and apply
              numerical methods and techniques related to the numerical integration of these
              DAEs.  The methods proposed, which are based on Runge-Kutta type methods, make
              great use of the structure of the DAEs considered and they are perfectly fitted
              to preserve their 
underlying properties.  Several applications in the
              following areas will be considered: rigid and flexible multibody dynamics;
              flight formation of multiple coordinated spacecraft; classical molecular
              dynamics.  The educational and research aspects of this project are
              intertwined. Graduate students will write their M.Sc. or Ph.D. thesis as part
              of the project.  They will spend part of their time with partners in industry
              and in research laboratories/centers. New courses closely related to the
              project will be created.

What is common between a spacecraft, a DNA loop in
              a gel, the landing gear of an aircraft, the suspension system of a truck, and a
              molecule colliding with another one?  They are all examples of systems in
              mechanics (a branch of physics) whose motion can be mathematically modeled by
              certain sets of equations called "differential-algebraic equations".  Being
              able to simulate these systems on a computer can have various impacts depending
              on the applications considered. Vehicle-system simulation can help improve
              research in vehicle safety and vehicle development.  Mechanical system
              simulation software enables users to relatively quickly analyze multiple design
              variations, thereby reducing the number of costly physical prototypes,
              improving the quality of the design, and reducing product development time. 
              The concept of having multiple coordinated spacecraft has been identified as an
              enabling technology for many of the NASA's 21st century missions. The accurate
              simulation of coordinated spacecraft before they are actually sent can help
              reduce the risk of mission failure. Understanding the mechanics of DNA, which
              is at the heart of life, can have some fundamental potential medical benefits. 
              Understanding the collision dynamics of molecules can help to delineate the
              parameters that are important in the energy transfer process, so that unwanted
              byproducts and pollutants in chemical reactions can be reduced.  Those are all
              examples of possible impacts that this research can have in the different
              application areas that will be considered.  The work primarily in designing and
              developing tools that will enable the accurate and efficient simulation of
              those "constrained systems in mechanics".

The National Science Foundation
              strongly encourages the early development of academic faculty as both educators
              and researchers.  The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a
              Foundation-wide program that provides for the support of junior faculty within
              the context of their overall career development.  It combines in a single
              program the support of quality research and education in the broadest sense and
              the full participation of those traditionally underrepresented in science and
              engineering.  This program enhances and emphasizes the importance the
              Foundation places on the development of full, balanced academic careers that
              include both research and education.

