Title       : CAREER: Process Operations: Decision Making Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a9983406

Award Number: 9983406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianthi Ierapetritou marianth@sol.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Among the challenges for the dynamic optimization of the entire supply chain
              enterprise is the rigorous treatment of uncertainty and risk factors. 
              Uncertainty appears in all the different levels of the chemical industry from
              the detailed process description to multi-site manufacturing, so that the
              successful utilization of process models relies heavily on the ability to
              handle system variability.  The overall scientific objective of this work is to
              investigate quantitatively the effects of uncertainty in process operations and
              to propose a methodology for the systematic incorporation of uncertainty in the
              decision-making process.  Uncertainty analysis will be performed in all stages
              of process operations in an integrated way, taking into consideration the
              interactions and uncertainty associated with propagation.  The first stage of
              the project concentrates on one of the production steps, short-term scheduling,
              while the next stage addresses the uncertainty in the detailed process
              description of complex kinetic networks.  The final stage is concerned with the
              uncertainty and risk consideration in design and operation for a sustainable
              environment.

The educational objectives are: (1) the development of an
              innovative instructional environment based on the Web and multi-media
              technology that enables hands-on interactive use of methods, tools, algorithms
              and examples;  and (2) the incorporation of inquiry-based learning techniques
              into new courses and extending a version of existing ones in the area of
              process systems engineering to increase outreach to under-represented groups of
              undergraduate students at Douglas Undergraduate College for Women.  The area of
              process systems engineering that mainly focuses on practical applications and
              new technologies offers a great opportunity to significantly alter the way in
              which chemical engineering is taught.  The activities planned extend over
              undergraduate and graduate level modules to cover all the available tools for
              the effective solution of design, synthesis and operations problems. 

