Title       : SBIR Phase II: Neural Inverse Control for Ventilators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a9983474

Award Number: 9983474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil R. Euliano neil@nd.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NeuroDimension Inc
	      1800 North Main St., Suite D-4
	      Gainesville, FL  32609    352/377-5144

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from NeuroDimension
              Incorporated will develop new, biologically inspired solutions to the problem
              of ventilator control of human subjects.  The problem is difficult because the
              patient is analogous to a time-varying, nonlinear plant.  Adaptive inverse
              control is powerful enough to adapt to changing conditions while maintaining
              system stability.  In Phase I, NeuroDimension developed a control architecture
              and development environment for neural inverse control and applied it to
              controlling a ventilator.  This solution outperformed the state-of-art
              commercial ventilator.  The goal is to develop a system that will optimize most
              of the major settings currently set by clinicians on present-day ICU
              ventilators.  The complexity of these ventilators subject their operators to
              speculative and empirical interpretation of many ventilatory parameters,
              leading to potentially hazardous misuse.  NeuroDimension proposed system will
              model and extract relevant physiologic conditions in the patient and use this
              information to either control the ventilator automatically or to advise the
              clinician on how to change the settings.  The primary technical approach
              utilizes neural fuzzy hybrid systems, Kohonen self-organizing maps (SOMs)-a SOM
              clusters the input space and assigns a different model to each cluster--and
              switching multiple inverse controllers.  The firm has assembled a unique team
              of experts in the fields of neural control and ventilation to accomplish this
              task.

NeuroDimension proffers technology that has application to a number of
              possible products including, inverse neural control application software; an
              ultra-intelligent respiratory monitor; and an easy to use and optimal
              closed-loop ventilator controller.

