Title       : CAREER: Low-Energy Excitations in Systems of Strongly-Correlated Electrons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9983544

Award Number: 9983544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chetan Nayak nayak@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This is a CAREER award for a research program on strongly correlated electron
              systems and the strange excitations which can determine their response to
              experimental probes.  This research program is coupled to an educational
              initiative which seeks to bring the methods of modern condensed matter physics
              to the graduate classroom and its concepts to a wider audience.  The ultimate
              goal of this research is to construct new quantitative theoretical frameworks
              for calculating the properties of materials whose electronic properties do not
              admit a conventional quasi-particle description.  In particular, excitations
              will be considered which exhibit (1) spin-charge separation; or (2) non-abelian
              statistics, or (3) exist as a result of the combined effects of disorder and
              strong interactions.  A number of concrete calculations of observable
              quantities, such as those measured in experiment, will complement this program.
               These problems call for the use of non-perturbative techniques - such as the
              renormalization group, the exploitation of dual representations, conformal
              invariance in 2D, topological methods, and the construction of variational
              wavefunctions - and an understanding of the interplay between strong
              interactions and disorder.  The physical systems considered will include the
              cuprates and other unconventional superconductors, disordered 2D electron gases
              such as those found in high-mobility Si-MOSFETs, and the quantum Hall regime
              near even-denominator filling factors.  The educational component of the award
              focusses on the development of a graduate textbook on modern condensed matter
              theory and a text for the general public on the concepts of condensed matter
              physics.
%%%
This is a CAREER award on theoretical condensed matter theory. 
              In particular, research will be conducted on novel, new states of matter, e.g.,
              the high temperature superconductors, for which conventional theoretical
              concepts fail.  Thus, the research involves developing new techniques as well
              as their application to these novel states.  The educational component of this
              award involves bringing these new techniques into the graduate classroom and
              bringing the concepts of condensed matter physics to the general
              public.
***



