Title       : CAREER: A Faculty Early Career Program in Development of Superhard Coatings for
               Improved Performances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a9983535

Award Number: 9983535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok Kumar akumar1@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Superhard coating systems for next generation materials applications must
              exhibit a combination of physical properties which include excellent thermal
              and chemical stability, wear resistance, high hardness, toughness, and good
              adhesion. The goal of this CAREER program is to develop a means by which
              application specific coatings can be efficiently designed, using an integrated
              approach tailored towards rapid scale-up and industrial production. The
              specific objective of this study is to understand structure-property
              relationships in advanced engineering superhard coating materials prepared by
              pulsed laser assisted physical vapor deposition (PVD) and by filament assisted
              chemical vapor deposition (CVD) techniques for multifunctional applications.
              The pulsed laser deposition (PLD) process promises a new generation of exotic
              coatings which have superior adhesion, near theoretical densities, and very
              high hardness, and which, at the same time can be deposited at low temperature.
              Superhard coatings of carbon nitride (CNx), cubic boron nitride (c-BN),
              diamond-like carbon (DLC) and microlaminate coatings of metal/ceramic materials
              will be fabricated by the PLD method. Very-high density CVD plasma will be
              explored for rapid growth of transparent diamond films at low substrate
              temperature with desirable microstructure that provides better mechanical
              properties for manufacturing applications. Evaluation of mechanical properties
              will include nanoindentation, adhesion and wear tests. Microstructural analyses
              will include X-ray diffraction analysis for lattice structure, and  SEM, TEM
              and AFM for grain structure and lattice microstructural information. Efforts
              will be made to work with the industrial partners in developing potential
              commercial products.  An important feature of the project is the training of
              graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area of Materials Science research related to synthesis, structure,
              properties and performance. The education plan involves the development of a
              module on 'Thin Film Technology' that illustrates key aspects of materials
              processing with appropriate emphasis on synthesis, selection of materials for
              substrate and film, deposition processes, microstructural development,
              mechanical properties, kinetics and thermodynamics, and applications in
              industrial sectors,  for instruction in cross-disciplinary fields. The module
              will include multimedia teaching resources and in-class demonstration. Special
              attempts will be made to attract students from under represented groups and to
              train them in multidisciplinary research.
