Title       : The Effect of the Pseudomonas Syringae Protein HopPsyA (HrmA) on Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9983113

Award Number: 9983113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Alfano alfanoj@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              To date, researchers studying proteins that travel the type III (Hrp) protein
              secretion system of bacterial plant pathogens do not know any of the virulence
              targets of these proteins - the bacterial-intended target that presumably
              contributes to the ability of these bacteria to be pathogenic. The experiments
              described in this proposal are designed to reveal the virulence target of
              HopPsyA (formally known as HrmA). HopPsyA is a protein that travels the type
              III (Hrp) secretion pathway of the plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae and,
              based on indirect evidence, appears to be delivered into plant cells. On some
              plants, HopPsyA functions as an avirulence (Avr) protein and induces a rapid
              defense response. By focussing on plants that do not recognize HopPsyA by
              mounting a defense response, the researchers hope to identify HopPsyA's plant
              target to begin to unravel how Hrp-delivered proteins allow pathogenic bacteria
              to multiply and cause disease in plants. Yeast 2-hybrid data presented in this
              proposal suggest that HopPsyA targets the Mad2 protein in Arabidopsis. Mad2 is
              a conserved protein in eucaryotes that plays an important role in the cell
              cycle. When eucaryotic cells have damaged spindles during metaphase, a
              checkpoint, called the spindle checkpoint, stalls the cell cycle so the cells
              do not continue into anaphase. This helps prevent daughter cells from receiving
              too many or too few chromosomes during segregation. Mad2 plays a central role
              in the spindle checkpoint. Intriguingly, if HopPsyA does indeed interact with
              Mad2, this suggests that bacterial plant pathogens may be capable of modifying
              the plant cell cycle to improve the likelihood of successful pathogenesis.  The
              proposed work will encompass many different molecular and cell biological
              techniques including standard light microscopy, yeast 2-hybrid screens, PCR
              mutagenesis, protein separation and immunoblot analysis, experiments with
              transgenic plants, coimmunoprecipitation and other methods to detect
              protein-protein interactions. Many components between the type III systems in
              pathogens of animal and plants are conserved. The research described in this
              proposal should provide important information about type III secretion systems
              and be of broad interest to researchers studying host-microbe interactions.
              


