Title       : RUI: MEF2 and Regulation of Transcription of the Skeletal Muscle Actin Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9983140

Award Number: 9983140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra B. Sharp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Los Angeles
	      5151 State University Dr
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-0111

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Sharp

The process of myogenesis, by which precursor cells develop into
              skeletal muscle, is regulated by an intricate interplay of molecular
              mechanisms. One approach to understanding these mechanisms is to study the
              DNA-protein and protein-protein interactions that regulate transcription of
              muscle-specific genes. This project will investigate the role of the
              transcriptional transactivator MEF2 and its binding to DNA in facilitating the
              activation of transcription by the myogenesis regulatory factor MyoD. Members
              of both the myogenesis regulatory factor (MRF) and the myogenesis enhancing
              factor 2 (MEF2) families are required for skeletal myogenesis in mammals. MEF2s
              are expressed from four different genes, A-D, and form homo- and heterodimers.
              The cell- and promoter-specific roles of the different isoforms are not known,
              It is known that MRF and MEF2 factors act synergistically; that is,
              transcription driven by a lest promoter is enhanced to a greater extent when
              both a MRF and a MEF2 are present than can be explained by adding the effects
              of each of them alone. On artificial test promoters, this synergism can occur
              even when the binding site for only one family is present, or when either MEF2
              or MRF lacks a transactivation domain. The promoter of the skeletal muscle
              actin (SKMA) gene differs from the promoters for which MEF2/MRF synergism has
              been tested thus far in that the binding sites for MEF2 and MRF, rather than
              being situated very near each other, are widely separated from each other.
              Maximum efficiency of expression of the SKMA gene requires the presence of a
              MEF2 binding site, However, it has not been possible to demonstrate a
              contribution of MEF2 to the activation of the SKMA promoter by MyoD using a
              transient transfection system in which MEF2 and MyoD are expressed from
              transgenes in non-muscle cells. In contrast, under the same conditions,
              synergism is easily demonstrable on a control modified muscle creatine kinase
              (MCK) promoter comprising two closely spaced MEF2 and MyoD binding sites. Thus
              aspects of the contribution of MEF2 to transcriptional efficiency remain to be
              explained. Transient transfection and luciferase reporter assays with SKLAA,
              MCK, and MEF2 site-negative promoters will be used to test the following
              hypotheses. 1) Efficient transcription from the mouse SKMA promoter is
              dependent upon the MEF2 site and upon transc6ptionally active MEF2. 2)
              Different isoforms or heterodimers of MEF2 have different potencies with
              respect to activation of a given promoter, and the contribution of a given
              isoform is not the same for all promoters. 3) MEF2 can contribute to promoter
              activation both through its transactivational activity and when it is inactive
              transcriptionally. The relative significance of the two contributions is both
              isoform and promoter specific. To test these hypotheses, transfections will be
              carried out in non-muscle cells with reporter constructs for each of the
              different promoters and an expression construct for Myo[), while inclusion of
              expression constructs for the MEF2 isoforms, as well as inhibitors and
              stimulators of MEF2 activity, will be varied as appropriate.


The
              conclusions drawn from these experiments will contribute to our understanding
              of how gene expression is regulated. They will allow the construction of
              broader regulatory models that can then be tested by further experimentation,
              Involvement in the research process will contribute to the development of
              undergraduate and Masters Degree students as scientists and will motivate
              students to continue for advanced degrees or to enter the workforce as research
              associates or community college educators in molecular biology.

