Title       : SBIR Phase II: MPI-2: A Systematic Study, Design, and Commercialization of the
               Extended Message Passing Interface for NOWs and Parallel Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a9983413

Award Number: 9983413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rossen Dimitrov rossen@mpi-softtech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MPI Software Technology
	      101 So. Lafayette Street, Ste 33
	      Starkville, MS  397599741    662/320-4300

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project builds on MPI Software
              Technology, Inc.'s (MSTI's) extensive MPI-1 implementation experience with our
              MPI-2 design developed in Phase I in order to continue research and advanced
              prototyping of a quality implementation of the MPI-2 standard for clusters of
              workstations . In Phase II, we build upon prototypes created in Phase I, while
              continuing our investigations into scalable dynamic process startup, advanced
              and poly-algorithmic approaches to one-sided communications, collective
              operations, and parallel I/O.  Our research and development outcomes will
              enable the high-performance computing community to unlock the potential of the
              latest workstation and networking technology, providing access to architectural
              enhancements of systems and software, and more complex computational
              environments. Rationale for undertaking this effort is that the scientific
              community needs enhancements to its most important parallel processing
              environment, MPI, and that workstation cluster targets comprise the fastest
              growing component of parallel processing environments. Inventing MPI-2
              capability for HPC represents widely enabling technology for scientists and
              engineers to produce new science, while incorporating computer-science
              challenges of its own, both of a research and advanced development nature. 
              Significant software, protocol, and algorithmic challenges must be tackled in
              order to create a useful MPI-2 environment.

MPI-2's dynamic process
              management would support several classes of new scientific applications, and
              computation strategies.  These include computational servers, growing/shrinking
              parallel applications, and multi-disciplinary codes. Support for the one-sided
              model would enable classes of applications that need fine grain communication
              support, including certain sparse matrix algorithms, as well as quantum
              chemistry codes that utilize global array-type algorithms (e.g., Focker-Planck
              computations) . Support for effective intercommunicator collective operations
              would simplify and enable applications that work with dataflow models,
              including composite parallel simulation and visualization techniques.  Support
              for MPI-2's I/O techniques would support myriad out-of-core and database-type
              applications, including growing interest in financial modeling with MPI, but
              also the traditional scientific problems in areas of climate and weather
              modeling, and others with large, out-of-core datasets needed in conjunction
              with parallel computing.

