Title       : CAREER: Atomically Detailed Modeling of Transport through Zeolite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a9983647

Award Number: 9983647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Sholl sholl@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal Number:  CTS-9983647
Principal Investigator:  David S.
              Sholl
Institution:	Carnegie Mellon University
Title:  CAREER: Atomically
              Detailed Modeling of Transport through Zeolite Membranes


Zeolites are
              solid, crystalline materials that are permeated by networks of ordered
              nanometer-scale pores. These pores are approximately the same size as many
              small molecules. Because molecules adsorbed inside zeolite pores are always in
              intimate contact with the walls of the pore, the diffusion rates, and
              adsorption energies of various chemical species can depend strongly on the
              size, shape, and functionality of the species. These facts have long been
              exploited in the applications of zeolites to shape-selective catalysis and
              adsorption-based separations. Recent years have seen dramatic advances in the
              reliable synthesis of ultra-thin membranes made from zeolite crystals. An
              important challenge in the continuing development of these membranes is the
              need for accurate theoretical models of their performance. This project will
              focus on developing hierarchical models of molecular transport through zeolite
              membranes that combine detailed atomic-scale simulations with macroscopic
              nonequilibrium thermodynamic theories. A vital part of this process will be a
              series of direct comparisons between theoretical predictions from this research
              and experimental results obtained by experimental collaborators. 

Zeolite
              membranes have a number of attractive properties. From a macroscopic point of
              view, they have excellent thermal, mechanical, and chemical stability. These
              properties allow zeolite membranes to be used under conditions that are too
              harsh for traditional membrane materials such as polymers. Microscopically, the
              atomically ordered pore structure of zeolites means that zeolite membranes can,
              in principle, be extremely selective even for mixtures of molecules with very
              similar shapes and sizes. By developing theoretical models that explicitly
              account for the atomic-scale structure of zeolite pores, this project will
              develop a framework for computationally screening libraries of zeolite
              structures to choose membrane materials that optimize throughput and
              selectivity for a desired chemical separation. In the shorter term, this work
              will clarify the fundamental microscopic processes that control molecular
              transport through zeolite membranes and provide insight into selecting
              efficient operating procedures for existing membranes.


