Title       : Symposium: Perceptual Organization in Vision: Behavioral and Neural
               Perspectives, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9983241

Award Number: 9983241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marlene Behrmann behrmann@cnbc.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl R. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project: BCS 9983241 PI: Behrmann, M.

The project is to hold a symposium at
              Carnegie-Mellon University in June, 2000 on the topic of Perceptual
              Organization in Vision. The aim of the symposium is to bring together
              researchers from a variety of disciplines to consider mechanisms of perceptual
              organization. Both behavioral and neural approaches will be considered.
              Behavioral approaches will include those arising from research in cognitive
              psychology, developmental psychology, and animal behavior studies. Neural
              approaches will include results from single neuron recording studies, from
              neuropsychological studies of patients with discrete lesions and from
              functional neuroimaging studies. Qualitative and computational approaches will
              also be incorporated. The following types of questions will be examined in the
              course of the symposium: What are the heuristics involved in perceptual
              organization? Are these predetermined and/or are they experience-dependent? Do
              they operate only feedforward or is the system interactive, combining bottom-up
              and topdown knowledge in deriving organizational structure? Do they operate
              "early" or "late" or is it perhaps more parallel than sequential? What is an
              object? What is the role of attention in perceptual organization? What specific
              neural mechanisms mediate perceptual organization? The general goal of the
              meeting will be to review the current state of the field from a
              multidisciplinary perspective by bringing together researchers who might not
              ordinarily exchange ideas, to provide the opportunity for junior scientists to
              interact with leaders in the field, to identify future research directions, and
              to disseminate the results broadly. The results of the symposium will be
              published as the 31st  in the series of the Carnegie Cognition Symposium
              volumes.



