Title       : Three-Dimensional Modal and Nonmodal Structures in Frontal Rainbands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a9983077

Award Number: 9983077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257277             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qin Xu qxu@hoth.gcn.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It has been observed that mid-latitude precipitation is commonly associated with
              frontal systems and frontal precipitation is organized into bands, which
              exhibit three-dimensional substructures.  
Prediction of fronts and associated
              precipitation on the synoptic scale has steadily improved over the past decade;
              however, prediction of frontal substructures and associated precipitation on
              the mesoscale has experienced less success.  

The goal of this research is
              to explore new instability mechanisms that will provide possible explanations
              for some observed three-dimensional substructures, including severe storm
              elements, embedded in frontal rainbands.  As one of the possible dynamic
              mechanisms, symmetric instability (SI) and conditional SI have been shown to
              have many attractive features in interpreting the gross structures of some
              observed frontal rainbands.  However, the often-observed three-dimensional
              substructures in frontal rainbands are beyond the description of current SI
              theories.  Recent research by the Principal Investigator (PI) suggests that
              nonlinear SI circulations are unstable in three dimensions and the related
              secondary unstable modes resemble some observed mesoscale substructures.  The
              results obtained so far are still very preliminary but shed light on a number
              of important issues, which need further investigation.

Successful completion
              of this research will advance theoretical understanding of precipitation
              systems and potentially lead to better forecasts.

