Title       : SBIR Phase II: Web-Based Touch Display for Accessible Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a9983472

Award Number: 9983472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399998             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Anastas janastas@immersion.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Hasser  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Immersion Corporation
	      801 Fox Lane
	      San Jose, CA  951311601    408/467-1900

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 1545,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from Immersion
              Corporation takes advantage of an opportunity to turn an emerging mainstream
              computer technology into a universal accessibility tool.  During Phase I,
              researchers at Immersion Corporation and at Oregon State developed enabling
              software technologies for Web-based force feedback and put them to use by
              designing a physics computer laboratory module.  The module allowed students to
              actually FEEL forces while holding a simulated charged particle in an electric
              field, take data points, and then feel a plotted curve using prototypes of a
              force feedback mouse.  Such mice have received excellent reviews from
              mainstream users who enjoy the ease-of-use and excitement of feeling GUI
              objects and computer feel effects and have met with enthusiasm from blind
              users, who require the best touch interfaces at the lowest cost.  Phase II will
              expand the enabling technology, curriculum, and evaluation work begun in Phase
              I, and it will add interaction with accessibility software developers. 
              Enormous potential exists for accessibility research to push the cutting edge
              of force feedback technology and for accessibility applications to take
              advantage of mass market economies of scale, creating a true universal
              accessibility success story.

Over 110 million computer mice are sold each
              year.   Web-based applications will substantially drive the adoption of
              force-feedback mice.  The proposed Internet force feedback innovations will
              accelerate market penetration.  Development of educational applications will
              boost the market for accessible science education.  The technology could also
              give a competitive advantage to screen reader companies.

