Title       : CAREER: Robust and Optimal Control of Interconnected Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  2000     
File        : a9983954

Award Number: 9983954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raffaello D'Andrea rd28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               

This project is aimed at developing new tools and techniques for
              controlling large, interconnected systems, to transfer these methods to
              graduate students, researchers, and industry partners, and to develop
              innovative methods for control education at both the undergraduate and graduate
              levels.

Many systems consist of similar units which directly interact with
              their nearest neighbors. Even when these units have tractable models and
              interact with their neighbors in a simple and predictable fashion,  the
              resulting system often displays rich and complex behavior when viewed as a
              whole. There are many examples of such systems, including automated highway
              systems, formation flight of air vehicles and satellites, and in the limit as
              the size of the subsystems approaches zero, systems governed by  partial
              differential equations.  

In order for any optimal control technique to  be
              successful, the structure of the system must be exploited in order to obtain
              tractable algorithms. The bulk of the proposed research deals with developing
              new tools and techniques for control analysis and design for the large (and
              growing) class of systems  that are comprised of many similar units that are
              locally interconnected.  This will be achieved by adopting  a multidimensional
              systems framework for modeling interconnected systems, and by developing
              control design and analysis tools based on multidimensional system models. 
              

In addition to a strong commitment to research, the PI is actively involved
              in education, both at the undergraduate and graduate level.  There are two
              large efforts currently being directed by the PI to improve the engineering
              curriculum at Cornell University and to disseminate this information to
              educators at large:  1) Systems Engineering, and 2) the construction of a
              Multidisciplinary Systems and Control  Laboratory for undergraduate and
              graduate education. 



