Title       : Stigmoid Bodies: Localization, Ontogeny and Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9983078

Award Number: 9983078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire-Anne N. Gutekunst mguteku@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Enrique R. Torre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Stigmoid bodies (SBs) are structures found in the cytoplasm of many cells.  To
              date SBs remain enigmatic structures and little is known about their
              distribution in the brain, their content and potential functions.   In some
              brain cells, SBs represents up to 20% of the volume of the cell body.  This
              enormous amount of material represents a major commitment from the cell
              suggesting that SBs participate in an important and specific cellular mechanism
              or that they are involved in sequestering particular molecules.  However, the
              lack of a specific to detect SBs has been the primary obstacle to their study. 
              The investigator have recently shown that antibodies against a brain protein,
              called huntingtin associated protein 1 (HAP1), stain and detect SBs in several
              regions of normal rat and mice brains and can therefore be used as markers for
              these structures.  Such staining will be used to identify brain regions in
              which the SB-containing neurons are located and to determine whether
              SB-containing neurons represent a specific sub-population.  To identify the
              various factors regulating SB formation, their development will also be
              examined in neurons cultured from embryonic brain tissue under different
              conditions.  Finally, SBs will isolated and purified SBs and their molecular
              composition will be ascertained using biochemical studies of SBs and will
              provide crucial information on the physiological role they may play in cells.
