Title       : DNA Damage Checkpoint Response in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a9983142

Award Number: 9983142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne B. Britt abbritt@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Britt,  A.

Although some of the genes encoding the direct regulators of the
              cell cycle have been identified in plants, virtually nothing is known as to
              whether DNA damage induced cell cycle arrest occurs in plants. However, there
              are certain interesting effects of DNA damaging agents on plant growth, which
              suggest that cell cycle arrest is taking place. When plants are treated as
              seeds with very high levels of gamma radiation, the seed survives, germinates
              at a normal rate, develops normally in respect to its environment but does not
              produce any new cells. All growth occurs through cell expansion and a plant
              that possesses only its embryonic leaves results, a "gamma plantlet". Mutants
              have been obtained defective in DNA repair that are hypersensitive to the
              gamma-plantlet inducing effects of gamma radiation. The genes that are required
              for detecting the persistence of DNA damage and transducing that information to
              the direct regulators of the cell cycle will be sought. More importantly, a
              genetic screen for mutants defective in this process will be performed. The
              screen will allow identification of any genes required for this process which
              are unique to plants or which have not yet been identified in animals.  Second
              site suppressors of the gamma plantlet phenotype in the DNA repair mutant line
              will be obtained.

In order to reduce the frequency of induction of
              mutations, most living things have developed mechanisms for the detection of
              persisting DNA damage and the transduction of this information to the
              regulators of the cell cycle. These damage-specific "checkpoints" provide the
              cell with time in which to repair DNA damage before it is processed into a
              mutation. Cells defective in DNA damage-specific checkpoints are both
              hypermutable and hypersensitive to the toxic effects of many DNA damaging
              agents. 

