Title       : SBIR Phase II: Acoustic Microcavitation Assisted Fine Cleaning of Post-Chemical
               Mechanical Planarizing (CMP) Wafers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9983485

Award Number: 9983485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. McKenna mark@ritecinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RITEC Inc
	      60 Alhambra Road, Suite 5
	      Warwick, RI  028861442    401/738-3660

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This SBIR Phase II project is to continue the investigation in the removal of
              particulates from silicon wafers.  It is a problem which can only become more
              important as the evolving circuit complexity demands greater miniaturization
              and multi-storied 'architectural' chip designs.  Miniaturization poses a
              increasing challenge because any particulate which is one-third to one-half the
              size of the smallest chip circuit feature (i.e. the line width) is deemed a
              killer defect.  As the line width gets thinner, the particle-intolerance
              because correspondingly greater.  Up to 40% of all silicon wafer rejections are
              due to unremoved particulates.  The challenge of maintaining ultra-clean wafer
              surfaces is further exacerbated by the more complex, multi-storied chip
              designs. Each new 'floor' of circuitry requires that a high degree of wafer
              flatness and smoothness be  restored using the chemical mechanical planarizing
              or polishing (CMP) process.  Each CMP procedure involves a fine, fumed silica
              slurry and therefore introduces new particulates.  Several CMP operations are
              typically necessary in wafer processing and each wafer must be perfectly
              cleaned after each operation. 

This  project is to develop a precision
              cleaning unit to rapidly clean post-CMP silicon wafers using only 'Silent Sound
              and Clean Water'.   Based on Acoustic Coaxing Induced Microcavitation (ACIM), 
              the process requires no chemicals--only silent sound and clean water.  The
              Silent Sound and Clean Water (SSCW) wafer cleaner to be developed through this 
              SBIR Phase-II grant will face none of the conventional limitations with regard
              to particle size and it will be wholly environmentally friendly. 

