Title       : CRB: The Effects of Barley Yellow Dwarf Virus on Introduced and Native Grass
               Species in California and Implications for Restoration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a9983373

Award Number: 9983373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharon Collins, Capital Systems         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn M. Malmstrom malmstr1@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Malmstrom Abstract

CRB:  The effects of barley yellow dwarf virus on
              introduced and native grass 
species in California and implications for
              restoration


Over the last two centuries, introduced plant species have
              become notable 
components of many American grasslands, sometimes altering
              grassland properties and reducing forage quality.  The California grasslands
              are one system in which species composition has been profoundly transformed, in
              this case from a system dominated by native perennial grasses to one dominated
              by exotic annuals and now threatened by noxious weeds such as the yellow star
              thistle.  Current efforts to improve the quality of California grasslands
              include a focus on restoring populations of native perennial grasses.  However,
              restoring native grass populations has not always been straightforward.
              Evidence suggests that a common cereal virus, barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV),
              is a widespread ecological agent in these grasslands and may play a notable
              role in influencing the population dynamics of the native and annual species.  
              This work investigates interactions between native and introduced grasses and
              BYDV, and examines the hypothesis that BYDV places a stronger limitation on the
              persistence of native perennial populations than on those of the introduced
              annuals.  The work will provide valuable insight into the role of plant viruses
              in 
natural communities, an area in which current understanding is poor.  The
              information gained about BYDV in particular will be relevant to the many
              grasslands around the world in which BYDV is common.  For California, this work
              will be the first investigation of a widespread ecological agent that has
              hitherto been overlooked in analysis of grassland and rangeland dynamics.  For
              grassland and range managers, this work will help assess the trajectories of
              native grass populations under BYDV pressure and will help evaluate the
              
feasibilit

