Title       : SBIR Phase II: High Rate, High Capacity Anodes for Rechargeable Lithium
               Batteries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9983448

Award Number: 9983448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399997             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Miller jmiller@tjtechnologies.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : T/J Technologies, Inc
	      PO Box 2150
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481062150    313/213-1637

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop higher
              energy storage electrode materials for rechargeable lithium ion batteries. 
              Tin-based oxide materials have attractive reversible charge storage capacities
              but high first-cycle losses.  In Phase I, new tin-based materials were
              demonstrated with superior capacity and significantly reduced first-cycle loss.
               The volumetric charge storage capacity was three times better than
              commercially established carbon-based anode materials.  These proprietary
              materials are based on nanoscale tin domains highly dispersed and stabilized
              within a conductive ceramic matrix.  In Phase II, two ceramic hosts will be
              investigated.  Precursor chemistries, tin atomic fraction, and reactive
              conditions will be optimized with respect to capacity and cyclability.  The
              composition and microstructure of these materials will be determined and
              correlated with rate and cycle life.  Test cells will be prepared and evaluated
              to determine their capacity and cyclability.  Producibility issues such as
              precursor cost, process scale-up, and compatibility with established cell
              components (e.g. electrolyte, separator, binder, current collector) will be
              addressed.  The ultimate goal is to demonstrate that the capacities
              demonstrated in phase I can be realized while simultaneously meeting the cost
              and cycle life requirements for rechargeable batteries used in consumer
              electronics.

This project will develop advanced electrode materials that
              will increase the run tim or reduce the size and weight of rechargeable lithium
              ion batteries. There is a rapidly growing market for lithium ion batteries for
              consumer electronics (wireless communications, laptop PC's, camcorders), as
              well as for electric vehicle propulsion. 

