Title       : EPSCoR: University of Maine Research Infrastructure to Enhance Maine's
               High-Technology Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2002    
File        : a9983432

Award Number: 9983432
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4118317            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Kennedy r-kennedy2@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Dwyer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert J. Lad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Max J. Egenhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis G. Grillo  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Heather Almquist  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will enhance the research infrastructure at the University of
              Maine, the only research university in the state, and the institution
              responsible for awarding all of the state's Ph.Ds in science and engineering. 
              The goal of the project is to develop two complimentary and nationally
              competitive research programs at the University of Maine that will provide
              significant research support for the state's emerging high-technology
              industries.
One of the programs to be developed under the award will establish
              new research capabilities at the University in the area of Biosensor
              Technology.  Development of Biosensors with applications to food safety,
              medical monitoring and bioweapons detection will be pursued under the award. 
              The Biosensor Technology program is expected to stimulate cooperative research
              activities by chemists, microbiologists, food scientists, and electrical
              engineers at the University and its industrial partners.  The second program
              will focus on Intelligent Spacial Technologies, which provide spatial
              information in ways that meet user choices of concepts, language and style of
              interaction.  The project will build on the University's existing research
              strength in Geographic Information Science by focusing on the software
              engineering of spacial domain research.
NSF funding will be used principally
              to hire new tenure-track faculty (four in Biosensors and three in Intelligent
              Spacial Technologies) and to provide them with the equipment, graduate students
              and technicians to initiate their research efforts at the University.

