Title       : CAREER: Development of Seismic Isolation Systems for Nonstructural Walls in
               Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9983896

Award Number: 9983896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali M. Memari amm7@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI: Ali M. Memari, The Pennsylvania State University
Proposal Number:
              9983896
Proposal Title: Development of Seismic Isolation Systems for
              Nonstructural Walls in                                 Buildings

Project
              Abstract

Seismic isolation systems are researched and developed for a select
              group of "nonstructural" walls in buildings, and integrated educational
              activities that address the issue are created.  Innovative alternative designs
              for curtain walls with architectural glass, veneer walls, cladding panels, and
              infill walls based on seismic isolation philosophy are developed in the
              research component of this project.  In the teaching component, Architectural
              Engineering students are educated and trained in earthquake design of buildings
              with emphasis on nonstructural elements. 

The seismic isolation approach for
              design of nonstructural wall systems is based on developing mechanisms that
              will minimize the unwanted interaction between the nonstructural component and
              the structural component in buildings to prevent damage to the vulnerable
              element.  Full-scale specimens of alternative designs are tested under dynamic
              racking motion for concept verification. The findings of this project are
              integrated in a compact series of graduate level courses on earthquake design
              of buildings and building enclosures. In addition, experiments on instructional
              shaking tables are included in several courses as primary teaching component
              activities. 

Several innovative seismic isolation concepts that can save
              millions of dollars by minimizing damage to nonstructural elements in future
              earthquakes are introduced to the building industry as a result of the research
              in this project. Moreover, as part of the outcome of the project's educational
              activities, Architectural Engineering students are trained with an in-depth
              capability for seismic design of nonstructural walls in an effort to fill the
              current void of professionals with sufficient knowledge to undertake the
              structural design of these systems.




