Title       : Functional Analysis of RhoX, a New Branch of the Rho Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9983760

Award Number: 9983760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise J. Montell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Rho family of intracellular signaling proteins mediates a variety of
              critical cellular responses to external stimuli.  Specifically the family
              members Rho, Rac and Cdc42 are activated in response to receptor tyrosine
              kinases and G-protein coupled receptors, among others, and can have rapid
              effects on the organization of the actin cytoskeleton as well as delayed
              effects on transcription.  Rho family GTPases have been shown to be essential
              for cell polarity in yeast, as well as for cytokinesis, epithelial sheet
              invagination, cell migration and axon pathfinding in more complex organisms. 
              Preliminary studies have identified a novel, evolutionarily conserved branch of
              the Rho family which has been tentatively named RhoX.  cDNAs encoding members
              of this family are found in fruit flies, mice, rats and humans.  Drosophila
              appears to have one family member, whereas there are at least two highly
              related human genes.  All of the encoded proteins share characteristics that
              are otherwise unique amongst Rho family GTPases.    In addition to an
              N-terminal Rho homology domain, these proteins contain 200-400 additional
              residues at the C-terminus.  Characteristically, the C-terminus contains a
              proline rich segment reminiscent of SH3 binding domains, followed by one or
              more BTB oligomerization motifs.  The remaining sequences share slight homology
              with members of the Kelch family of actin binding proteins.  The Drosophila and
              human RhoX mRNAs are expressed widely, perhaps ubiquitously in embryos.  In
              preliminary studies the Drosophila gene has been mapped and a P-element
              insertion mutation has been identified.  The mutation is homozygous lethal,
              which confirms the functional importance of this new branch of the Rho family. 
              Homozygous mutant clones in the adult Drosophila eye exhibit a rough eye
              phenotype, due to loss of photoreceptor cells and ommatidial fusions, that
              resembles EGF receptor (EFGR) pathway mutants.  Specific aims of this project
              are to determine whether RhoX proteins bind and hydrolyze GTP and to test the
              hypothesis that the BTB domains mediate dimerization or interactions with other
              BTB domain proteins such as Kelch.  Additionally, experiments will test whether
              the C-terminal domain is responsible for the subcellular localization of RhoX. 
              In collaboration with Alan Hall, fibroblasts that express mammalian RhoX
              proteins will be characterized.  The RhoX loss-of-function mutations in
              Drosophila will be used to study the in vivo functions of this protein. 
              Through this combined use of biochemistry, cell biology and genetics, these
              studies are likely to reveal the fundamental roles of this new and essential
              member of the Rho family.



