Title       : Interconnecting Research and Education in the Mathematical Sciences at Stony
               Brook
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9983196

Award Number: 9983196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2342965            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Tucker atucker@notes.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Woo J. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Irwin Kra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dusa McDuff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Glimm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony V. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W.Brent Lindquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award seeks to build meaningful interconnections among the
              various
educational and research components of the mathematics enterprise at
              Stony
Brook.
The Departments of Mathematics and of Applied Mathematics and
              Statistics have
developed strongly but in largely divergent directions.  This
              joint proposal
enhances the instruction and research training in both
              departments through (i)
cooperation in areas where the strengths of one
              department can benefit the
other, and (ii) new initiatives that will benefit
              both departments. The proposal's
emphasis on expanding research teams to
              include undergraduates ties in with the
university mandate to develop
              opportunities for undergraduates to participate in
research.  Its emphasis on
              developing pedagogy ties in with the university
mandate to revitalize
              undergraduate education. The proposal has four components:
A. Broadening the
              Research Training of Undergraduates, Graduate Students and
Postdocs;
B.
              Developing Vertically Integrated Research Teams;
C. Strengthening the
              Educational Experiences of Undergraduates, Graduate
Students and Postdocs;
D.
              Promoting Greater Interactions Among Students, Postdocs and Faculty in The
Two
              Departments

The proposed initiatives in the Stony Brook VIGRE project will
              strengthen the
education and research training of undergraduate and graduate
              students and
postdocs in both departments with better classroom learning, new
              opportunities
for research, and broadened career opportunities. 
              Undergraduates will have a
variety of new experiences involving independent
              thinking, culminating in the
opportunity to participate in vertically
              integrated research teams.  Graduate students and
postdocs in Mathematics will
              have an exposure to the types of mathematics
research that reach out to other
              disciplines and to industry with involvement in one such
research project. 
              While most recent Mathematics Ph.D.'s have been successful in
finding academic
              employment at leading institutions, it still makes sense for
all Mathematics
              Ph.D.'s to be aware of a wider range of career opportunities.
Applied
              Mathematics graduate students will develop a better appreciation of,
              and
preparation for, academic careers in (unified) mathematics departments. 
              The
employment of Applied Mathematics Ph.D.'s has swung too far in the
              direction of
non-academic careers.  As a result of this trend, liberal art
              colleges have
great difficulty hiring qualified U.S.-citizen faculty in
              statistics and applied
mathematics.  The summer internship program will build
              valuable ties with local
industry and business along with directly benefiting
              the training of the student
interns.  VIGRE Postdoctoral Fellows will share in
              the exposure of broadened
research and career opportunities.  Some will also
              become involved in
instructional reform, particularly in the arena of teaching
              preparation.  All
postdoctoral Fellows will have extensive mentoring in
              launching their own
research programs.

Funding for this award is provided
              by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Directorate's Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.


