Title       : Patterns and Mechanisms of Ovule Diversification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9983354

Award Number: 9983354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Gasser csgasser@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   As the developmental precursors to seeds, ovules are a defining feature
              of
seed plants and play essential roles in their sexual reproduction. 
              Among
angiosperms, the dominant group of seed plants, ovules are
              diverse,
exhibiting differences in the number of integuments (external
              sheathing
structures), and in the orientation of the micropyle (the opening in
              the
integuments which facilitates fertilization).  Ovule diversity has
              been
invaluable in evolutionary studies of angiosperms, and ovule
              development
has become a useful model for studies on genetic regulation of
              plant
morphogenesis.

     An interdisciplinary approach will be used to
              characterize the historical
patterns of ovule evolution and its molecular
              genetic basis.  Ovule
characteristics will be plotted onto the best available
              phylogenies for
angiosperms to clarify transitions between primitive and
              derived ovule
features.  Species having either primitive or derived ovule
              features will
be selected for phenotypic and molecular genetic
              characterization.
Molecular genetic analysis of the basis of changes in
              integument number and
micropyle orientation will be accomplished through
              analysis of orthologs of
INO, a gene which regulates these processes in
              Arabidopsis and which is
specifically expressed in the outer integument. 
              Isolation of INO orthologs
from key species, and characterization of
              expression patterns, will enable
the formulation and testing of hypotheses on
              the molecular genetic changes
underlying ovule diversification.

     To
              facilitate future studies on ovule diversification, we will also isolate
ATS,
              a gene required for developmental separation of outer and inner
integuments in
              Arabidopsis.

     Completion of the proposed work will provide insights into
              the regulation
of plant development, ovule diversification, and their
              interrelationship.

     

