Title       : Androgen Regulation of Early Vocal Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9983338

Award Number: 9983338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest J. Nordeen ernie@bcs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy W. Nordeen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The nervous system's ability to change in response to experience is exaggerated
              during distinct sensitive periods in development.  This is illustrated clearly
              by instances of early learning (e.g. language acquisition, imprinting, avian
              vocal learning), and by the susceptibility of developing sensory systems to
              early manipulations of input.  This proposal is aimed at identifying biological
              conditions that foster plasticity during these sensitive periods, and
              understanding how their timing is regulated.  The studies investigate vocal
              learning in songbirds, a phenomenon restricted to a discrete developmental
              period and controlled by a well described neural system.  An integrated series
              of behavioral, molecular, and anatomical investigations address the hypothesis
              that gonadal androgens regulate sensitive periods for learning by triggering
              specific neurochemical and neuroanatomical changes that influence the threshold
              for permanent synaptic change.  By accelerating or delaying androgen action in
              young birds it will be determined if androgens precipitate changes necessary
              and/or sufficient for terminating the sensitive period for song acquisition. 
              This will provide the crucial behavioral framework for two other experimental
              series investigating whether androgens regulate synaptic changes previously
              associated with the sensitive learning period.  Drawing on earlier work
              suggesting that vocal learning entails a competitive pruning of thalamocortical
              synapses mediated by activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate
              receptor subtype, these studies will determine if androgens influence when
              learning occurs by controlling the time course of developmental changes in 
              NMDA receptor expression and composition.  Also, the possibility that androgens
              accelerate expansion and retraction of thalamocortical terminals to hasten
              closure of the sensitive learning period will be  investigated.  The combined
              results will critically address the working hypothesis that developmental
              changes in NMDA receptor expression and synaptic organization constrain
              behavioral plasticity.  Additionally, the work will broaden our understanding
              of how androgens affect neural and behavioral development in a context relevant
              to understanding the ontogeny of human language disorders.


