Title       : Ecophysiology and Phylogeny of Vacuolate, Nitrate-Accumulating Sulfur Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9983119

Award Number: 9983119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Nelson dcnelson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Vacuoles, fluid-filled membrane-bound spaces within cells, may serve a variety
              of functions, including storage.  Until recently, it has been categorically
              stated that vacuoles do not occur in bacteria.  In recent studies, however,
              including NSF-supported studies undertaken in the PI's laboratory, vacuoles
              have been discovered in large bacteria belonging to the genera Beggiatoa,
              Thioploca and Thiomargarita.  These structures, which comprise roughly 80% of
              the biovolume of these cells, are believed to be involved in the accumulation
              and storage of nitrate, which averages 0.1 to 0.5 molar (10,000-fold above
              ambient levels) computed over the entire cell volume.  The stored nitrate can
              serve as an oxidant, thereby being converted to ammonia while allowing the
              generation of biologically useful energy driven by the anaerobic oxidation of
              hydrogen sulfide.  These nitrate-accumulating bacteria form a single
              evolutionary cluster, and, judging from field studies of others, they may play
              a quantitatively important role in the marine nitrogen cycle.   

The current
              research will examine the ecophysiology and metabolism of these bacteria,
              focusing on Beggiatoa, and will extend the study of vacuolate bacteria to
              attached, filamentous, Thiothrix-like strains that dominate the biomass on a
              variety of surfaces at deep-sea hydrothermal vents off the coast of Washington
              and elsewhere.  Studies of the attached forms will be undertaken to determine
              the evolutionary relationships between them and the previously identified
              vacuolate bacteria, and to determine whether the vacuole serves the same
              physiological role in the diverse species.  To delve more deeply into the
              ecophysiology of vacuolate, nitrate reducing, sulfide-oxidizing bacteria,
              Beggiatoa populations readily available from sulfide-rich seeps (900 m depth)
              in Monterey Canyon will be studied in detail.  Their ability to use both oxygen
              and nitrate as oxidants as well as their ability to use organic vs. inorganic
              sources of cell carbon will be determined.  Because these bacteria dominate the
              upper 15 centimeters of the Monterey Canyon seep sediments, these studies will
              yield information on the bacteria's in situ metabolism through analyses of
              their abundance vs. depth in conjunction with a study of sediment porewater
              profiles of sulfide, sulfate and ammonia and the influence of certain metabolic
              inhibitors on sediment processes.  No vacuolate bacterium has ever been grown
              in pure culture, but the populations under study can be harvested in sufficient
              purity to allow chemical, enzymological and molecular characterizations.  The
              investigators will attempt to clone the genes encoding the central metabolic
              processes in Beggiatoa and will employ molecular procedures to determine
              whether the cloned genes were actually derive from Beggiatoa.  Analyses of this
              type may eventually make it possible to understand the genetic basis for
              vacuole formation or gigantism in bacteria.  This offers the long-term
              possibility of engineering these seemingly desirable traits into other
              cultivated bacteria 


