Title       : SBIR Phase II: In-Situ, Real-Time Process Control for Micro-Electro-Mechanical
               System (MEMS) Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a9983399

Award Number: 9983399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvie Charpenay Sylvie@online-ftir.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : On-Line Technologies Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  061083720    860/291-0719

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                           This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
              develop a multiple-applications, low-cost, real-time process monitoring and
              control tool for micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) deep-etch fabrication.
              Deep-etch processes are used to manufacture high aspect ratio structures up to
              several hundred microns thick, and promise to deliver new devices with
              increased performance and functionality at lower cost.  A major difficulty in
              deep-etch technology is the control of the etch depth, which is currently
              measured post-etch using ex-situ destructive scanning electron microscopy. This
              is extremely inefficient, and is a major hurdle to be surmounted before
              extensive production takes place. During Phase I, an FTIR-based sensor was
              designed, constructed and installed on top of an etcher chamber. Etch depth and
              photoresist thickness measurements were obtained, for the first time ever,
              in-situ and in real-time on several MEMS structures. An excellent correlation
              between the FTIR measurements and SEM measurements was found. During Phase II,
              analysis models will be developed and implemented to measure the widest
              possible range of MEMS structures. These models will extract multiple
              parameters on any type of patterns, and will allow the use of the sensor for
              various applications, including deep trenches in silicon or SOI (silicon on
              insulator) wafers, membranes, thick photoresist, and mainstream silicon
              applications such as DRAM
(Dynamic Random Access Memory) trenches. Hardware
              will be optimized for spot size, measurement spot range, compactness and, very
              importantly for the cost-sensitive MEMS industry, for cost.
                 
              The result of this project will be the development of a metrology tool with
              capabilities currently unavailable, and which are in high and increasing need. 
              The specific anticipated results of the use of the proposed metrology are:  (1)
              to reduce cost through the reduction of destructive measurements and the
              improvement in process control,(2) to increase the reproducibility of the MEMS
              structures through better process control (run to run accuracy is currently ~3
              % and is expected to be lowered by the use of the sensor to <0.5 %), (3) to
              provide useful feed-back for process development, thus reducing development
              time.  These results will have a great impact on the deep-etch MEMS market, as
              they willhelp future MEMS applications to mature and come to market at a faster
              pace through cheaper characterization and improved process control. In
              addition, this first-of-a-kind real-time wafer-state monitoring and control
              technology will lead to applications within mainstream semiconductor processing
              such as DRAM.
