Title       : CAREER: Growth and Analysis of Novel Nitride Semiconductor Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9983816

Award Number: 9983816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Smith smitha2@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              PI: Arthur R. Smith
INST: Ohio University
Verne

9983816
Smith

This is
              an Electronic Materials CAREER grant; during its second year the grant was
              converted to a PECASE award. The aim of the project is to investigate the
              structural, chemical, electronic, optical, and magnetoelectronic properties of
              nitride semiconductors. Thin films will be grown in a molecular beam epitaxy
              chamber which is coupled directly to a dedicated analysis chamber. The films
              will be investigated in-situ using: 1) reflection high energy electron
              diffraction; 2) real-time electron energy loss spectroscopy; 3) in-situ
              scanning tunneling microscopy; 4) in-situ atomic and magnetic force
              microscopy); 5) in-situ auger electron spectroscopy; and 6) in-situ
              cathodoluminescence and STM tip-induced luminescence. It is planned to
              investigate a wide variety of thin film phenomena, including surface structure,
              chemical composition, surface diffusion processes, and surface magnetism.
              Educational activities address both University and local area K-12 educational
              needs. The primary emphasis is on the training of graduate and undergraduate
              students in experimental science, and to develop a new course in electronic
              materials and surface analysis techniques which is oriented toward integrating
              research and education. To stimulate interest in science among local K-12
              students, a program is planned which brings a scanning tunneling microscope
              into K-12 science classes. To facilitate this program, a Summer training
              experience is planned for K-12 science teachers to learn the fundamentals of
              scanning tunneling microscopy, learn to use the unique educational microscope,
              and to make plans to integrate the microscopy activities into their curriculum.
              Faculty visitation hours are also planned to discuss science and technology
              career opportunities with local K-12 students. 
%%%
This is an Electronic
              Materials CAREER grant; during its second year the grant was converted to a
              PECASE award. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical
              area of materials science having high technological relevance. The research
              will contribute basic materials science and physics knowledge at a fundamental
              level to important aspects of electronic/photonic materials. The scope of the
              project will expose students to challenges in materials synthesis, processing,
              and characterization. An important feature of the project is the strong
              emphasis on education, and on the integration of research and
              education.
***



