Title       : Selective Gene Regulation by Manganese and Iron in Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9983656

Award Number: 9983656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Helmann jdh9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
All organisms must obtain a specific set of trace metals from their
              environment.  Accordingly, cells must be able to sense the intracellular level
              of individual metal ions in order to properly coordinate metal ion transport,
              storage, and intracellular trafficking.  Cellular metal ion levels are
              monitored by metalloregulatory proteins that repress or activate the expression
              of metal ion homeostasis genes.  In Bacillus subtilis, four distinct
              metalloregulators control the transport of zinc, iron, and manganese and
              regulate an oxidative stress response.  This project addresses the biological
              roles and mechanisms of two regulators, the Fur and PerR proteins.  The ferric
              uptake repressor (Fur) protein coordinates the expression of iron uptake
              functions by acting as an iron-dependent repressor.  However, recent
              biochemical studies indicate that Fur binds tightly to its target operator
              sites independently of iron.  This suggests that in the cell the activity of
              Fur is regulated by other factors, perhaps a metal ion, that antagonize this
              intrinsic DNA-binding activity.  The peroxide regulon (PerR) repressor is
              structurally related to Fur.  However, PerR functions physiologically as a
              sensor of oxidative stress, rather than metal ion starvation.  It is proposed
              that PerR, together with a metal bound cofactor, reacts with hydrogen peroxide
              to generate an inactive repressor.  The nature of the change(s) in PerR that
              lead to derepression are currently unknown.  In this project, the molecular
              basis for Fe-sensing, by Fur, and peroxide-sensing, by PerR, will be
              investigated using a combination of molecular genetic and biochemical
              approaches.  These studies will provide insights into how proteins bind
              selectively to different metal ions in the cell and how they can use metal ions
              to serve as sensors of oxidative stress.  The presence of related regulators in
              diverse bacteria argues that the paradigms established by a detailed
              characterization of the B. subtilis regulators will have far-reaching
              implications. 

