Title       : Digital Government: REGBASE: A Distributed Information Infrastructure for
               Regulation Management and Compliance Checking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9983368

Award Number: 9983368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kincho H. Law law@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gio Wiederhold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1706      DIGITAL GOVERNMENT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1387,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9983368
Law, Kincho H.
Stanford University

Digital Government:  
              REGBASE: A Distributed Information Infrastructure for 
Regulation Management
              and Compliance Checking

This research project proposes to develop a formal,
              but practical infrastructure (REGBASE) to support national efforts to make
              governmental regulations publicly and beneficially available. The objective is
              to enhance the access and retrieval of government regulations by the public, as
              well as to provide support for the users, framers and critics of the
              regulations. It has been well recognized that the complexity, diversity, and
              volume of regulations are detrimental to business and also hinder public
              understanding of government. The means to improve the situation is to
              understand the issues in depth, and then develop tools that can support the
              interaction and collaboration among different parties involved. In the proposed
              distributed information service framework, governmental regulatory information
              will be made available on-line for use by designers, inspectors and regulatory
              policy bodies. The infrastructure includes repositories as a base and, more
              importantly, tools to locate, merge, compare, and analyze the information. This
              application infrastructure will exploit in an intelligent way the communication
              and computational resources that are now widely available to the public. New
              network access, search and analysis tools will help disseminate regulatory data
              and allow finding and comparing multiple sources of related data. Partial
              support for this project is provided by the Information Technology and
              Infrastructure Systems program of NSF's Directorate for Engineering.

