Title       : CAREER: Nonprehensile Mobile Manipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a9983642

Award Number: 9983642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280941             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley H. Huang whuang@cs.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a four year continuing award.  This proposal
              describes an integrated career development plan with research and educational
              activities centered on methods for mobile robot systems to display a basic
              competence in manipulation.  The approach advanced by this proposal is to equip
              nonholonomic mobile robots with very simple manipulators and use nonprehensile
              manipulation techniques to accomplish a variety of manipulation tasks.

We
              will initially focus on two types of manipulators:  a "plan" manipulator and a
              "finger" manipulator.  A single robot with one of these manipulators can push
              or roll an object along the ground.  Although this seems limited, a wide
              variety of objects can be manipulated in this manner.  With two or more such
              robots, a much greater variety of manipulation is possible:  objects can be
              lifted, reoriented, carried, and so on.

The proposed research has three main
              components:  generalizing existing nonprehensile manipulation strategies and
              developing new ones for mobile manipulators with nonholonomic motion
              constraints; creating a unified framework for manipulation planning that can
              reason about different nonprehensile manipulation strategies; and the
              distribution of intelligence among multiple robots in order to achieve robust
              cooperative manipulation.

The proposed educational activities complement the
              research plan.  The research will require custom-built mobile manipulators and
              the development of nonprehensile skills.  These activities are excellent
              opportunities for hands-on education, and they are well within the scope of
              class projects and independent studies.  There are three parts to the proposed
              educational activities:  engagement of undergraduates in research; development
              of a hands-on course covering manipulation, mobile robotics, and robot-design;
              and writing a text to serve as a reference for robot design and programming.

