Title       : Asymptotic Reasoning: Explanation, Reduction, and Emergence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9983696

Award Number: 9983696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56342              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Batterman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              99-83696 -- Robert W. Batterman (Ohio State University) 
"Asymptotic Reasoning:
               Explanation, Reduction, and Emergence"

A form of reasoning involving
              mathematical asymptotics is employed in many different contexts in scientific
              investigations. This project examines "asymptotic reasoning" as applied
              mathematicians and physicists use it. In many instances, the mathematical
              investigation of equations in an asymptotic regime, which involves a kind of
              physically motivated simplification, can yield formulas describing the salient
              and dominant features of the phenomenon of interest. The project aims to
              illuminate the nature of this asymptotic "simplification" and to understand why
              it is often very fruitful. The project also argues that this special type of
              simplification results in a deep understanding and explanation, unavailable by
              other means, of the salient features of the phenomenon of interest. It is
              argued that the extant philosophical theories of explanation and understanding
              overlook this widespread form of reasoning. The research will result in new
              insights about the nature of scientific understanding, explanation, and
              emergence. It builds upon past investigations into the nature and importance of
              asymptotic limiting relations between theories. That earlier work focused on
              the fact that in certain asymptotic regimes between theories (for instance, the
              semiclassical regime "between" quantum and classical mechanics) salient
              structures emerge which play crucial explanatory roles. The current project
              focuses on the questions of why and how this asymptotic reasoning is as
              fruitful as it is.

