Title       : Discrete and Extended Arrays of Main Group Elements and Transition Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9983352

Award Number: 9983352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenton H. Whitmire whitmir@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award, the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
              Program supports research by Kenton H. Whitmire, Department of Chemistry, Rice
              University, on clusters of main group elements (E) and transition metals (M).
              New techniques will be used to synthesize large, novel E-M cluster compounds
              with new bonding and reactivity characteristics. Heavy p-block elements often
              form unusual compounds because of their size, Lewis acid-base properties,
              metallic character and relativistic effects.  The high-pressure synthesis will
              be monitored by infrared spectroscopy in a specially designed cell. The bonding
              will be analyzed in collaboration with Dr. Jean-Yves Saillard of the Universite
              de Rennes, France. The compounds will be characterized using x-ray diffraction,
              NMR and IR spectroscopies, and magnetic susceptibility. In addition, the
              catalytic activity of the M3E family of cluster compounds will be studied by in
              situ analysis of the kinetics and mechanism of carbonylation and hydrogenation
              reactions. The role of the main group element is of particular interest. The
              high-pressure reactor used in the synthetic studies will be used in this
              investigation to monitor the effects of cluster composition, reactant gas
              pressure, and solvent and ion pairing on cluster stability.

The interaction
              of main group elements and transition metals is important in chemistry,
              materials science and catalysis. Alloys containing elements of the p- and d-
              blocks have interesting electronic and magnetic properties. Understanding how
              these different elements form structures, bond, and react is important in
              characterizing discrete compounds and also in extended solid state phases.  For
              the first time, both formation of these elements into large clusters and their
              behavior in catalytic reactions will be studied in detail in real time. 
              Graduate and undergraduate students would learn how to integrate experimental
              and theoretical results.

