Title       : A Proposal for Vertical Integration of Research and Education in Mathematics and
               Statistics at Purdue University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a9983601

Award Number: 9983601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2125003            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard M. Lipshitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl C. Cowen  (Principal Investigator former)
              Mary E. Bock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9177,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Purdue University VIGRE Program has the goal of diversifying and broadening
              the educational preparation of undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral
              students in the mathematical sciences. It will simultaneously integrate
              research and educational activities while promoting involvement with industry
              and K-12 education. The program is a cooperative effort by the Department of
              Mathematics and the Department of Statistics whose highly ranked research
              programs offer a broad range of diverse assets that are mutually beneficial to
              all.  The VIGRE participants are organized in research groups that allow
              introduction and in depth exploration of specific research areas.  Each will
              include an interdisciplinary aspect involving faculty outside the mathematical
              sciences. These groups will include undergraduates, graduate students,
              postdoctoral fellows and faculty. High school faculty and/or middle school
              faculty will participate in summer activities of the groups.  The group will
              provide a ladder of mentoring among the participants with each individual
              responsible for mentoring those less experienced than herself or himself.These
              same groups will provide expository lectures to members of other groups to
              broaden their exposure to a variety of areas.

The expository lectures of the
              research groups will be part of a series of seminars at several levels to
              introduce undergraduates and graduate students and postdocs to the breadth of
              research areas in the departments. In addition, a seminar series in teaching
              and communicating the mathematical sciences will be a part of the program. The
              long tradition of research consulting experiences for graduate students in
              statistics will be expanded to mathematics.  Significant teaching experiences
              for both postdoctoral fellows and graduate students are a key part of the
              program. They are meant to provide a meaningful exposure to classroom teaching
              that does not overemphasize this aspect of the typical experience at a large
              state university. A project management team will monitor and report on the
              activities and success of the program.

This program is being jointly funded
              by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities from the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.




