Title       : Reproductive Allocation of Specific Nutrients: The Effects of Foraging, Life
               History, and Flight
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9983044

Award Number: 9983044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol L. Boggs cboggs@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Many organisms, including butterflies and some other insects, have very
              different larval and adult life stages. Many aspects of the life style,
              including food sources, differ between these life stages. Species differ in the
              quality and quantity of adult food available to them, resulting in differences
              among species in the relative importance of adult and larval food in egg
              production and adult survival, or life history traits. These patterns of
              importance of nutrients from different life stages determine the timing of egg
              production, and the nutrient make-up of the egg. Our work on nutrient
              allocation to eggs from larval and adult sources is aimed at understanding the
              constraints on possible combinations of feeding and reproductive habits, as
              well as the likely persistence of species in different environments.

We will
              use natural variation in stable carbon isotope ratios of food sources as a tool
              for tracing the origin of nutrients used to make eggs.  We will address three
              hypotheses. The first addresses how allocation varies among six species of
              Lepidoptera that differ naturally in availability and quality of adult food. 
              We will determine if the source of nutrients allocated to reproduction (i.e.,
              larval food vs. adult food) varies with adult feeding ecology. The second
              hypothesis concerns the chemical identity of the two nutrient pools. This
              information allows us to understand the physiological mechanisms governing the
              relative use of larval and adult dietary nutrients in eggs. The third
              hypothesis explores how ecological factors, namely variation in nectar
              availability and time spent in flight, may affect allocation patterns within a
              species. Individuals of one species will be kept under varying conditions of
              food availability, and will be induced to fly for varying lengths of time
              daily.  Stable carbon isotope composition of eggs from these individuals will
              be analyzed to yield understand how allocation to reproduction interacts with
              feeding conditions and flight expenditure.  This experiment allows the
              extrapolation of our results to a field setting.

The results of our proposed
              work will provide information on the relationships among nutritional ecology,
              energy metabolism, and reproduction. This information has particular practical
              value for butterflies and other insects, many species of which are threatened
              or are important indicators in conservation biology. More generally, however,
              the proposed research will provide an important conceptual and empirical
              foundation for further work on both nutrient dynamics and the evolution of life
              histories. 


