Title       : Water-Borne Self-Assembled Monolayers and Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9983966

Award Number: 9983966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Kane Jennings jenningk@vuse.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9983966
Jennings - Vanderbilt U.

This proposal seeks to
              develop new methodologies for forming self-assembled monolayers (SAMS) that
              will expand the uses and applications of these molecular films.  The approach
              utilizes the assembly of alkanethiolate SAMs onto metal supports from aqueous
              solutions instead of the traditional organic solvents.  The proposed work
              exploits the molecular design of water-soluble adsorbates and the control of
              aqueous processing variables including pH, electrochemically benign aqueous
              solvents.   The information of the SAMs can be monitored in situ by
              electrochemical techniques such as interfacial capacitance measurements.  The
              proposed work will also investigate the feasibility of using water-borne SAMs
              in applications.  Through the hydrophobic effect, the low-energy surfaces
              formed from aqueous solvents will serve templates for the formation of
              surfactant films or layered, self assembling systems that can be removed from
              the substrate and used as ultrathin skins for membrane separations.  The
              proposed research also provides new opportunities for applying SAMs to
              alleviate engineering problems such as corrosion.  Water-borne SAMs will be
              used as aqueous-phase corrosion inhibitors to provide and maintain a ultrathin
              barrier layer that impedes the transport of aqueous species to an underlying
              metal such as copper or iron in continuous contact with an aqueous
              phase.

The advantages of forming self-assembled monolayers in aqueous
              solutions include (1) environmentally clean processing of films and coating,
              (2) the ability to utilize hydrophobic interactions to engineer novel
              self-assembled systems (3) the use of added surfactant, electrochemical
              potential, and pH to gain an unprecedented control over the molecular-level
              properties of SAMs, and (4) the development of new technological applications
              for SAMs in aqueous systems.  The study of SAM formation in aqueous solution
              will likely spark the fusion of knowledge from two separate areas of colloid
              and surface chemistry involving research on micellar systems and that on
              self-assembled monolayers.  This fusion should result in a dramatic increase in
              the generation of novel self-assembled systems with unique  properties,
              superior stabilities, and attractive potential for applications. 

