Title       : UCLA Mathematics Department 1999 VIGRE Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a9983726

Award Number: 9983726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4453863            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Greene greene@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tony F. Chan  (Principal Investigator former)
              Mark L. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bjorn Engquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Petersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The widespread penetration of mathematics into almost every area of
              science and technology has vastly expanded the opportunities available to
              mathematicians, both in traditional areas of pure and applied research and in
              emerging interdisciplinary areas. The UCLA Vigre Program will seek to create an
              environment in which students and post-docs can explore and participate in
              these important mathematical developments. Building on the strength of existing
              UCLA programs, we will introduce new initiatives that will broadly impact the
              department at both structural and cultural  levels.  The overall goals are to
              (1) encourage interaction between faculty, postdocs, graduate students and
              undergraduates, (2) enhance the already close cooperation at UCLA between pure
              and applied mathematics, and (3)  facilitate interaction between mathematics
              and other sciences.  To accomplish this, the Department of Mathematics will
              take advantage of its position as a major research center, its excellent
              faculty, and its large and wide-ranging graduate and undergraduate programs.
              The new national Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM), located
              nearby on the UCLA campus will also provide an exciting focus for VIGRE-related
              interdisciplinary activities.

Vertical integration and broadening will be
              enhanced through the following initiatives: 

* Research clusters, in both
              traditional and emerging areas, via participating seminars and group projects
              to achieve vertical integration and to involve graduate students and advanced
              undergraduates in research as early as possible.

* Faculty Research
              Seminars: to be given regularly by senior faculty to provide overviews of their
              research specialties.

* Strengthening of our on-going internships with
              industry and government laboratories.

* An annual retreat conference with
              faculty, postdocs and senior graduate students.

The UCLA VIGRE Program has
              three major components: postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate.
              

POSTDOCTORAL: VIGRE Post-doctoral Fellows will play a pivotal role in our
              integration efforts. They will form a link in the research interaction between
              faculty and students via participation in research clusters. Vigre Postdoctoral
              Fellows will benefit from:

* Reduced teaching.

* Formal mentoring by
              senior faculty in both research and teaching, including guidance in formulating
              a research program and grant proposal preparation.

* Summer research support
              and travel/equipment allowance.

GRADUATE: At the graduate level, the
              following programs will help graduate students to progress more rapidly from
              classroom learning to active participation in research and to become more
              effective teachers:

* New summer program of preparatory courses for graduate
              students prior to beginning graduate study to provide a solid foundation for
              the first year qualifying exam courses.

* Streamlined first-year graduate
              curriculum and qualifying exam process, to enable an early start on research
              and create more opportunities for interdisciplinary research.  

* No
              teaching in the first and dissertation years.

* Teacher training and
              mentoring.

These programs are expected to ensure that the average time to
              PhD is five years or less. 
 
Recruitment at the graduate level will be
              enhanced through contacts established with colleges and universities in
              Southern California and visitation days for prospective recruits.
              

UNDERGRADUATE: At the undergraduate level, our goal is to attract more
              students into the mathematical sciences broadly construed.  The following
              programs will enhance recruitment of undergraduates, enrich their educational
              experience, and allow them to make contact with mathematical research in the
              junior and senior years:

* The Mathematics Scholars Program to attract
              beginning undergraduates into  the mathematical sciences and to enhance their
              educational experiences in mathematics. It consists of an intensive summer
              program prior to the Freshman and Sophomore years, collaborative learning
              groups during the academic year, and special projects with faculty. 

*
              Special Pre-research Courses to prepare undergraduates to participate in
              research projects.

* Research experiences for undergraduates, including
              summer research internships.

These new programs will be closely integrated
              with existing departmental activities. Together, they will create an exciting
              and enriching educational and scientific environment which will provide a broad
              mathematical culture and an early entrance into a wide variety of research
              areas. 

Funding for this activity was provided by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office for Multidisciplinary Activity.


