Title       : CAREER: Statistical Learning in Language Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9983630

Award Number: 9983630
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jenny R. Saffran jsaffran@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Statistical learning is a promising addition to the language learning arsenal,
              given the massive amount of statistical information in linguistic input.
              However, the fact that such mechanisms exist raises several pressing problems.
              In particular, different types of statistical learning mechanisms are required
              for the acquisition of different aspects of language. What remains unknown is
              how these mechanisms interact to derive linguistic structure, given multiple
              possible levels of analysis. A related issue concerns the domain-specificity of
              statistical language learning processes. 

The following objectives will be
              addressed, using previously developed laboratory learning paradigms which
              permit careful manipulation of the input and detailed assessment of what
              participants are able to learn: (1) to determine whether learners can track the
              multiple levels of statistical regularity present in linguistic input, (2) to
              reveal constraints on the particular types of computations performed by infant,
              child, and adult language learners, (3) to determine whether the same types of
              regularities are detected in linguistic and non-linguistic learning tasks. The
              answers to these questions will inform an emerging theoretical framework,
              constrained statistical learning, intended to elucidate the study of language
              acquisition and other pressing issues in human learning and development. The
              proposed teaching objectives will serve to extend the excitement of the
              psychology laboratory to the classroom by training undergraduate Research and
              Teaching Fellows to bridge the gap between research and teaching by leading
              discussion sections, by facilitating the participation of students in a large
              lecture class in running small-scale research projects, and by encouraging
              scientific writing in the psychology classroom.
