Title       : Biogenesis of an Archaeal Rhodopsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a9983120

Award Number: 9983120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Krebs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              More than one-fifth of all proteins are membrane proteins, many of which allow
              living cells to sense their environment. However, all proteins are made on the
              inside of the cell, in the cytoplasm, not in the membrane. One of the
              fundamental problems in understanding how membrane proteins work is
              understanding how membrane proteins get from the cytoplasm into the cell
              membrane. Many membrane proteins, like the opsins in eye cells that enable us
              to see, snake across the membrane many times, and are called polytopic membrane
              proteins. Loops of these protein snakes are exposed outside the cell and inside
              the cell cytoplasm. For the past 25 years, how membrane proteins move from the
              cytoplasm to snake across their membrane homes has remained a mystery.
The
              goal of this study is to discover how bacteriorhodopsin (BR), a
              retinal-containing polytopic membrane protein produced by the archaebacterium
              Halobacterium is inserted in the membrane and matured into a protein capable of
              turning light into energy. The biogenesis of polytopic membrane proteins, which
              span the membrane multiple times, is essential for vision, energy production,
              and nutrient transport. Individual steps in biogenesis, which include membrane
              insertion, folding, and co-factor binding are poorly understood at the
              molecular level. BR is the ideal model for these studies, because it is the
              only membrane protein whose structure has been determined at high resolution in
              its native lipid (membrane) environment. Its biogenesis includes the insertion
              of the bacterioopsin (BO) apoprotein into the membrane, the formation of a
              7-transmembrane helical bundle, the binding of retinal, and the assembly of the
              purple membrane, a 2-dimensional crystalline lattice. The pathway by which BO
              inserts into the plasma membrane will be determined using a novel kinetic assay
              to time insertion of the extracellular regions of BR and their order of
              insertion. Whether the secretory translocase SecY protein is involved in
              insertion of BO will be tested, by determining whether SecY and BO interact
              genetically and biochemically. The cellular factors that mediate the binding of
              retinal to BO will be identified. The proposed studies of BO insertion and
              retinal binding will yield basic insights into how membrane proteins insert and
              bind co-factors.
Understanding the biogenesis of polytopic membrane proteins
              at the molecular level is important for achieving the high-level expression of
              physiologically and biotechnologically important membrane proteins. 

