Title       : CAREER: Building a Theory of Teacher Learning With and About Mathematics
               Curriculum: The Role of Innovative K-12 Materials in Elementary Teacher
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a9983393

Award Number: 9983393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwendolyn M. Lloyd lloyd@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project focuses on the professional development of prospective elementary
              teachers in the context of current mathematics education reform efforts in the
              United States. Challenging conventional views of mathematics teaching and
              learning, reform visions posit the processes of investigation, sense-making,
              and communication as central mathematics classroom activities. Numerous
              empirical studies over the past decade have indicated that teachers' attempts
              to enact reform visions in their classrooms are fraught with conceptual and
              practical challenges, many of which relate to teachers' lack of personal
              familiarity with reform-oriented instructional practices and representations of
              mathematics. In light of this situation, this project creates opportunities for
              prospective teachers to learn about mathematics and pedagogy by working with
              reform-oriented K-12 curriculum materials, and examines how such experiences
              can promote meaningful, long-term changes in prospective teachers' conceptions
              and classroom practices. In the mathematics and methods courses required of
              prospective elementary teachers, strategies will be developed for using
              reform-oriented curriculum materials to support the transformation of
              prospective teachers' conceptions of mathematics, teaching, and learning. The
              specific challenges that teachers encounter through engagement with curriculum
              materials, and the impact of these challenges on teachers' conceptions and
              early classroom practices, will be investigated using interpretive case study
              methods. Through examination of prospective and beginning teachers' learning
              with and about curriculum, this project will produce vital findings about the
              role that innovative curriculum materials can play in the educational reform
              process. Such results have potential to impact the content and processes of
              teacher preparation and professional development programs in mathematics
              education.


