Title       : SBIR Phase II: The Study of Superior Quality Thin Films Derived from Liquid
               Combustion in a Thermal Plasma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a9983420

Award Number: 9983420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miodrag Oljaca moljaca@microcoating.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry A. Luten  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CCVD dba MicroCoating Tech
	      5315 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
	      Atlanta, GA  303412107    678/287-2400

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project for clean and efficient
              combustion of liquid fuels is of importance in many technologies including
              internal combustion engines, gas turbines, waste-incineration and, more
              recently, advanced materials processing.  The efficiency of the thermal
              combustion of a fuel controls the efficiency and emissions of a process.  Two
              governing factors in the combustion of a liquid fuel are atomization and
              vaporization of the liquid prior to its ignition.  Two advanced thin film
              coating deposition techniques utilize the combustion of a liquid fuel
              containing a dissolved metal complex to deposit films of desired materials on
              to substrates.  The first, flame spray pyrolysis, is a rapid deposition process
              yielding
thick films, however, the films are generally of poor quality due to
              inefficient atomization.  This leads to rough films of low density and purity. 
              In contrast, combustion chemical vapor deposition (CCVD) utilizes an efficient
              atomization and vaporization process that makes it a true vapor deposition
              method.  The CCVD process incorporates a patented atomization method for liquid
              fuels, trademarked as the Nanomiser.  The Phase I
effort studied the flame
              physics and chemistry of the deposition of high quality barium strontium
              titanate (BSTO) thin films by CCVD.  BSTO is a high performance ferroelectric. 
              This Phase II project will build upon the results of Phase I by expanding the
              levels of analysis and modeling of the CCVD process to develop a thorough,
              predictive model and thereby improve the CCVD process.  The data and models
              developed in Phase II will be of extreme importance to spray combustion
              processes in general.

MCT is targeting development of high quality thin film
              materials for use in electronics, corrosion protection, optical coatings,
              nanopowders, superconductors, fuel cells as well as other applications yielding
              a potential multibillion dollar market.  Results from this research will be
              used to increase combustion efficiency and satisfy key requirements for
              performance of thin film ferroelectrics.  This will enable commercialization of
              the CCVD process applications through a combination of R&D services, advanced
              license agreements and pilot production services.



