Title       : Structural Studies on Aequorin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9983055

Award Number: 9983055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Head   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to understand the mechanism of action of the
              calcium-activated light-emitting protein aequorin. The work will focus on
              structure determination by X-ray crystallography to identify, at the atomic
              level, the components of the protein and the chromophoric ligand,
              coelenterazine, which enable aequorin bioluminescence. Once the structure of
              the native, calcium-free, holoprotein is determined, the structures of other
              forms will be studied. These include aequorin after calcium-activation (blue
              fluorescent protein), aequorin containing modified forms of the chromophore,
              and aequorin with protein mutations which are designed to establish which
              residues are involved in the reaction mechanism and how. The mechanism(s)
              involved in the regeneration, in which the blue fluorescent protein can be
              converted back to active aequorin, will also be investigated. In addition to
              understanding the mechanisms of these processes, these studies will also be
              aimed at producing modified forms of aequorin, by either mutation of the
              protein or changes in the chromophore, to produce forms with different ion
              selectivity, responsiveness and emission wavelength.

Bioluminescence is a
              process whereby chemical energy is converted into light by a biological
              molecule. Many animals use such molecules for signaling; to one another, to
              enemies or to prey. One such molecule is the protein aequorin.  Aequorin has
              proved of particular scientific value because it emits light in response to the
              presence of calcium.  Despite the extensive laboratory use of aequorin, the
              details of the mechanism by which it converts chemical energy to light when
              calcium is added remains poorly understood. This work aims to provide an
              understanding these details by using x-ray crystallography to determine the
              position of the individual atoms of aequorin and how they interact with calcium
              to generate light.

