Title       : Molecular Basis of Hormone Antagonism in Cereal Aleurone Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a9983126

Award Number: 9983126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tuan-hua D. Ho ho@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The antagonism between two phytohormones, gibberellins (GA) and abscisic acid
              (ABA), regulates the transition from seed formation to seed germination as well
              as several other physiological and developmental processes in plants.  This
              proposed project is designed to investigate the molecular basis of this hormone
              antagonism in the aleurone cells of barley seeds, where the action of these two
              hormones can be conveniently monitored by the activity of several marker genes
              encoding enzymes such as a-amylases, proteases, or a group of unique proteins
              called late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins.  The GA/ABA antagonism has
              long been recognized as non-competitive in nature, and it has been observed
              that the action of ABA in this antagonism is sensitive to inhibitors of the
              gene transcription process.  Recent results suggest that an ABA induced
              regulatory molecule, the protein kinase PKABA1, is a key intermediate in
              suppressing the GA-regulated gene expression.  The objective of this proposed
              project is to further elucidate the role of PKABA1 in GA/ABA antagonism and to
              investigate the mechanisms underlying its interactions with other signal
              transduction components mediating the action of GA and ABA.  The specific aims
              in this project include: 1) to investigate how ABA and GA regulate the
              synthesis of PKABA1,  2) to determine whether the expression of PKABA1 is
              mediated by the activity of a lipid-degrading enzyme, phospholipase D (PLD), an
              early ABA signal transduction component, 3) to "map" the site of action of
              PKABA1 in relation to other known signaling molecules, 4) to determine the
              functional domains of the PKABA1 molecule, which are important for its
              regulatory roles,  and 5) to study how the levels and activities of regulatory
              molecules important for the GA induction of gene expression can be affected by
              ABA treatment or PKABA1.  A multi-discipline approach employing biochemical,
              genetic, cell and molecular biology techniques will be followed in carrying out
              this project.  It is hoped that this proposed project would not only reveal new
              insights into the molecular basis of interactions between two important groups
              of phytohormones, but also the role of a unique protein kinase in plants. 
              Since regulation of seed germination has been an important problem in
              agriculture, it is conceivable that the information obtained in this project
              could also lead to potential applications.  In addition to the training of one
              postdoctoral fellow and one graduate student, the participation of several
              undergraduate students throughout this project is also anticipated.   


