Title       : SBIR Phase II: Integration and Distribution of Low-Jitter On-Chip Clock for
               High-Speed Analog-to-Digital Converters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a9983361

Award Number: 9983361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deepnarayan Gupta gupta@hypres.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : HYPRES, Inc.
	      175 Clearbrook Road
	      Elmsford, NY  10523    914/592-1190

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to integrate two
              superconducting technologies (rapid-single-flux-quantum (RSFQ) and
              long-Josephson junction (LJJ))  to build a wide-bandwidth digitizer with
              on-chip clocking. The performance of a Flash analog-to-digital converter (ADC)
              can be enhanced by replacing the external high-frequency clock generator with
              an on-chip clock with very low timing jitter. In Phase I, we demonstrated an
              on-chip 10-50 GHz RSFQ clock source using an LJJ resonator with a quality
              factor of 106. We also built a clock selector circuit that allows the user to
              select different clock frequencies. We also implemented ballistic transport of
              SFQ pulses on impedance-matched striplines. In Phase II, we will integrate the
              high-quality LJJ oscillator along with associated circuitry with a Flash ADC
              through a hybrid stripline/JTL (Josephson transmission line) clock distribution
              network. A phase-locked loop (PLL) will be built to synchronize the LJJ
              oscillator with an external stable low-frequency reference to ensure long-term
              stability. The LJJ oscillator together with the PLL will constitute a self
              contained clock module capable of generating 10-100 GHz SFQ clock with
              femtosecond time jitter. This universal clock module can be used in almost all
              future superconducting electronic circuits and systems.

 A transient
              digitizer instrument capable of sampling rates above 10 GSamples/s is not
              commercially available today, in spite of a growing demand in fields such as
              inertial confinement fusion and high-energy physics. HYPRES is developing such
              an instrument focusing on the $630M/year market for digitizer instruments.
              Elimination of expensive multi-GHz external clock generators will simplify the
              digitizer design, lower power consumption, simplify packaging and reduce its
              cost. Other applications of a wideband ADC include communication signal
              processors and microscan receivers. A by-product of the Phase II work will be a
              self-contained multi-GHz clock module that can be used as on-chip clock for a
              variety of superconducting circuits, including processors for a petaflops-scale
              supercomputer currently being developed. The LJJ oscillator coupled with the
              fluxon sender circuit, developed in Phase I, can be used for building
              instantaneous clock recovery and data re-timing circuits for handling
              burst-mode data in data communication networks.

