Title       : Olfactory Basis of Moth-Hostplant Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a9983302

Award Number: 9983302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253664             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Hildebrand jgh@neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy L. Mechaber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              4NSF IBN-9983302		8 February 2000


Lay Abstract
				
This research focuses
              on determining how female moths use their sense of smell to find appropriate
              plants on which to lay their eggs.  We study an experimentally favorable and
              extensively investigated model insect, the tobacco hornworm moth Manduca sexta.
               Because little is known about hostplant finding by female moths, and in
              particular which compounds released by plants facilitate this interaction
              between moths and their specific hostplants, this research comprises two main
              tasks: (a) chemical separation of volatile compounds ("plant volatiles")
              collected from the air surrounding living plants, and (b) behavioral testing of
              the responses of female moths to these hostplant volatiles under controlled
              laboratory conditions.  In the next year of this research, we will focus on
              utilizing a chemical separation technique called preparative gas-chromatography
              (GC) to fractionate headspace-volatile mixtures obtained from living plants and
              on testing the behavioral responses of adult female M. sexta moths to the
              isolated fractions.  Currently we are constructing a special fraction collector
              that will allow us to trap volatile compounds separated by GC as they emerge
              from the GC column. As a fraction emerging from the GC column pass into a
              cooled collection tube in the fraction collector, the volatile compounds in the
              fraction will be trapped. The isolated  fraction then can be tested for its
              effects on the flight behavior of female moths, in the laboratory, and if the
              fraction elicits appropriate behaviors, compounds making up that fraction will
              be identified by means of GC coupled with mass spectroscopy (GC-MS).  We will
              focus on using one hostplant species, named devil's claw (Proboscidea
              louisianica var. fragrans), and one non-hostplant species, foliage of potato
              plants (Solanum tuberosum).  Headspace-volatiles from potato foliage trigger
              strong behavioral responses in the moths both in the flight tunnel and in a
              bench-top bioassay that tests abdomen-curling responses (a simple behavior that
              immediately precedes egg-laying).  Potato plants are closely related to
              hostplants of M. sexta and are attractive to female moths, but these plants are
              not good hostplants themselves because they are rejected for oviposition after
              a female moth has contacted the leaves of the plant. From our previous work in
              this project, we know that the behavioral responses of female moths to the
              volatiles released by greenhouse-grown potato plants are stronger than
              behavioral responses to several documented hostplants.  Devil's claw plants are
              not related to the previously known hostplants of M. sexta, but we recently
              found that this plant is a surprisingly good hostplant nevertheless.  We expect
              that both of these plant species, whose volatiles elicit strong behavioral
              responses from the female moths, will emit the same or very similar
              behaviorally active volatile compounds.  By studying and comparing their
              volatiles and the behavioral effects those compounds elicit, we furthermore
              expect to be able to discover what volatile compounds are responsible for the
              attractiveness of hostplants.  Because our research plan is directed toward
              obtaining publishable results within one year, our goal will be to focus on
              volatiles that elicit one of the two key behavioral responses that are elicited
              by hostplants and volatiles collected from them -- either odor-modulated upwind
              flight or the abdomen- curling behavior that precedes egg-laying.

