Title       : An Analysis of Spore Germination in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9983231

Award Number: 9983231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Herman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              When conditions are not optimal for continued growth, eukaryotic cells stop
              dividing and enter into a specialized resting state known variously as G zero,
              the stationary phase, or the spore state.  Cells in a quiescent state are often
              resistant to environmental stress and may remain viable, although not dividing,
              for very long periods of time.  The transition between the period of quiescence
              and the mitotic cycle has been shown to be a key point of proliferative
              control. This project will examine a model transition, that of spore
              germination in the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  This budding yeast
              provides a useful background in which to carry out these studies because of the
              relative ease with which this organism can be manipulated in the laboratory. 
              In addition, previous work has shown that the mechanisms regulating cell growth
              and division are remarkably conserved in all eukaryotes.  Therefore, insights
              gained from these studies with yeast should be generally applicable.  The
              experiments will further our understanding of both the regulatory mechanisms
              responsible for initiating germination and the molecules required for carrying
              out this multi-step process.  A combination of genetic, biochemical and cell
              biological approaches will be used to achieve these goals.  The specific aims
              of this project are as follows:

1.   To characterize components required for
              the early steps of spore germination.  Experiments will clarify the role of key
              signal transduction pathways in the early steps of spore germination.  The Ras
              proteins are important regulators of cell division and are known to be required
              for germination.  This aim will test whether an artificial activation of this
              signaling pathway is sufficient to trigger entry into the germination program. 
              In addition, the experiments will test whether a second pathway, involving the
              Tor protein kinases, is necessary for spore germination.  The Tor proteins are
              also essential for cell growth and good candidates for regulators of the
              germination process.  Finally, a hypothesis suggesting that early steps in
              germination are controlled at the level of protein synthesis will be tested
              experimentally.
  
2.   To characterize yeast mutants defective in spore
              germination.  A full understanding of germination requires knowledge of the
              genes involved in this pathway.  This aim will use two novel strategies to
              isolate and characterize yeast mutants defective in spore germination.

3.  
              To characterize a novel enzyme required for spore uncoating. Yeast spores
              possess a specialized coat that must be partially removed prior to the
              formation of the first daughter bud following germination.  This part of the
              project will involve the purification and characterization of an enzyme that is
              essential for this uncoating process, which is initiated very early in the
              germination program.  Understanding the function of this enzyme and how it is
              regulated will provide important insights into the control of spore
              germination.  

