Title       : Mechanisms Controlling Organelle Acidification Along the Regulated Secretory
               Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9983342

Award Number: 9983342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsiao-Ping H. Moore hpmoore@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry E. Machen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The eukaryotic cell is exquisitely compartmentalized into membrane-enclosed
              spaces that provide sequestered microenvironments particularly suited for
              various metabolic functions.  In particular, one aspect of these
              microenvironments within the subcellular compartments is the pH: for example,
              some compartments, such as lysosomes, are extremely acidic, while others, such
              as the endoplasmic reticulum, provide a pH environment close to neutral.  Some
              of these compartments are part of the dynamic membrane trafficking system of
              the inter-related secretory and endocytic pathways, which are involved in the
              processing and secretion of proteins and other macromolecules synthesized by
              the cell and the uptake of proteins and hormones from the cell's surface and
              its environment.   A key feature of this inter-related set of trafficking
              pathways is the differences in pH among the various compartments. 
              Acidification of the exocytic and endocytic pathways controls a variety of 
              cellular processes, including viral entry, protein sorting, and proteolytic
              processing.  A specific example of this generalization, which forms the model
              system on which this project is based, is the regulated secretory pathway for
              the peptide hormone ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone).  Here, the
              establishment of distinct ionic milieus within individual compartments is
              essential for proper sorting and processing of the various peptide hormones and
              their precursor molecules.  For example, the trans-Golgi network (TGN)
              maintains a lumen that is acidic enough for sorting of regulated secretory
              products, and yet alkaline enough to prevent premature activation of
              prohormones and lysosomal enzymes. Upon budding from the TGN, secretory
              granules (SG's) acidify further to allow processing of the packaged
              prohormones.  Thus, molecular mechanisms must be in place to ensure that the
              TGN and SG each maintains its unique level of acidity.  How this is
              accomplished remains mysterious.  A major difficulty has been the lack of a
              systematic method to study acidification of individual organelles along the
              regulated secretory path.  The goal of this project is to use a novel
              fluorescence targeting method to study the regulatory mechanisms that control
              acidification of the secretory pathway.  This elegant but technically
              challenging method, which involves genetic engineering and novel pH-sensitive
              fluorescent dyes, is expected to allow the systematic introduction of
              pH-sensitive dyes into specific compartments such that the pH dynamics of each
              organelle can be measured in living cells.  The mouse pituitary cell line
              AtT-20 will be used as a model system because of its well characterized
              regulated secretory pathway and the role of organelle acidification in
              prohormone processing.  The fluorescence targeting method will be used to
              determine the pH values of individual compartments along the regulated
              secretory pathway.  The mechanisms that maintain individual organelles at their
              respective pH's will be elucidated.  In particular, Drs. Moore and Machen will
              test the hypothesis that progressive acidification along the secretory pathway
              is generated by iterative retention of proton leaks within the earlier
              compartments.




