Title       : INITITIATIVE FOR THE ENHANCEMENT OF MATHEMATICAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION AT
               CORNELL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a9983660

Award Number: 9983660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2418916            (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Smillie smillie@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose F. Escobar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis J. Billera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Guckenheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9177,9178,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

The purpose of the VIGRE project at Cornell University is to foster
              working relationships among undergraduates, graduates, postdoctoral faculty and
              permanent faculty; to promote the transfer of skills and knowledge between
              mathematicians inside the Mathematics Department and scientists, engineers and
              mathematicians outside the Mathematics Department; and to enhance and expand
              communications and contacts among teachers of mathematics at all levels.
              

This project consists of four main components: 

1. Postdoctoral
              positions with a one course per semester teaching load will bring top young
              mathematicians to Cornell to participate in our mathematical research and
              teaching community.  Each postdoctoral fellow will be assigned a faculty mentor
              and will be exposed to a wide variety of the possible applications of
              mathematics at Cornell, but they will be completely free to choose the topics
              of their research. 

2. Beginning in the fall of 2000, several new VIGRE
              trainees each year will receive two years of fellowship support over the first
              three years of their graduate career. The program will engage the students in
              mathematical research as early as possible and will allow them to learn about
              the applications of mathematics in biology, physical sciences, or engineering.
              Some one-semester trainee awards will be available to other students in the
              middle to late stages of their academic career.  These awards will allow them
              to pursue applied research or simply to have a free semester to get their
              thesis research in order. 

3. Undergraduates will be supported by a variety
              of mechanisms. VIGRE funds will make it possible to support Cornell
              undergraduate math majors during the summer before their senior years in order
              to facilitate their pursuit of honors programs and writing senior theses in
              mathematics.  A second new opportunity for the undergraduate math major is to
              do work in collaboration with scientists at a variety of labs on campus.  A
              third benefit of VIGRE funds is that it will allow more Cornell students to
              participate in the successful REU Program and conversely, it will bring the
              benefits of the summer REU Program to Cornell math majors during the school
              year.  

4.  We will support outreach activities in the local schools in
              order to expose talented students to the excitement of mathematics and the
              career opportunities that further study would open for them.  
This program is
              being jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Programs from the Directorate of Physical and Mathematical
              Sciences.
