Title       : Structure-Function Studies of Novel Insecticidal Toxins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a9983243

Award Number: 9983243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340052             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn F. King glenn@psel.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9983243
King
A key factor in determining agricultural output is the reduction
              in crop yield due to insect pests and viruses. Insect pests have traditionally
              been controlled by application of chemical pesticides. However, pesticide
              management in the USA and elsewhere is becoming increasingly complicated due to
              the evolution of insect resistance to classical chemical pesticides, growing
              community awareness of the environmental damage caused by many agrochemicals,
              and the exploitation of pesticide residuals in export crops and livestock as
              trade barriers. Thus, new "environmentally friendly" strategies are required to
              combat highly resistant insect species. One option is to engineer
              insect-specific toxins into plants, as exemplified by the engineering of genes
              encoding insecticidal d-endotoxins from the soil bacterium Bacillus
              thuringiensis into a variety of agriculturally important cultivars. A
              potentially more selective method is to use insect-specific viruses as vectors
              to deliver toxins to a restricted number of target species without harming
              beneficial insects and predators of the targeted pest.  There are only a
              limited number of well-characterized insect-specific biopesticides that lend
              themselves to genomic approaches. Hence this PI has begun a program with
              specific aims to discover and characterize insect-specific peptide toxins that
              are suitable for engineering into plants and viruses. In this project he
              proposes to further characterize the action and structure-activity
              relationships in three families of insect-specific toxins that he and his
              co-workers have isolated from the venom of the Australian funnel-web spider:
              the w-atracotoxins, d-atracotoxins, and N-atracotoxins.  They propose to
              determine the three-dimensional structure and analyze the mode of action of two
              paralytic insecticidal toxins that they recently isolated from the same spider.
              The ultimate goal is to develop each of these toxins to the point where they
              can be safely engineered into plants and insect-specific viruses. 


