Title       : Ring and Cage Assemblies for Main Group Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9983205

Award Number: 9983205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Paine rtpaine@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Robert T. Paine, Chemistry Department, University of New Mexico, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program of the Chemistry Division for the study of phosphorus-boron cage  and
              ring molecules. The study will focus on the fundamental bond breaking and
              making processes of tricoordinate main group atoms. The basic objective of the
              project is the development of new, general synthetic methods for main group
              ring and polycyclic compounds and to explore the use of these species as
              precursors to boron phosphide solid state materials. Specifically, new
              boron-phosphorus cages with core atom nuclearities of greater than five and
              analogues that contain one or more heteroatoms will be prepared and acyclic
              building blocks will be developed as reagents for cage assembly. 

While
              boron phosphide (BP) is a semiconductor with potentially valuable electronic
              properties, it is currently only available as an impure material that displays
              low electron mobility and that is hard to process. These features have retarded
              commercial  development of BP. In this project molecular cage molecules, which
              are composed of a three dimensional B-P framework, will be prepared. These
              compounds, together with closely related molecules that incorporate small
              amounts of yet a third element into the cage, will be examined as precursors
              from which BP can be made more easily and cleanly. As small fragments of BP
              will be preformed in the core of the molecules, precise control of the size of
              the resulting BP may be possible, leading to the possibility of obtaining very
              small particles of BP for use as `quantum-confined semiconductors.`

