Title       : VIGRE: Undergraduate, Graduate, and Postdoctoral Education in Mathematics at the
               Courant Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9983190

Award Number: 9983190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4743373            (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. McLaughlin dmac@knicks.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Kohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helmut H. Hofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Newman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Mathematics Department in the Courant Institute of New York University
will
              provide significant opportunities for research and graduate education
through
              its academic programs, under the support of the VIGRE program of
the National
              Science Foundation. This support will be used to integrate
the postdoctoral
              and Ph.D. programs at the Courant Institute, together
with research
              experiences for honors undergraduates in mathematics.  This
integration will
              be founded upon focused research groups at the Courant
Institute, which exist
              in disciplinary mathematics -- such as differential
geometry, symplectic
              geometry, geometric and topological analysis, the
analysis of partial
              differential equations, dynamical systems theory,
probability theory and
              mathematical physics, computational science and
numerical analysis, and
              applied mathematics;  as well as in
interdisciplinary science -- such as
              neural science, vision, biophysics,
computational biology, plasma physics,
              multimedia technology, materials
science, condensed matter physics, fluid
              mechanics, atmosphere/ocean
science, and financial mathematics. Each of these
              research groups uses
advanced graduate courses, seminars, working seminars,
              and workshops to
foster interactions and to exchange knowledge. 
              Mathematicians from
neighboring academic institutions, industrial laboratories
              and from Wall
Street, often interact with and contribute to these groups.
              Interactions
between members of the faculty, postdocs, Ph.D. students, and
              advanced
undergraduates will be developed through active membership in
              these
research groups.  Junior scientists will be trained and encouraged
              to
advance a view in which artificial boundaries between pure and
              applied
mathematics do not exist, and in which interdisciplinary research is
              the
norm.

The Courant Institute's VIGRE Program will provide support for 9
              postdoctoral scientists and 24 graduate students each year. Postdoctoral
              participants will gain breadth and depth through the Courant Institute's
              uniquely interdisciplinary environment. Each will be encouraged to develop his
              or her own scientific personality and vision over the course of a three-year
              appointment. In addition, each postdoc will gain classroom skill and experience
              by teaching one course per semester, with supervision by an expert in pedagogy
              as well as by a member of the faculty. Graduate students will be drawn quickly
              into the scientific life of the Institute through participation in various
              research groups. They will be encouraged to do internships in nonacademic
              environments such as industrial and government research labs, to gain added
              scope and perspective. They will learn communication skills through a variety
              of mechanisms, including supervised classroom experience. Undergraduate math
              majors will be encouraged to participate in an enriched honors program,
              featuring diverse research experience opportunities. The honors program will
              help draw
talented undergraduates into quantitative careers, by communicating
              the
many opportunities and great excitement available in mathematics
              and
interdisciplinary science. Some specific developments associated with
              this
VIGRE project include: (i) the creation of undergraduate
              research
opportunities within research groups at the Courant Institute; (ii)
              the
formalization of internship opportunities in industrial and
              government
laboratories and in nearby medical schools, for undergraduate and
              graduate
students;  (iii) systematic supervision of graduate student and
              postdoc
teaching, by professionals in pedagogy as well as by members of
              the
mathematics faculty;  (iv) more active recruitment of US citizen
              and
permanent resident candidates for graduate and postdoctoral support,
              with
special emphasis on women and other underrepresented groups.

Funding
              for this award is provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS
              Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.


