Title       : Genetics of Meiotic Drive and Infertility in Mouse T Haplotypes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a9983161

Award Number: 9983161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340728             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Schimenti jcs@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

t haplotypes are variant forms of the t complex, a 20 cM stretch of
              DNA on the proximal end of mouse chromosome 17. Although most t haplotypes
              contain a recessive developmental lethal mutation, and males heterozygous for
              two complementing t haplotypes are sterile, these variant chromosomes propagate
              to high frequencies in wild mouse populations due to transmission ratio
              distortion (TRD): male mice heterozygous for a t haplotype and a wild-type form
              of the t complex (t/+) transmit the t chromosome to nearly all of their
              offspring. TRD involves at least three t haplotype-encoded "distorter" loci
              (Tcd1-Tcd3) acting in concert with a t complex responder (Tcr). The distorter
              genes act as quantitative trait loci in that they boost transmission of the
              Tcr-containing chromosome in an additive fashion. T haplotypes contain 4
              inversions relative to wild type forms of the t complex, thereby inhibiting
              recombination between + and t chromosomes and allowing propagation of the TRD
              loci as an intact unit. Genetic evidence suggests that the distorter genes are
              identical to the t complex sterility (tcs) genes, which cause male infertility
              when in the homozygous state. An alternative to standard recombinational
              mapping was provided by the observation that one of the distortion/sterility
              loci, Tcd1/tcs1 behaves as a loss-of-function allele, in that a deletion in the
              syntenic region of a wild-type chromosome mimics the distortion and sterility
              activities of this gene. A special resource of chromosomal deletions near the
              Tcd1 locus will be exploited to functionally establish its genomic interval and
              identify the gene(s) underlying the phenotypes. In preliminary studies, a panel
              of mice bearing deletions induced in ES cells has been used to map Tcd1/stcs1
              to a small region of under 1 cM. This interval will be further defined by
              analysis of key deletion breakpoints, and transgenic rescue of the
              sterility/TRD phenotypes will be performed with YAC and BAC clones. Candidate
              genes within rescuing clones will be individually validated in transgenic
              experiments.

The intriguing process of meiotic drive has implications for
              chromosome evolution, population genetics and sperm development. Ultimately,
              the identification of these genes will contribute to an understanding of t
              haplotype meiotic drive, an understanding that will have important practical
              ramifications.

