Title       : Emergence and Early Development of Stereopsis in Infants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a9983465

Award Number: 9983465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela M. Brown brown.112@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Delwin T. Lindsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project will improve our understanding of how human infants come
              to
appreciate the three-dimensional structure of the world by means of
              binocular disparity between the visual signals from the two eyes. This
              capability is exquisitely acute in normal adults, and it is known as
              "stereopsis".  Stereopsis is the simplest emergent property of visual
              perception that cannot be performed using subcortical processes.  Rather,
              stereopsis necessarily involves the cerebral cortex, not only in generating the
              final three-dimension stereoptic percept, but even in extracting the sensory
              information it is based upon, namely binocular disparity.  Understanding the
              emergence and early development of stereopsis in human infants will improve our
              understanding of perceptual and cognitive
development in infancy.

	Infants
              are not capable of stereopsis at birth, but rather become capable of stereopsis
              sometime between ages 2 and 6 months. Individual infants acquire stereopsis
              very suddenly, whereas other visual functions, such as contrast sensitivity and
              grating resolution acuity, develop gradually over this age range. A central
              issue in the study of infant visual development is to account for the sudden
              postnatal emergence of stereopsis.   It is well known from much previous work
              in anatomy, physiology, and psychophysics, as well as from clinical experience,
              that normal maturation of stereopsis depends critically on normal binocular
              visual experience. However, this dependency of continuing develop-ment on
              experience does not necessarily mean that experience is necessary to establish
              the physiological bases of stereopsis to begin with, or that experience
              controls the timing and manner of its emergence.  Another possibility is that
              the anatomical and physiological substrate of human stereo vision appears
              automatically as the infant matures, and never imposes any serious limit on
              behavior.   Perhaps the known immaturity of the infant's contrast sensitivity
              function limits infant stereo behavior without limiting the maturation of the
              stereo vision mechanisms. A third possibility is that the infant visual nervous
              system is "wired up" in a fundamentally different way from those of older
              infants, children and adults. The project will be made up of a series of
              experiments on infants and adults that are designed to explore the limitations
              on infant stereopsis over the first months of life, just as it emerges.  The
              experiments will test these general explanations of why newborn infants do not
              have stereopsis. 


