Title       : Ubiquitin Recognition in Endocytosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9983688

Award Number: 9983688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas G. Davis ndavis@cmb.biosci.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Endocytosis is the process by which eukaryotic cells take up materials from
              their immediate surroundings and internalize their own surface membranes by
              invaginating small patches of the plasma membrane and then pinching these
              invaginations off.  The endocytotic process is complex and highly regulated,
              and often involves receptor-mediated uptake of biologically important external
              molecules.  Work in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has identified a mode of
              endocytosis in which ubiquitin plays a central role. Ubiquitin is a small (76
              amino acids) polypeptide that has been well characterized in terms of its role
              in marking or tagging proteins destined for proteolytic turnover.  However, the
              recent work of Dr. Davis and others has demonstrated that ubiquitin also plays
              another important role in the life of the cell, in this case marking or tagging
              membrane proteins for endocytosis.  The covalent attachment of ubiquitin to
              selected plasma membrane substrates provides the sorting determinant that
              triggers uptake.  Though initially characterized in yeast, ubiquitin-dependent
              endocytosis is not yeast-limited:  several mammalian plasma membrane proteins
              have long been known to be ubiquitinated and recent evidence links
              ubiquitination to endocytosis. While ubiquitin clearly provides the initiating
              signal, nothing is presently known about how the attached ubiquitin is
              recognized or how the plasma membrane is packaged for uptake. Protein(s) must
              bind to the attached ubiquitin signal to "decode" it, and then other endocytic
              factors and coat proteins are expected to act downstream, packaging the
              endocytic substrate for uptake. This this project will identify and
              characterize the yeast protein(s) that serves as the ubiquitin recognition
              factor for uptake.  Identification of this protein will potentiate the
              identification of the downstream components of the endocytic apparatus, the
              proteins, including perhaps the coat proteins, that serve to package the
              endocytic substrate into the endocytic complex. With key components identified,
              a biochemical analysis will follow how the uptake complex is assembled. Beyond
              this project, the ultimate goal is to build a molecular picture for
              ubiquitin-dependent uptake as rich in detail as the current picture for the
              clathrin-mediated uptake process.  As the ubiquitinated plasma membrane
              substrate ultimately is delivered to the vacuole (yeast lysosome) for
              degradation, the attached ubiquitin also may provide a sorting determinant for
              downstream, endosomal sorting steps. Indeed, preliminary evidence is consistent
              with such a role. Another goal of this project, therefore, is the
              identification and characterization of such late-acting ubiquitin recognition
              factors. A final aspect of this work will be to expand upon an initial
              discovery of receptor recycling in yeast. This recycling, associated with the
              ligand-dependent uptake of the yeast a-factor pheromone receptor, is the first
              direct demonstration of receptor recycling in yeast. Again for this process,
              ubiquitin may provide the key sorting determinant, directing transport to the
              vacuole for degradation, versus the alternative -- recycling of receptor back
              to the cell surface for additional rounds of endocytosis.
