Title       : Time-Resolved ESR and ENDOR on Triplet States in Photosynthetic Antenna
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9983034

Award Number: 9983034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Angerhofer alex@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1960,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Angerhofer, Alexander
MCB-9983034

Carotenoids are used in photosynthetic
              organisms to protect against the harmful photoinitiated sensitization of
              singlet oxygen by chlorophyll triplet states. The photoprotection mechanism of
              the carotenoids will be studied in bacterial, algal and higher plant
              photosynthetic antenna complexes using time-resolved ESR, ENDOR, and transient
              absorption techniques. The isotropic and anisotropic hyperfine interaction
              between the triplet electron spin and the carotenoid polyene chain protons will
              be analyzed by the time-resolved ENDOR. This will lead to the assignment of the
              triplet-carrying pigments and the determination of their electronic structures.
              The results of this research will lead to refinements of currently available
              X-ray structural data and/or the determination of structural changes that may
              occur in the excited triplet states. A detailed understanding of the
              temperature dependence of the triplet spin dynamics will be obtained by
              time-resolved ESR and will allow us to distinguish the different mechanisms of
              triplet energy transfer that take place in various antenna and reaction center
              complexes.

Carotenoids are essential for the survival of photosynthetic
              organisms (plants, algae, and some bacteria). They serve an important
              protective role that allows the organism to get rid of excess energy without
              stimulating the production of singlet oxygen which is highly toxic. The process
              involves a transfer of a so-called triplet state from the chlorophylls to the
              carotenoids. This transfer of energy has so far been understood only in general
              terms and in many cases the identification of the actual pigments responsible
              for it is lacking. Furthermore, the details of the dynamic interaction between
              the triplet excited carotenoids or chlorophylls and their environment are not
              well understood. This work will fill this gap. 

This project is supported by
              the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
              Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Physical
              Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences Directorate.

