Title       : Distributive Justice Norms in Marriages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a9983417

Award Number: 9983417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $535916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret S. Clark mc0z+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Past research has established that being married is associated with superior
              mental and physical health relative to not being married. At the same time,
              little is currently known about what processes underlie these associations.
              Moreover, existing research has not established whether all marriages are
              beneficial to individuals' well-being. This longitudinal study of marriages
              addresses these issues. The study involves tracking 214 individuals in 107
              marriages from just prior to each marriage through the end of the seventh year
              of their marriages. Its central focus is on patterns of giving and receiving
              benefits in marriage along with the antecedents and consequences of different
              patterns. Patterns comprising mutual responsiveness to one another's needs on a
              non-contingent basis are predicted to be associated with greater marital
              satisfaction and felt security as well as with superior mental and physical
              health. Adherence to other norms, equity, exchange, and self-interest, even if
              perceived to be fair, are predicted to be associated with poorer adjustment.
              Data show that most people initially endorse a norm of mutual responsiveness to
              needs as both ideal and as realistic for their marriage. However, many people
              are not able to maintain or follow such a norm over time, turning instead to
              exchange or equity norms which tend to be associated with poorer martial
              adjustment, a lower sense of security, and possibly poorer mental and physical
              health. The study will investigate possible antecedents of falling away from a
              norm of mutual responsiveness, including personality variables that people
              bring with them to marriages, outside stressors (e.g., job loss, birth of a
              first child), and poor adherence to the norm by one's spouse. This research
              will contribute to a base of scientific knowledge on close interpersonal
              relationships, and will lead to greater understanding of why some marriages
              succeed and others do not.


