Title       : Computational Modeling of Individual Differences in Working Memory and Strategy
               Adaptivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9983183

Award Number: 9983183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne M. Reder reder@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha C. Lovett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lynne Reder

Abstract


Performance on cognitive tasks varies among
              individuals. This project is a of study two of the sources of these individual
              differences; namely, working memory capacity (people's limited resources for
              retrieving and maintaining information during cognitive processing) and
              strategy adaptivity (people's ability to change their approach to a task in
              order to achieve greater success). The first goal of this project is to
              develop, test, and refine a theory of how individual differences in working
              memory capacity impact performance across multiple tasks. This theory will be
              developed as a computational model that can make accurate predictions of
              individual subjects' performances across multiple tasks at a fine-grained,
              quantitative level. Specifically, the computational model will enable the
              estimation of an individual's working memory capacity from one task and then
              use that estimate to make predictions of performance on the second task. The
              parameters can be interpreted to represent stable differences between subjects
              and can be used to predict the same individual's performance on other tasks.
              Predicting individuals' performances in this way has not been achieved before
              now and will be a major contribution of this research. The second goal of this
              project is to explore how differences in strategy adaptivity can be understood
              in terms of differences in working memory capacity. In sum, the project will
              result in several unique achievements: 1) the development of a new way to
              understand individual differences in working memory capacity and strategy
              adaptivity; 2) provision of a mechanistic account of these differences; and 3)
              a determination of whether computational modeling can be used to predict
              performance in terms of zero parameter model fitting.

