Title       : CAREER: Peptide Adsorption Dynamics on Molecularly Imprinted Surfaces: A Surface
               Plasmon Resonance Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9983737

Award Number: 9983737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott M. Husson shusson@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
 CTS-9983737
 S. M. Husson
 Clemson U.

Molecular imprinting
              provides a promising technique for designing materials that possess the
              molecular recognition properties of biological systems.  This process produces
              a polymeric material that contains a molecular imprint of a target molecule
              with size and shape dimensions that match those of the target molecule.  This
              research describes a methodology that uses surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
              spectroscopy to examine peptide adsorption dynamics on molecularly imprinted
              polymer (MIP) surfaces.  The project has three primary goals: i) to synthesize
              uniform, ultrathin MIP films with predetermined thickness on SPR biosensor
              chips; ii) to measure in real time the adsorption properties of target peptides
              on their corresponding MIP films; and iii) to apply fundamental information
              gained from these measurements to design and test chromatographic separation
              materials for peptide separations.  The first goal will be achieved by carrying
              out surface-confined living radical polymerization (SCLRP) on the SPR biosensor
              chips in the presence of target peptides.  SPR spectroscopy will be used to
              accomplish the second goal.  The third goal will be met by synthesizing our MIP
              films on commercially available chromatography support materials.  Synthesis of
              an MIP film by SCLRP and subsequent use of SPR to measure the fundamental
              adsorption properties of these films represent the novel features of this
              research career plan.  Results of the research will broadly impact the
              development of a range of MIP materials, including tailor-made separation
              materials, antibody and receptor binding sites mimics in recognition and assay
              systems, enzyme site mimics for catalysis, and recognition elements in
              biosensors.

Elementary school teachers assigned to teach multiple subjects
              often cite mathematics and science as their least comfortable subjects to
              teach. The education plan has four primary goals: i) to teach elementary school
              teachers and preservice teachers that teaching mathematics and science means
              interaction with materials and fostering independent thinking; ii) to educate
              teachers about programs that employ inquiry-driven, activity-based learning;
              iii) to train and support teachers to implement these programs; and iv) to
              encourage and aid teachers to disseminate their experiences to other
              teachers.




