Title       : Function of the SPY O-GlcNAc Transferase in Gibberellin Signal Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9983583

Award Number: 9983583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil E. Olszewski neil@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research is to understand the molecular genetics of signal transduction in
              Arabidopsis involving gibberellins (GA), a class of phytohormones.  Although
              several new components of the GA signal transduction pathway have been
              identified, the interrelationships between these components and the mechanism
              by which they act remain largely unknown.  The function of one such component,
              the SPY protein, is the focus of this project.  Genetic analysis suggests that
              SPY is a suppressor of GA signal transduction and that its loss leads to
              increased signal transduction.  SPY mutations completely suppress the
              inhibition of seed germination and partially suppress the dwarfism and
              sterility caused by GA-deficiency.  SPY may be an O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT),
              an enzyme which in animals catalyzes the addition of N-acetylglucosamine to
              specific serine and/or threonine residues of target proteins in both the
              cytosol and nucleus.  The N-terminal half of both SPY and animal OGT contains
              tandemly arrayed tetratricopeptide repeats (TPRs), which presumably are
              involved in protein-protein interactions.  Preliminary biochemical and genetic
              results suggest that SPY transfers GlcNAc to proteins and that SPY is part of a
              multiprotein complex.  The goal of this work is to confirm that SPY is an OGT
              and that proteins with which it associates alter its subcellular localization
              or activity in GA signal transduction.   To determine if SPY is an OGT, the
              structure of the GlcNAc modification made by SPY will be determined.  To
              determine if other components of the SPY complex regulate its localization, the
              size and subunit composition of the complex from different cellular
              compartments will be determined, and the effects of different mutations will be
              assessed.  In addition, two-hybrid screens will be used to identify proteins
              that interact with SPY.  Future studies will characterize the proteins that
              make up the complex and will determine the role of these proteins in GA signal
              transduction.  These studies will provide important information that will
              enhance our fundamental understanding of gibberellin action. 

