Title       : SBIR Phase II: Membrane Hydrogen Dissolution for Bioremediation of High Strength
               Nitrate Waste
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9983421

Award Number: 9983421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart M. Nemser snemser@compactmembrane.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Compact Membrane Systems
	      325 Water Street
	      Wilmington, DE  198042410    302/999-7996

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1166,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will expand the Phase I
              study, examine the effect of high nitrate loading and demonstrate the
              technology at a drinking water treatment site, by treating the brine regenerant
              stream from an ion exchange water treatment system. This would broaden
              utilization base of the technology and allow increased market penetration since
              the technology will supplement the existing technology base and reduce the
              operating costs of the currently practiced technologies for NO3 removal. This
              will lead to both high probability of commercial success plus a large sales
              base to allow for lower pricing in remediation markets.
Across the United
              States there are a number of drinking water facilities that are wrestling with
              the problem of high concentrations of dissolved nitrates in their influent
              water streams. The present methods of removal resort to concentrating the NO3
              into a small volume by means of reverse osmosis or ion exchange and then
              disposing off this concentrated stream, appropriately. The recovered NO3 in
              such a waste stream can be destroyed biologically using dissolved hydrogen gas
              as the electron donor. Hydrogen offers several economic and operational
              advantages over other organic electron donors in denitrification. The factor
              limiting hydrogen use is its low solubility, i.e. existing commercial
              gas-dissolution technologies cannot dissolve sufficient hydrogen in a safe,
              cost effective manner. Membrane-based gas-dissolution technologies can
              potentially supply the hydrogen required for these processes safely, but
              commercially available membrane suitable for bubble-free gas-dissolution have
              poor performance, biological fouling, or both.  Compact Membrane Systems, Inc.,
              has developed a highly gas permeable perfluoropolymer coating for microporous
              membranes. The smooth, non-porous nature of the perfluoropolymer coating is
              highly resistant to biological fouling, especially compared to microporous
              hydrophobic membranes. This coating could remove the performance, fouling, and
              cost barriers that preclude the use of membrane-based gas dissolution
              technologies in continuous biological processes.  The Phase I study established
              concept feasibility and demonstrated that nitrates could effectively remediate
              without the formation of nitrites in a continuous mode.  


