Title       : CAREER: Mixing and Separating Digital Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9983806

Award Number: 9983806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hany Farid farid@cs.dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this award is to build an education and a research program in
              digital image processing. The development of digital technology is facilitating
              advances in virtually every area of science.  Further advances will surely
              accrue as the technology improves. 

The objective of this award is to build
              an education and a research program in digital image processing. The
              development of digital technology is facilitating advances in virtually every
              area of science.  Further advances will surely accrue as the technology
              improves. 

The rapid development of digital technology is due to work that
              spans several disciplines. As a result, students interested in this area must
              cobble together courses from a range of departments.  Even if students are able
              to take all of the necessary courses, the material is certainly not presented
              to them within a cohesive framework.  One objective of this award is the
              creation of a curriculum for the study of digital image processing. This
              curriculum will draw from topics in computer science, electrical engineering,
              mathematics, optics, and psychology.

The second objective of this award is
              the creation of a research group dedicated to topics in digital image
              processing and computer vision. My group will undoubtedly be involved in a
              variety of research projects, but the emphasis will be on studying the mixing
              process that typifies the formation of digital images.  This research will have
              a dual focus: (1) the first focus will be in separating the various components
              that contribute to the appearance of an image (e.g., lighting, reflectance, and
              shape); (2) the second focus will be in understanding how these image
              components are mixed to form natural images, and in characterizing the
              statistics of natural images.

The rapid development of digital technology is
              due to work that spans several disciplines. As a result, students interested in
              this area must cobble together courses from a range of departments.  Even if
              students are able to take all of the necessary courses, the material is
              certainly not presented to them within a cohesive framework.  One objective of
              this award is the creation of a curriculum for the study of digital image
              processing. This curriculum will draw from topics in computer science,
              electrical engineering, mathematics, optics, and psychology.

The second
              objective of this award is the creation of a research group dedicated to topics
              in digital image processing and computer vision. My group will undoubtedly be
              involved in a variety of research projects, but the emphasis will be on
              studying the mixing process that typifies the formation of digital images. 
              This research will have a dual focus: (1) the first focus will be in separating
              the various components that contribute to the appearance of an image (e.g.,
              lighting, reflectance, and shape); (2) the second focus will be in
              understanding how these image components are mixed to form natural images, and
              in characterizing the statistics of natural images.


