Title       : Coordination of 3' mRNA Processing with Export to the Cytoplasm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a9983378

Award Number: 9983378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles N. Cole   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Charles Cole
MCB 9983378

	The production of proteins within complex
              (eukaryotic) cells requires the synthesis and processing of mRNAs in the cell
              nucleus followed by their transport to the cytoplasm where protein synthesis
              takes place.  Gene expression can be regulated at most or all of these steps. 
              Evidence is accumulating that RNA synthesis (transcription) and processing are
              coupled.  Preliminary evidence suggests that export of the mRNA from the
              nucleus is also coupled to other steps in mRNA formation.  This research
              project will determine the mechanism of this coupling.  The model to be
              examined is that one or more 3' processing factors remain associated with the
              mRNA following cleavage and polyadenylation, and then mediate important
              interactions between the mRNP and the mRNA export machinery.  These processing
              factors are proposed to exit the nucleus with the mRNP and to shuttle back to
              the nucleus following their removal from the mRNP.  Experiments will be
              performed using budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Preliminary data
              indicates that mRNAs accumulate in the nucleus when the signals for 3'
              processing are mutated or when mutant 3' processing factors are produced.  In
              addition, several genetic screens have linked 3' processing factors to mRNA
              export.  When 3' processing is aberrant, mRNAs are produced with extended 3'
              untranslated regions and a poly(A) tail.  At least one 3' processing factor
              shuttles between nucleus and cytoplasm.  These data are consistent with the
              idea that mRNA exportability requires formation of correct 3' ends through the
              normal mechanism.  To test this possibility, the effect of forming an mRNA 3'
              end via a cis-acting, hammerhead ribozyme will be examined.  Other studies will
              determine which 3' processing factors shuttle and whether they exit the nucleus
              with mRNA. The poly(A) tails on the extended mRNAs will be analyzed for
              sequences able to mediate nuclear retention of the RNA.   Fusions of 3'
              processing factors to the RNA binding domain of Rev (or MS2 coat protein) will
              be used to test the ability of processing factors tethered to the mRNA to
              participate in mRNA export.   Additional mutant alleles will be prepared and
              characterized in an attempt to separate the export and 3' processing functions
              of specific factors.  Other preliminary studies suggest that export factors may
              participate in 3' processing.  Using in vitro extracts, a consistent 2-3 fold
              stimulation of cleavage and polyadenylation was seen when GST-Xpo1p was added
              to the extract.  This increased the processing efficiency from 25-30% to ~75%. 
              Several in vitro experiments, in collaboration with Dr. Claire Moore, will be
              performed to determine the basis for the observed stimulation of processing by
              Xpo1p and to determine whether Ran/Gsp1p is also involved.  The ability of
              other transport factors to stimulate 3' processing will be determined.



