Title       : Durational Patterns in Connected Discourse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a9983106

Award Number: 9983106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline L. Smith caroline@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The speech synthesis systems now available can produce speech whose
segmental
              properties mimic human speech remarkably well. However, synthetic
speech still
              often sounds unnatural, primarily because of the relatively
less successful
              modeling of the prosodic properties of speech, such as
intonation and timing.
              This project focuses on the prosodic properties of
longer stretches of speech
              - sequences of sentences and paragraphs. The
goal is to explore how prosody,
              specifically durations, is organized over
larger units of speech.

The
              approach adopted here is to compare different languages, with
              known
differences in timing at segmental, word or phrase level, to see how
              they
differ in structuring timing over an entire discourse. The languages
              that
will be compared are English, French and Japanese. Improved
              understanding
of discourse-level timing will help to explain the relation
              between
durational patterns and linguistic structure.

The project is
              organized into four phases: (1) a production study to
investigate what factors
              influence durational patterns in longer stretches
of speech; (2) modeling of
              the results of the production study; (3)
analysis-synthesis incorporating the
              model of durations into synthesized
speech; and (4) testing the resulting
              synthesis through evaluation by human
listeners. The durational properties to
              be examined include amount of
lengthening at sentence boundaries, duration of
              pauses, and changes in
speech rate before and after a boundary. Comparisons
              among the three
languages will identify the factors that are important in
              influencing
durations, and help explain how these factors relate to the
              different
linguistic structures of the languages.
