Title       : CAREER: Cost-Effective Precision Form Grinding of Advanced Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a9983572

Award Number: 9983572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Shih   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this research grant are to study two precision form grinding
              technologies for advanced materials and to develop web-based mechanical
              engineering design courses for undergraduate and graduate education.  The
              increased utilization of advanced materials, complexity of parts, and the
              requirements of tighter form tolerances and surface finish along with the
              pressure to reduce cost demand the development of new cost-effective form
              grinding technologies.  Diamond, the hardest material known to exist, has long
              been recognized as the only abrasive that works effectively in the grinding of
              ceramics and other advanced materials.  The generation of micrometer-scale
              precision forms on diamond wheels has proven difficult due to the excess wear
              of the diamond tool during truing of diamond grinding wheels.  This study plans
              to investigate the use of the cylindrical wire Electrical Discharge Machining
              (EDM) process to generate the desired form on a rotating metal bond diamond
              wheel and to use the conventional abrasive on low thermal conductivity ceramic
              materials, such as zirconia.  Research tasks include analysis of the chip
              formation mechanism in grinding, modeling the energy partition and grinding
              temperature, studying the erosion mechanism for cylindrical wire EDM of metal
              bond diamond wheels, and thermal modeling of cylindrical wire EDM of metal bond
              diamond wheels.  

The success of this research project will lead to a better
              understanding of the cylindrical wire EDM process and to the development of a
              new mechanism for grinding low thermal conductivity ceramic materials. These
              results will help lower the cost and improve the accuracy of machining
              components made of advanced materials.  The Internet technology will be used
              extensively to disseminate and integrate the results in the proposed web-based
              course development.  It will offer rapid and efficient access to knowledge
              and
information in machine and process design and development.

