Title       : Organization of the Pathway of Urea Synthesis In Situ
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2001  
File        : a9983005

Award Number: 9983005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalie S. Cohen ncohen@hsc.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The cell is a highly structured complex system, in which ultrastructural
              elements form
scaffolds for the attachments of organized arrays of
              functionally-related enzymes and other
proteins. The purpose of this project
              is to identify mechanisms underlying the intracellular
organization of soluble
              enzyme systems, with the urea cycle as a model. The
pathway of urea synthesis
              in mammalian liver consists of five enzymes in two cellular
compartments; the
              first two enzymes are in the mitochondrial matrix, and the next three are
              in
the cytoplasm. Although all the enzymes are soluble (they go into solution
              when cells or
organelles are disrupted in the absence of detergent),
              biochemical studies have demonstrated
that the pathway is highly organized in
              situ, behaving as a functional unit within which intermediates are channeled
              between enzymes and compartments. Those studies showed that
the three
              cytoplasmic enzymes are sequentially organized at the mitochondrial membrane.
              It
was also shown that, like their respective proteins, the mRNA's of two of
              the cytoplasmic
enzymes, argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) and
              argininosuccinate lyase (ASL),  are localized
next to the mitochondria. The
              3'untranslated region (3'UTR) of ASS mRNA binds specifically to
a protein
              complex that is located on the outside of liver mitochondria.  The specific
              aims of this project focus on studies of the mechanisms of ASS and ASL mRNA
              localization and of the macromolecular interactions that maintain the
              localization of the proteins in situ. There are four  aims:
1. To determine
              the sequence(s) in ASS and ASL mRNA's responsible for localizing
              these
messages around liver mitochondria in situ, and the functional role of
              the protein-binding
sequences of the 3'UTR's. This will be done by
              constructing vectors containing various
mRNA sequences fused to the coding
              sequence of green fluorescent protein (GFP), transfecting
these into
              hepatocytes in culture, and determining the location of the GFP in the cells
              by
standard fluorescence and confocal microscopy.
2. To characterize the ASS
              mRNA 3'UTR binding complex and/or peptides. The complex
and any other
              specifically-binding peptides will be purified on RNA affinity columns, and
              characterized by SDS-PAGE, isoelectric focusing, and N-terminal sequencing.
              This will be followed by library screening and cloning and sequencing of the
              genes.
3. To determine if ASS and ASL mRNA localization is required for urea
              cycle function.
The mRNA targeting sequences will be overexpressed in cultured
              hepatocytes, to compete with
endogenous mRNA for localization. After inducing
              increased endogenous expression of the
urea cycle enzymes, the ability of
              these cells to synthesize urea will be measured.
4. To identify and
              characterize other cellular components that may interact with ASS and
ASL
              proteins to maintain the localization of the latter in situ, and to begin to
              identify the
interacting domains of ASS and ASL. The two-hybrid method will be
              used to screen a liver
cDNA library for components interacting with ASS or
              ASL. These will be cloned, sequenced, and
overexpressed, and the proteins
              characterized as described above for Aim 2. Site-directed
mutagenesis of
              selected regions of ASS and ASL, and analysis of the effects of the
              mutations
on two-hybrid interactions will be used to identify interacting
              regions.

The intracellular organization of soluble enzyme systems is a
              significant and basic feature
of cells. Identification of the underlying
              mechanisms is an important matter of general interest
in the fields of
              metabolic biochemistry, cell biology, differentiation, and signal
              transduction.
These studies will increase our knowledge and understanding of
              the regulation of urea synthesis, a major function of mammalian liver. The
              studies will also provide basic information directly relevant to other
              cytoplasmic enzymes known to be associated with the mitochondrial outer
              membrane, and to other metabolic pathways whose function may be dependent on
              specific enzyme organization and localization.

