Title       : Photoreceptor Synaptic Ribbon Associated Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9983297

Award Number: 9983297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107274             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grant W. Balkema grant.balkema@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research examines molecules in the retina that participate in sight.
The
              retina is a thin sheet of nerve cells at the back of the eye that is
              five
layers thick. It processes information about light and sends it to the
              brain.
The molecules studied in this research are special proteins in the
              retina
involved in signaling the presence or absence of light at the first
              point at
which light is detected in the photoreceptor cell.  The proteins make
              up a
microscopic structure in the photoreceptor called the synaptic
              ribbon.
Signals about the presence or absence of light are transmitted to the
              next
layer of cells by using  the synaptic ribbon in an unknown way. The
              proposed
work will investigate this mechanism.
We have made special markers
              for this family of proteins.  Each marker
attaches to proteins with specific
              weights, which is one of the properties we
use to tell the proteins apart. 
              One of these markers, called the B16
antibody, recognizes a rare protein found
              only in the retina that weighs 54kD.
We have recently succeeded in separating
              the 54kD protein from the rest of the
retina.  We will now sequence its amino
              acids as a way of identifying it and
understanding the function of this
              protein.
	The second group of experiments will examine other proteins are
              related to
the one recognized by our B16 marker.  One of these, called a focal
              adhesion
protein, may be involved in keeping the synaptic ribbon attached to
              the
presynaptic membrane.  This is the place where information is transmitted
              to
the next group of cells in the retina.
In the third group of experiments
              we will use the electron microscope to look
at the position of these proteins
              within the synaptic ribbon.  It is critical
that we demonstrate that the
              proteins are part of the synaptic ribbon within
the presynaptic terminal not
              postsynaptic to the photoreceptor or in the
extracellular space.  In addition,
              we will examine the other proteins
associated with the synaptic ribbon with
              other biochemical methods.
	When all the experiments are finished, we expect
              to have: 1) identified the
protein that our B16 marker recognizes, 2) learned
              the identity of the other,
related proteins in this family, and 3) shown that
              the B16 marker attaches to
a protein that is integral to the synaptic ribbon. 
              This will advance our
fundamental knowledge about what the synaptic ribbon is
              made of and how it
works.


