Title       : Recombination, Mutagenesis and Evolution of Phage T4 DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a9983568

Award Number: 9983568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles K. Singleton charles.k.singleton@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gisela Mosig  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Comparisons of rapidly expanding sequence databases suggest that there has been
              extensive lateral exchange and transfer of genes on an evolutionary scale. 
              Transposable elements, including retroviruses, and site specific recombination
              systems of viruses and plasmids have been implicated in lateral gene transfer. 
              Recent results have indicated that lateral gene transfer can also use
              homologous recombination mechanisms, initiated between sequences of limited
              homology, and that multiple mutations can appear more or less simultaneously in
              an adjacent region.  This suggests that lateral transfer of DNA sequences can
              simultaneously lead to acquisition of new genes, the evolution of multi-partite
              control elements, such as origins of DNA replication, and to considerable
              sequence divergence.  To explain these observations, a model is proposed in
              which heteroduplexes are formed between partially matching sequences. 
              Subsequent heteroduplex repair simultaneously generates multiple mutations, and
              recombination-dependent DNA replication resolves the recombination
              intermediates and splices some unchanged foreign DNA into the resident genome. 
              Strong selection pressure maintains those recombinants that code for functional
              essential genes.  The model implies that similar recombination and repair steps
              that generated the sequence divergence between the 'survivors' of lateral gene
              transfer now generate recombinational barriers between them.  The major aim of
              this project is a test of this model, with the goal of better understanding
              recombination processes and their consequences for mutagenesis and evolution of
              genes.  Phage T4 and related phages (T-evens) have several advantages for these
              studies: 1) a high recombination potential, 2) the demonstrated stimulation of
              recombination by packaged DNA ends and inflicted breaks, 3) an understanding of
              apparently redundant, interwoven and non-linear pathways of recombination and
              DNA replication and 4) an appreciation that the enzymes of these pathways are
              mixed and matched in various combinations in different complexes, performing
              different functions that differentially affect different pathways of
              recombination and of initiation of DNA replication.  Within the framework of
              the hypotheses outlined above, the following questions are being addressed,
              combining genetic, genomic and biochemical approaches: 1) to what extent are
              apparent sequence differences generated within or in the vicinity of genes that
              had been acquired by lateral gene transfer?  2) to what extent are sequence
              differences responsible for exclusion of certain phages by related phages (e.
              g., T4 excludes T2, and RB69 excludes T4 )?  3) which phage- or host-encoded
              replication, recombination, and repair proteins and restriction enzymes
              participate in such exclusion? and  4) to what extent can one explain the
              larger differences in base sequences of genes than in amino acid sequences of
              orthologous and paralogous proteins from different organisms as consequences of
              the mutagenic potential of lateral transfer by homologous recombination?  The
              main strategy is to use phages and plasmids containing homologous, but diverged
              genes from different T-even phages and chimeras of these genes.  Effects of
              phage and host recombination and restriction enzymes on recombination will be
              tested on viability of the progeny and on formation, persistence or elimination
              of potential heteroduplex loops.  The latter will be monitored by Southern
              blotting of non-denatured DNA and by sequencing of packaged progeny DNA. 
              Understanding these recombination and exclusion mechanisms is relevant to
              interpretations of clades, phylogenetic trees and tempos of evolution.  It is
              also relevant for understanding 'errors' that can generate antibody diversity.
