Title       : Design of In Vivo Indicators for Cyclic GMP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2000     
File        : a9983097

Award Number: 9983097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang R. Dostmann dostmann@salus.med.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this project is to understand the spatial and temporal
              dynamics of the second messenger molecule, cGMP, in live cells. This project
              focuses on the design of novel in vivo cGMP indicators created by fusing
              wavelength mutations of green fluorescence protein (GFP) from the jellyfish,
              Aequorea victoria, to cGMP-binding fragments of a cGMP-dependent protein
              kinase.  Studies will take advantage of changes in fluorescence resonance
              energy transfer (FRET) between cyan and yellow GFP mutants (CFP and YFP) which
              are induced by conformational changes upon cGMP binding to the receptor portion
              of the hybrid-protein.  Preliminary results have demonstrated that FRET changes
              are directly proportional to the concentration of intracellular cGMP and can be
              used to probe the dynamic behavior of cGMP by non-invasive means.  Additional
              experiments will examine aspects of hybrid protein design that contribute to
              optimal cGMP-dependent FRET ratio changes.  Suitable fluorescent probes will
              then be tested by employing confocal fluorescence imaging techniques to examine
              the spatial and temporal changes in intracellular cGMP levels in living cells
              in response to physiological stimuli.  A collaboration will be undertaken to
              understand the role of cGMP in the regulation of vascular smooth muscle tone by
              nitric oxide (NO), which decreases tone by direct stimulation of cGMP
              production.  It is thought that cGMP causes relaxation through activation of
              cGMP-dependent kinase I, which is known to lower cytosolic calcium
              concentrations in these cells.   Studies will correlate changes in
              intracellular cGMP with various downstream physiological responses, i.e. local
              and global changes in calcium concentration, and cell relaxation. The in vivo
              cGMP-indicators which will be developed are the first of their kind and should
              provide the means to gain essential insights into various other physiological
              processes involving cGMP-mediated signaling in other cell systems.  The project
              also includes the purchase of accessories for a confocal scanning laser
              microscope which will be shared by several investigators with NSF funding at
              the University of Vermont.
