Title       : Stigma and Coping with Intergroup Threat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9983888

Award Number: 9983888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda N. Major major@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Prejudice and discrimination remain ongoing and important problems for their
              targets as well as for society in general. This research builds on the
              principal investigator's earlier work examining how members of stigmatized, or
              low status, groups cope with being a potential target of negative stereotypes,
              prejudice and discrimination. The past work is extended to examine how members
              of privileged, or high status, groups cope when they find themselves in a
              similar predicament. This research is guided by the assumption that these
              coping processes are influenced by motives to maintain personal and social
              self-esteem, as well as by motives to justify the status quo. It is
              hypothesized that the extent to which people believe existing status
              differences between groups are legitimate shapes how they cope with social
              rejection and other negative events experienced in intergroup encounters. It is
              further hypothesized that the impact of believing status differences are
              legitimate differs depending on the status of one's own group compared to other
              groups in a given context. These hypotheses are tested in a series of
              experiments examining how members of groups that are traditionally high in
              social status (e.g., men, European-Americans) versus traditionally low in
              social status (e.g., women, ethnic minorities) cope with threats to self-esteem
              in intergroup contexts. These experiments test the impact of group status and
              beliefs about the legitimacy of that status on the extent to which individuals:
              (1) attribute negative outcomes to discrimination based on their group
              membership; (2) selectively devalue domains in which their own group compares
              unfavorably relative to other groups; and (3) selectively compare their
              situations with members of their own group, rather than with members of other
              group. This research is important because it advances our understanding of
              intergroup conflict as well as of processes of coping and resilience among
              targets of prejudice.

