Title       : Digital Government: Criteria-Based Inference from Geospatial Data: Automating
               Government Decision Making for Genetic Food Security, Crop Improvement, and
               Global Germplasm Needs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9983507

Award Number: 9983507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley O. Parks bparks@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1387,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9983507
Parks, Bradley O.
University of Colorado Boulder

Digital
              Government:  Criteria-based Inference from Geospatial Data: Automating
              Government Decision Making for Genetic Food Security, Crop Improvement and
              Global Germplasm Needs

This award will support a planning effort for
              submission of a full proposal.  Government partners include primarily the
              National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (National Geophysical Data
              Center), the US Department of Agriculture (Agricultural Research Service, and
              several other agencies in supportive roles.

There is immediate need to
              prioritize the target government germplasm (seeds and rootstocks) acquisitions
              for crop improvement and to estimate distribution of germplasm diversity in
              landscapes.  These problems are complex and interdependent ones since the
              distribution of germplasm diversity must be inferred (modeled) from
              eco-geographical indicators such as temperature, precipitation, and soil type,
              accommodating anecdotal information about native distributions, without knowing
              how the relationships among these elements are controlled.  The objectives of
              the proposed work are to predict, based on ecological factors; when current
              germplasm collections are inadequate, how they should be augmented with new
              material, and where additional germplasm should be collected.  The scope of
              these problems is global since the gene pool from which germplasm may be
              sampled is not restricted to nations or continents.

An innovative approach
              is proposed to infer germplasm diversity from the extensive and expanding
              national resource of digital environmental data by applying multiple-criteria
              geospatial stratification techniques and geographic information system (GIS)
              technology to predict germplasm distributions in relation to environmental
              factors.  This approach will automate previously non-comparable, unsystematic,
              and subjective procedures to create digital government gene banks that are
              capable of becoming self-monitoring, more adaptable to changing conditions, and
              much more efficient.

