Title       : Pattern Formation and the Regulation of Morphogenesis During Drosophila
               Oogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a9983207

Award Number: 9983207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Celeste A. Berg berg@gs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pattern Formation and the Regulation of morphogensis during Drosophila
              Oogenesis

Unraveling the process by which multi-cellular organisms develop
              remains one of the major challenges in biology today. The studies proposed here
              examine the mechanism by which cells interpret positional information and
              coordinate cell migrations to generate shape and structure. Previous studies by
              other investigators in the field have focused mainly on the mechanics of cell
              movement, and most thoroughly in a few non-genetic systems such as frog
              development or tissue culture cell models. The work planned here focuses
              instead on the genetic regulatory hierarchies and cell signaling events that
              govern these cell biological forces. The proposed research uses the fruit fly
              Drosophila melanogaster as a model system to understand how cells coordinate
              their movements during development. Specifically, the work examines cell-cell
              interactions that direct the migrations of the follicle cells, the somatic
              cells that surround the oocyte, during their synthesis of two dorsal eggshell
              appendages required for respiration in the developing embryo. The advantages of
              this system pertain to the relatively simple nature of the tissue, the
              excellent culturing and imaging capabilities, and the outstanding genetic
              tools.

The objectives of this research are threefold.
(1) Determine the
              precise movements of the follicle cells using time-lapse confocal microscopy on
              cultured egg chambers. This analysis will assess the extent to which cell
              rearrangements and cell shape changes contribute to each phase of dorsal
              appendage synthesis. In addition, this approach will establish the relationship
              between a cell's fate, as determined by gene expressionmarkers, and its
              subsequent migratory behavior.
(2) Investigate how cells coordinate their
              movements by studying cell behaviors in mutants that exhibit aberrant eggshell
              structures. Patterning mutants will be used to disrupt cell fate in subsets of
              migrating cells, then ask how neighboring cells respond. In addition, the
              overall migratory behavior of cells will be assayed in morphogenesis mutants
              with defects at specific stages of dorsal appendage formation. Both approaches
              will provide insight into the cell-cell interaction, cell adhesion, and
              cytoskeletal properties that control cell movements.
(3) Examine the molecules
              that induce the cell movements and cell shape changes required for dorsal
              appendage formation.  The PI will use the sophisticated genetic tools available
              in Drosophila to disrupt signaling and cell adhesion molecules that have been
              implicated in regulating the initial phases of dorsal follicle cell migration.
              These studies will establish the conserved nature of thedevelopmental process,
              not only at the morphogenetic level but at the molecular level as well. 

The
              overall goal of the proposed research is to understand how populations of cells
              coordinate their movement to generate the complex shapes required to make a
              functional tissue or organ. The pattern forming and morphogenetic events
              studied here represent the kinds of processes that take place during all stages
              of animal development, from the lowly fruit fly to the complex human. The ease
              of genetic, molecular, and cell biological approaches makes this system ideal
              for characterizing the processes by which cells transmit, receive and interpret
              positional information and thereby direct the ordered process of development

