Title       : SBIR Phase II: Large Eddy Simulations (LES) of Gas-Particle Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a9983395

Award Number: 9983395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shivshankar Sundaram jls@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    256/726-4800

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,9147,9148,9163,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
              develop, validate and demonstrate Large Eddy Simulations (LES) for the
              prediction of gas-particle flow phenomena. The Phase I study has clearly
              demonstrated the feasibility of using a commercial CFD code to perform
              Gas-Particle Large Eddy Simulations in flows with simple geometry. Good
              predictions of particulate dispersion, deposition and agglomeration in
              isotropic and channel turbulent flows have been obtained. The Phase II study
              will refine the models and techniques developed in Phase I and extend them to
              simulate more complex flows, in practical geometries. The Phase II work will be
              focused on the following main areas: unstructured and mixed element (adaptive
              cartesian) grids (driven by the need for fast and accurate simulations; 
              adaptation and implementation of advanced sub-grid scale models and particle
              transport in these alternative grid topologies; implementation of enhanced
              particle sub-grid scale models for (a) fluid sub-grid scale (SGS) velocity (b)
              deposition and (c) agglomeration; extensive and systematic validation in
              channel, free shear and mixing layer flows; technology demonstration using a
              practical contaminant transport simulation.  A team of experienced
              investigators and strongly interested end-users of this capability (Aerodyne
              Research, PLG, Dura Pharmaceuticals) has been assembled.  The end-product of
              the Phase II effort will be an Integrated Large Eddy Simulation System for
              gas-particle flows (featuring advanced gridding, solver and visualization
              software). 

Gas-particle processes cannot usually be well-understood without
              a detailed consideration of the complex  and usually highly nonlinear
              interaction between the flow and the motion  of the particles. The developed
              Integrated Large Eddy Simulation System will foster a better fundamental
              understanding of dilute particulate turbulent flows in complex geometries. It
              will enable improved engineering design in a variety of fields such as air
              pollution control and chemical/bio-terrorism programs to
              chemical/pharmaceutical/semiconductor processing. The product developed at the
              end of Phase II will put a sophisticated physics simulator heretofor only
              avaialbe with academicians and that too in simple flow situations, in the hands
              of a trained industrial engineer enabling him to better understand and improve
              the processes of concern.

