Title       : IME4 gene: Putative Methyltransferase Coupling Nutrition to Meiotic Development
               in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9983555

Award Number: 9983555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Clancy mclancy@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim D. Karam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda E. Hyman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The IME4 gene of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes an activator of
              meiotic development, but the basis for its activity is obscure.  IME4 was
              originally identified by virtue of its interaction with the mating type
              pathway, and its function, as defined genetically, is to promote meiotic
              development.  Indeed, overexpression of IME4 overrides the normal requirements
              for the a1 and alpha2 regulatory molecules, permitting sporulation to occur in
              inappropriate cell types.  Homology to a human protein called MTA-70 suggests a
              surprising mode of action for the IME4 protein.  MTA-70 is believed to be the
              catalytic subunit of a nuclear mRNA methyltransferase complex, whose
              biochemical activity is the transfer of methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine
              (AdoMet) to a subset of adenosine bases in mammalian mRNAs.  The present study
              examines whether the Ime4p also binds AdoMet, and whether the conserved
              catalytic residues are essential for IME4 function in vivo.  In vivo labeling,
              HPLC analysis, and in vitro studies using transcription-competent nuclear
              extracts will determine whether adenosine base methylation occurs in yeast
              mRNAs, as this modification has not been observed previously in this organism. 
              Although the homology to the vertebrate enzyme suggests a role for Ime4p in an
              aspect of mRNA metabolism, many other possibilities are plausible. 
              Specifically, Ime4p could interact with tRNAs, rRNAs or snRNAs, all of which
              are known to contain methylated bases in yeast.  This research will employ 
              two- and three-hybrid systems to identify proteins and RNAs that interact with
              Ime4p, thereby distinguishing whether this protein is involved in mRNA
              metabolism as opposed to other RNA or even protein level functions.  Taken
              together with the methylase homology, genetic work suggests that Ime4p mediates
              an aspect of RNA metabolism that is particularly important to sporulating
              yeast, or one that is exploited in the regulation of this pathway.  Examination
              of genetic interactions with known nutritional or developmentally-responsive
              RNA pathways will determine whether IME4 is involved in any of these.  Detailed
              phenotypic analysis of ime4 mutant cells will pinpoint precisely the roles of
              the wild type protein in promoting sporulation.  Methylation is a ubiquitous
              feature of mammalian mRNAs, including viral RNAs, but its role is not known. 
              The very early time of its occurrence, before splicing, permits this
              modification to influence virtually every later aspect of mRNA function. 
              Hence, mRNA methylation could play a critical, but unappreciated role in gene
              expression.  The yeast system potentially offers experimental advantages to
              understanding this issue.
