Title       : Multidimensional Exploration of Linguistic Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a9983258

Award Number: 9983258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Bird sb@ldc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Liberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to foster a new mode of fundamental research in
linguistics,
              namely 'web-based exploration of linguistic field
data.''  The objectives are
              to develop tools for manipulating
linguistic databases; to store and
              disseminate large datasets using
the model; to exploit the tools and datasets
              in teaching and research;
and -- underlying all of the above -- to explore new
              methods for
representing and analyzing linguistic data.  The consequence of
              this
research will be increased accessibility, accountability, and
stability
              of empirical linguistic research.

The project will provide wide-ranging
              support for empirical linguistic
research, through the combination of
              traditional field methods with
new technologies for exploring and visualizing
              complex databases.  The
interlinked, heterogeneous, and multimodal aspects of
              the data will be
a key component, and the research will encompass data types
              including
lexicons, interlinear texts, field notes, paradigms, grammar
              sketches,
annotated recordings, annotated maps and photographs, folios,
              course
notes, and problem sets, as well as links between all of these.  A
              set
of collaborators have granted access to their field data for the
purposes
              of this project, and have agreed to road-test the new tools
in their ongoing
              fieldwork.  All of the primary data created by the
project will be published
              on the web site of the Linguistic Data
Consortium (LDC), for general public
              access, subject to the
appropriate permissions having been granted.  All tools
              and
documentation produced by the project will be freely available to
others.
