Title       : PECASE: Parallel Visualization and Interaction Techniques for Exploring Large
               Scale Volume Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a9983641

Award Number: 9983641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwan-Liu Ma ma@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              One of the best methods of presenting large scientific data sets to users is
              visualization. Over the past ten years, our ability to create useful
              visualizations has undergone a revolution due to advances in 3D graphics
              hardware and software technology. However, we still face endless challenges as
              the complexity and scale of the data, whether from physical experiments or
              computer simulation, continue to grow. In many cases, visualization of
              large-scale data sets is very expensive, sometimes even more expensive than the
              supercomputer simulation that produced the data in the first place. This
              project will perform a comprehensive study aimed at two questions that arise
              from this situation. First, can we use parallel supercomputers to generate data
              and for visualization calculations in an optimal fashion? Second, are there
              mechanisms and methodologies to enhance the productivity of scientists doing
              exploratory and production visualization? 

The project will develop a fully
              parallel visualization system to maximize the overall throughput of the system.
              This system will emphasize computing on clusters of PCs. Four major sub-themes
              of this part of the project will be parallel preprocessing algorithms to
              prepare data for visualization, parallel rendering algorithms to produce the
              graphics, parallel image compression and transport to efficiently manage the
              graphics, and application-controlled parallel I/O to store the data for
              visualization. The project will particularly focus on parallel feature-enhanced
              visualization algorithms and parallel subsetting of the visualized data.
              Complementing the research component of this project is an educational
              component, directed at undergraduate and graduate students, aimed at inspiring
              interest and fostering creativity through hands-on experiences. One aspect of
              this education is an applied visualization course to non-CS graduate students,
              which should foster greater interaction and cross-fertilization of ideas from
              the students' home departments.

