Title       : Plant-Plant Signaling in the Rhizosphere: the Role of Quinone Oxidoreductases in
               Host Perception by Parasitic Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9983053

Award Number: 9983053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Yoder jiyoder@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plants identify nearby plants by perceiving chemical signals released by roots
              into the soil.  Parasitic plants in the family Scrophulariaceae recognize
              quinone molecules released by the roots of host plants to trigger the
              development of haustoria, parasite-specific root organs that function in host
              attachment and invasion.  Haustorium induction and development is readily
              monitored in vitro by applying host root exudates or purified haustoria
              inducing factors (HIFs) onto roots of aseptic parasite seedlings.  Because
              haustorium development is rapid, highly synchronous and strictly dependent on
              exogenous HIFs, it is a fantastic system for investigating molecular mechanisms
              governing subterranean plant-plant interactions.
It is likely that a common
              redox reaction occurring between structurally diverse HIFs and a parasite
              receptor initiates the haustorium development signal pathway.  Two quinone
              oxidoreductases have been cloned from the parasitic plant Triphysaria that have
              properties consistent with them being directly involved in the perception and
              initial processing of the HIF 2,6-dimethoxybenzoquinone (DMBQ).  Based on
              sequence and structural homologies with well characterized proteins in
              microbes, fungi and vertebrates, TvQR1 and TvQR2 likely encode different NAD(P)
              dependent quinone oxidoreductases.  TvQR1 is homologous to a family of
              oxidoreductases that catalyze one-electron quinone reductions, yielding the
              semiquinone intermediate predicted to be critical in HIF signal transduction. 
              In contrast, TvQR2 is homologous to a detoxifying quinone oxidoreductase that
              catalyzes two electron reductions, thus bypassing the semiquinone intermediate.
               These experiments will test the hypothesis that TvQR1 and TvQR2 catalyze
              distinct reactions fulfilling different biological functions.
Both TvQR1 and
              TvQR2 are primary response genes transcriptionally activated in Triphysaria by
              DMBQ in the absence of de novo protein synthesis.  Promoter sequences
              responsible for DMBQ responsiveness will be identified by assaying reporter
              fusions in transgenic Arabidopsis.  Sequence comparisons of TvQR1 promoters in
              parasitic and non-parasitic plants will elucidate the mechanism of parasite
              specific responsiveness.  Because TvQR2 is predicted to cleanse the cells of
              oxidized quinones used by TvQR1 as HIF substrates, the relative levels of these
              two enzymes in parasite roots is predicted to determine HIF responsiveness. 
              Western blots probed with TvQR1 and TvQR2 specific antibodies will determine if
              protein levels reflect transcript abundance.  A comparison of protein levels
              and activities in DMBQ responsive and non-responsive lines will relate TvQR1
              and / or TvQR2 to specialized functions in parasitic plants.  By understanding
              the mechanisms that plants use to recognize and respond to other plants, it
              should be possible to engineer plants for optimal growth in the presence of
              weeds. 

