Title       : CAREER: Understanding and Improving Corrosion Minimization Using Surfactants and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9983945

Award Number: 9983945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Free mfree@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9983945
Free

This CAREER effort involves research and education in the area
              of corrosion mitigation through corrosion education and surfactant corrosion
              inhibitor research.  The approach is to: (1) Understand and improve the use of
              surfactants as corrosion inhibitors; (2) Quantitatively describe the role of
              adsorption density in corrosion inhibition by surfactants; (3) Determine the
              relationship between the nature of surface bonding and its role in corrosion
              inhibition; (4) Improve surfactant selection criteria for corrosion inhibitors
              on the basis of surfactant type, hydrocarbon chain length, functional group,
              and the application environment; and (5) Maximize corrosion mitigation training
              and learning opportunities for students through labs, demonstrations, science
              projects, and distance learning. The project research goals are achieved using
              a variety of state-of-the-art instruments to analyze mild steel corrosion in
              the presence of surfactant corrosion inhibitors. Adsorption density
              measurements are made using Fourier-Transform infrared spectrometer and quartz
              crystal microbalance tools. The effects of surfactant adsorption on corrosion
              inhibition are evaluated using potentiodynamic scanning, electrochemical
              impedance spectroscopy, and inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy. Light
              microscopy and scanning probe microscopy examine the role of surfactants in
              pitting corrosion inhibition. Important learning experiences are provided to
              students through laboratory exercises that are designed around identifying,
              understanding, and mitigating corrosion through group projects. Students learn
              about corrosion minimization through a new introductory web-based corrosion
              course that will be offered with interactive tutorials as part of this project.
              High school students are involved through corrosion monitoring projects and
              through presentations made at local schools with large minority populations and
              low educational advancement success. 
%%%
In the United States it is
              estimated that $30 billion could be saved on an annual basis through the use of
              economically viable corrosion mitigation technology. However, proper
              application of such technology is contingent upon education, training, and
              research. This project addresses corrosion minimization through integrated
              research and education.
***

