Title       : SBIR Phase II: Development of a Compact, Lightweight Millimeter-Wave Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9983471

Award Number: 9983471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose E. Velazco jvelazco@microwavetech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Microwave Technologies Inc
	      5716 Edgewater Oak Court
	      Burke, VA  22015    703/250-1440

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will involve the
              experimental study of a novel millimeter-wave source (MWS) that will provide
              short-wavelength radiation for numerous civilian and military applications. The
              MWS is based on novel synchronous interactions between a pencil electron beam
              and rotating wave fields. Our Phase I studies confirm that the MWS will offer
              order of magnitude improvements in the overall size and weight when compared to
              conventional millimeter-wave sources which will make these new devices less
              complex, more affordable, and readily available for a diversity of
              applications. Some of the applications for these devices include
              high-resolution radar, satellite telecommunications systems, power beaming, and
              electron cyclotron resonance heating of fusion plasmas. Also, due to the fact
              that the MWS does not require a focusing magnetic field, it should be suitable
              for airborne and mobile applications, as well as other commercial applications
              where size, weight, and efficiency are critical. Detailed experimental analysis
              of this concept is proposed during Phase II in order to evaluate key issues
              such as beam transport, maximum output power, efficiency and gain. 

Once
              successfully developed, the MWS will be the basis for a new generation of
              millimeter-wave sources capable of producing high-power ultrahigh frequency
              radiation with high efficiency in a very compact and lightweight package.

