Title       : CAREER: Algorithms for Organizing and Scheduling Distributed Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9983901

Award Number: 9983901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajmohan Rajaraman rraj@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Algorithms for Organizing and Scheduling Distributed Resources

This
              project encompasses several basic algorithmic problems concerning the
              organization and scheduling of shared resources in distributed environments. 
              Over the course of this project, problems applying to a number of different
              environments will be studied, including wide-area networks, asymmetric
              communication channels, broadcast media, and wireless networks.  
An important
              component of this project is the study of replication, which is an effective
              paradigm in the design of high-performance scalable information systems.  Two
              major goals of this project are (i) the design of a provably efficient
              algorithm for coordinated placement of replicated objects, and (ii) the design
              of a distributed service for directing access requests to appropriately chosen
              servers.
Once an access request is assigned to a server, the end-to-end
              performance observed by the request critically depends on the scheduling policy
              of the server and the allocation of network resources for the delivery of data
              from the server to the client.  This project also explores competitive online
              algorithms for server scheduling in unicast and broadcast environments, and the
              approximability of certain NP-hard optimization problems arising in unicast and
              multicast routing.
The final research component of this project focuses on two
              important aspects related to resource management in wireless networks:
              contention and mobility.  Contention resolution protocols for uplink scheduling
              in cellular networks and the design of basic control structures in mobile
              ad-hoc networks will be studied.
The integrated educational goals of this
              project include (i) experimental projects in cooperative caching and
              distributed directory services that will provide research experience for
              undergraduate students, (ii) the development of a new undergraduate course on
              the organization, representation, maintenance, and retrieval of data in diverse
              computing models, and (iii) the development of an advanced graduate course on
              algorithmic issues in mobile computing.
