Title       : Accuracy, Experience and Empathy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9983890

Award Number: 9983890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30698              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara D. Hodges sdhodges@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An important part of human social relationships is the ability to experience
              empathy. Although the term "empathy" has been applied to a variety of concepts,
              a shared element of these concepts is that they all involve people seeking to
              bridge the gap between their own and another person's subjective experience.
              One clear indication of having bridged this gap between self and other is to
              possess an accurate representation of the other person's experience -- to know
              what the other person is thinking and feeling. Achieving this kind of empathic
              accuracy should be easier if the experiences of the two people are similar.
              Indeed, shared experience has been long believed to be an important facilitator
              of empathy. Yet there is little evidence addressing how shared experience
              affects empathic accuracy and other empathic outcomes, such as the degree of
              concern one person expresses for another, or how understood a target of empathy
              feels. Having shared an experience could provide the kind of knowledge that is
              key to better empathic accuracy. But if the two experiences are only
              superficially similar, then using one's own experience to comprehend another
              person's experience could actually provide misleading information that could
              impede understanding. Shared experience may affect empathy in other ways,
              potentially motivating empathic perceivers to pay more attention to targets of
              empathy who have shared their experiences, or even affecting the behavior of
              the targets, who may respond more positively or reveal more when they believe
              they are interacting with someone who has shared their experience.

The
              primary goal of this project is to examine the role of shared experience in
              understanding the thoughts and feelings of others, investigating the
              circumstances under which shared experience improves empathic performance
              (especially empathic accuracy) and the mechanisms by which it operates. A more
              general goal is to examine the relationship between empathic accuracy and other
              variables associated with empathy, including empathic concern and personal
              distress felt by empathic perceivers, targets' perceptions of how understood
              they feel, and outcomes that connect target and perceiver (such as perceived
              similarity or rapport).  By drawing from a diverse population of people, and
              studying the experiences they share on a number of dimensions, it will be
              possible to gain a deeper and more comprehensive understanding of empathy in
              natural contexts. Empathy is a key part of social life, and better
              understanding of this important psychological construct will produce insight
              into how positive social relationships develop and are sustained.

