Title       : Host Cell Control of Yeast Ty3 Element Reverse Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a9983116

Award Number: 9983116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Menees meneest@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Retroelements are mobile DNA elements found integrated in the genomes of all
              eukaryotes and many prokaryotes. The hallmark of retroelements is the copying
              of an RNA intermediate into DNA by the enzyme reverse transcriptase (RT).
              Reverse transcription by retroelement RT's has also been a major force in the
              shaping of eukaryotic genomes. The cDNA's produced from retroelement and
              cellular mRNA's by reverse transcription insert into host cell chromosomes and
              constitute a significant fraction of many genomes, creating structural and
              functional consequences. Two related subgroups of retroelements, widespread in
              eukaryotes, are retroviruses and the long terminal repeat (LTR)
              retrotransposons. Because of their limited coding capacity, retroviruses and
              the LTR retrotransposons depend on their hosts to perform most of the functions
              necessary for their propagation. Two areas are under investigation that concern
              host cell control of reverse transcription in the Ty3 LTR retrotransposon of
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae. First, it has been previously shown that during the
              G1 phase of the cell cycle, the Ty3 transposition is blocked at reverse
              transcription. Although Ty3 viruslike particles are produced at equivalent
              levels in dividing cells and cells arrested in G1, the RT enzyme is inactive in
              arrested cells. The enzyme becomes active when arrested cells are returned to a
              dividing state. These data strongly suggest that host factors regulate the
              activity of Ty3 reverse transcriptase in the cell cycle, which represents a
              novel cellular control of retroelements. Second, in a genome-wide screen, two
              mutants that are deficient for Ty3 reverse transcription have been identified.
              These mutants have been named trt1 and trt2, for Ty3 reverse transcription. RT
              enzyme isolated from these mutants has reduced activity, suggesting that the
              proteins encoded by TRT1 and TRT2 directly or indirectly activate the Ty3 RT
              enzyme. Two goals will be pursued. Goal 1 will be to determine how host genes
              modulate cell cycle control of Ty3 RT activity. The objectives will be to
              determine whether Ty3 RT is positively or negatively regulated in the cell
              cycle, to determine if Ty3 RT is physically modified in response to cell cycle
              regulation, and to identify host genes that play roles in cell cycle regulation
              of Ty3 RT activity. In vitro Ty3 RT enzyme assays will be used to assay the
              mode of regulation, while physical probes will be used to assess Ty3 RT's from
              dividing and arrested cells for differences. A genetic screen will be used to
              identify host genes involved in the cell cycle regulation of Ty3 RT activity.
              Goal 2 will be to identify host genes that activate Ty3 reverse transcription
              and establish their relationship to each other and to Ty3 RT. The objectives
              will be to clone the wild-type TRT1 and TRT2 genes, to study the effects of the
              TRT1 and TRT2 gene products in detail, and to saturate the screen for mutants
              that exhibit decreased Ty3 reverse transcription. Genetic screens will be used
              both to isolate the TRT1 and TRT2 genes as well as to isolate additional
              mutants deficient for Ty3 reverse transcription. Molecular genetic
              manipulations will then be used to analyze the TRT1 and TRT2 genes.
              Understanding how reverse transcription is controlled is key to understanding
              the forces and counterforces that have shaped the genomes of eukaryotes.
              Although many different aspects of retroelement biology contribute to their
              mobility, control of reverse transcription is an underexplored area. Moreover,
              focusing on control of one aspect of the Ty3 life cycle will suggest the extent
              to which other aspects of the life cycle may be controlled. Understanding what
              controls Ty3 reverse transcription may lead to ways of controlling the mobility
              of other retroelements, including retroviruses, with potential therapeutic
              consequences. It is even reasonable to imagine that mechanisms that regulate
              Ty3 reverse transcription could serve as models for the control of eukaryotic
              DNA replication. Finally, the reverse transcriptase enzyme has been harnessed
              as a tool for use by molecular biologists. Understanding how this enzyme is
              controlled within the cell can lead to its improved utility. 
