Title       : SBIR Phase II: Increased Freezing Tolerance in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9983311

Award Number: 9983311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Z. Zhang jzhang@mendelbio.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mendel Biotech Inc
	      21375 Cabot Boulevard
	      Hayward, CA  94545    510/259-6129

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will establish the
              feasibility of improving the freezing tolerance of canola and wheat plants. 
              Phase I research has demonstrated that Arabidopsis plants show dramatic
              improvements in freezing tolerance when expressing the CBF gene. However,
              constitutive expression of the CBF gene was found to be detrimental to plant
              growth.  This Phase II research will determine whether inducible promoters
              provide freezing tolerance with normal plant growth. Our Phase I and other
              published work has indicated this approach is very promising.  The project goal
              is to produce enhanced freezing tolerant canola plants, with commercially
              efficacious growth levels, and provide the molecular biology tools to similarly
              engineer wheat plants.  Canola with improved winter hardiness would be a new
              high value crop for the US with a value of at least $300 M, as this amount of
              canola oil is imported annually, and provide a new winter crop rotation system.
               The project results will also lead to improved winter hardiness in wheat that
              would improve wheat yields by $940 M. Applications in additional crops such as
              corn (1995 frost losses of more than $1 Billion), barley, soy, strawberries,
              and eucalyptus will likely follow once demonstrated in canola. Mendel has
              targeted canola and winter wheat for the initial applications of the
              WeatherGard TM enhanced freezing tolerance technology.  Spring canola with
              increased winter hardiness will be a new winter crop suitable for the southern
              US.  Existing spring canola varieties don' t survive the winters well enough.
              WeatherGard TM winter canola will have increased winter hardiness that will
              allow it to be grown in the midwest. Existing winter canola varieties don' t
              survive midwestern winters very well.  One estimate of the value of the trait
              is that up to 50% of the winter wheat acres or 24 M acres would switch to
              canola due to its higher profitability and the advantages of crop rotation.
              Currently wheat is the only widely grown winter crop, so farmers would rotate
              it with winter canola.  The higher oil and protein content of canola creates a
              higher per bushel value than wheat, translating to a $30/acre increase in value
              when growing canola.  On 24 M acres this higher value crop would create $720 M
              of new value for farmers.  Additional value will be derived from the increased
              productivity from better crop rotations and the double cropping potential of
              canola harvested in May.  These latter values are hard to estimate in advance
              but clearly are very large.  At a minimum valuation, the US imports $300 M of
              canola oil annually, so the US canola crop should create at least that much
              value.  Additionally canola is an important crop worldwide (rapeseed) so export
              opportunities exist as well.

The expected economic benefits of winter wheat
              are  to be in excess of $940 M dollars of extra yield for the US farm economy
              annually. This assumes that the northern portion of the midwest, particularly
              North Dakota and South Dakota, that currently can only grow spring wheat, could
              grow the new variety as a winter wheat with an known 25% yield advantage which
              represents $500 M dollars of added value.  The remaining 80% of the US wheat
              market should also benefit from increased winter hardiness as sudden frosts
              after warm spells, very cold freezing temperatures and winter desiccation
              (essentially drought) are all common problems experienced to various amounts
              every winter.  Improved winter hardiness is estimated to improve winter wheat
              yields by 10% for an increase in value of $440 M.  Thus the combined canola and
              wheat projects could add over $1.2 to $1.6 billion annually to the US farm
              economy.

