Title       : Genetic Recombination in Brome Mosaic Virus: The Role of Intergenic Region in
               Junction Site Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9983033

Award Number: 9983033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jozef J. Bujarski jozef@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT

The long-term goal of this project is to understand the
              mechanism(s) of genetic recombination in RNA viruses.  By using brome mosaic
              bromovirus (BMV) as a model RNA virus, mechanistic differences between
              homologous and nonhomologous events at the RNA and protein levels have been
              previously reported.  These studies have suggested a copy choice mechanism,
              where the BMV replicase complex has changed among the RNA templates during RNA
              replication. To define the role of signal sequences during the junction sites
              selection and thus to determine the conditions leading to the efficient
              recombination hot spots, this project focuses on the multifunctional intergenic
              region in BMV RNA3.  Frequent homologous exchanges between molecules of BMV
              RNA3 within the intergenic hot spot have been recently confirmed
              experimentally. One goal of this project is to map the recombinationally active
              sequences inside the intergenic region, by using molecular genetics approaches.
               Its second goal is to determine how these sequences relate to each other in
              order to direct the junction sites efficiently. Specific aims to achieve the
              above research goals include studies of the role of a subgenomic promoter in
              recombination, including 1) the core region; 2) the polyA tract; 3) enhancing
              sequences; and 4) secondary structures. 
This novel experimental approach will
              help us obtain new data regarding the mechanism(s) of homologous RNA
              recombination. This, in turn, will provide information concerning the control
              of recombination activities in RNA viruses. The results of this model research
              will be applicable to a variety of RNA viruses that utilize intergenic
              (subgenomic) promoter sequences. 


