Title       : CAREER: Novel Excitations in Unconventional Ordered Phases of Correlated
               Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a9983731

Award Number: 9983731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tin-Lun (Jason) Ho   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yong Baek Kim  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER grant goes to young member of the faculty at the Ohio State
              University. The PI will integrate theoretical research in the properties of
              strongly correlated materials with innovative education activities at all
              levels.  He is planning to develop a new course on recent developments in
              condensed matter physics.  There are also plans to consider an interactive web
              site as a bulletin board for current problems to facilitate information
              exchange between students and more experienced researchers.  In research, he
              plans to study in detail two classes of materials, the doped Lanthanum
              Manganates also known as the CMR (colossal magnetoresistance) compounds and
              Strontium Ruthenates, a compound which is a superconductor with several unusual
              characteristics.  There are reasons to believe that the electron pairing state
              in the latter compound is with a finite angular momentum.  The PI, in a
              collaboration involving both theory and experiments, plans to search for a
              definitive answer to the various puzzles.
%%%
This CAREER grant to a young
              faculty member at the Ohio State University is awarded to support cutting-edge
              frontier research and innovation in education at several levels.  In the search
              for better materials suitable for magnetic recording or magnetic-memory
              industry, a promising avenue is believed to be the materials widely known as
              CMR (colossal magnetoresistance) materials.  The PI plans to carry out a
              theoretical study of doped Lanthanum Manganates to better understand their CMR
              properties.  He also has plans to conduct a theoretical study of a
              superconductor (Strontium Ruthenate) which has several anomalous
              characteristics.
*** 

