Title       : CAREER: Robust Optimization and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9983874

Award Number: 9983874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurent El Ghaoui elghaoui@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Most models used in engineering are prone to errors: poor measurement of
              physical
parameters, complexity of phenomena at hand making "exact" models too
              hard to handle,
etc. These uncertainties are now an important limiting factor
              in the use of optimization,
which by nature tends to finely tune solutions to
              problem data.
I propose a general framework for decision problems with
              uncertainty, based on a robust
optimization approach. In this framework,
              uncertainty on problem data is treated as 
deterministic, unknown-but-bounded.
              A robust solution is one which tolerates changes in the
problem data, up to
              the given bound. Such a solution is too hard to compute in general,
              but
relaxation techniques based on convex optimization can be devised to
              approximate the 
problem in an exhaustive manner. An efficient trade-off
              between computer effort and accuracy
is obtained by finely exploiting the
              uncertainty structure in the relaxation process.
The idea of robustness is
              well-known in the area of feedback control systems analysis
and design, where
              I and others have developed very effective relaxation methods based on
Linear
              Matrix Inequalities and related convex optimization. Obviously, robust
              optimization 
is relevant far beyond feedback control, for example to the
              combinatorial optimization
problems with uncertain data arising in
              communications network design. This opens new
avenues of research where
              seemingly very different problems are analyzed and solved in a
unified
              framework.
My proposal centers around theory and algorithms for robust
              optimization: convex 
optmization relaxations, large-scale problems,
              accuracy/complexity trade-offs, software. A
specific target of this research
              is the development ofvarious ellipsoidal approximation tools,
with
              applications to data fitting and estimation, simulation, and control of systems
              with
structured uncertainty. In addition, I seek to apply these techniques to
              several important
design problems in engineering, including timing analysis of
              RC circuits,  filter and antenna
array design, communications network design,
              and others.
In addition to robust optimization tools and engineering
              applications, I plan to study sev-
eral important problems in finance and
              management under the viewpoint of robustness and
worst-case risk-notions that
              begin to stir great interest in the community. I intend to develop fast and
              efficient robust optimization tools that are specific to finance and
              management
issues, based on ellipsoidal techniques for worst-case simulation
              and control.
My education plans aims at providing a solid theoretical and
              practical basis for our
students in the area of optimization, emphasizing the
              crucial issues of uncertainty and 
robustness. This goal will be implemented
              by course development intwo subjects: an advanced
course in robust
              optimization, and a basic graduate course in convex optimization. An
              
important aspect of this plan is the development of user-friendly robust
              optimization software
tools that complement those I have developed in the past
              for convex optimization.

