Title       : Mathematics Research and Education at the University of Illinois at
               Urbana-Champaign
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9983160

Award Number: 9983160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3620066            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Rosenblatt jrsnbltt@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E G. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. D'Angelo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Weichsel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Rosenblatt

The main goal of the VIGRE program at the University of
              Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) is to advance the mathematics enterprise
              through innovative, integrated activities in teaching and research. The
              Department of Mathematics is one of the largest and most active mathematics
              departments in the world.  The University's strength, particularly in
              engineering and the sciences, creates a huge demand for mathematics courses;
              the Department of Mathematics teaches mathematics to about 10,000 undergraduate
              students each year, and has 200 students enrolled in its graduate
              programs.
The VIGRE program at UIUC has three components:
strengthening the
              graduate program through curricular reform and instructional innovation
              improving the undergraduate program through the introduction of new research
              and teaching opportunities in seminars and  courses expanding the postdoctoral
              program in correlation with the faculty's research interests, and providing the
              postdoctoral associates with training in teaching and research.  

Moreover,
              graduate students, undergraduate students, and postdoctoral associates are
              linked with faculty in different types of peer groups to facilitate
              communication, to promote professional development, and to vertically integrate
              our activities.

In graduate education, innovative new courses introduce the
              graduate students to the research of the faculty and postdoctoral associates. 
              Graduate students will run their own seminars, giving them autonomy in their
              mathematical studies.  VIGRE fellowships give the graduate students independent
              study time and allow them to mature more rapidly in their chosen mathematical
              specialties.  

Some of these fellowships are specifically designed to foster
              interdisciplinary research activities.  At the same time, the faculty members
              give graduate students supervised teaching experiences that prepare them for
              the classroom environment.

In undergraduate experiences, special survey
              courses provide new insights into the role of mathematics in the many
              disciplines represented at the UIUC campus.  Research experiences for
              undergraduates give the undergraduate students a clear picture of the nature of
              mathematical research and of its role in interdisciplinary studies.  Special
              teacher training experiences with faculty mentors help undergraduate students
              to develop their classroom instructional skills.

The postdoctoral positions
              supported by VIGRE will enable UIUC to integrate recent Ph.D.s into the
              research and instructional activities of the Department of Mathematics.  The
              Department provides the VIGRE postdoctoral associates teaching opportunities at
              both the graduate and the undergraduate level.  Faculty members also mentor the
              VIGRE postdoctoral associates in their own research areas.   

Over all of
              the three professional levels, there is a mentoring structure that involves the
              regular faculty with graduate students, undergraduate students, and
              postdoctoral students.  There are two types of mentoring peer groups formed,
              Across Level Peers groups (ALPs) and Research Among Peers groups (RAPs).  The
              ALPs consist of undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral
              students and faculty members; ALPs run independently and develop their own
              group seminar and discussion agendas.  The RAPs include advanced graduate
              students, postdoctoral associates and faculty members with specific
              mathematical interests in common; RAPs also run autonomously and plan their own
              seminar and research activities.  
Funding for this activity was provided by
              the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office for Multidisciplinary
              Activity.

