Title       : Digital Government: Collaborative Research: Quality Graphics for Federal
               Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9983451

Award Number: 9983451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. MacEachren maceachren@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia A. Brewer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1706      DIGITAL GOVERNMENT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1387,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9983451
MacEachren, Alan M.
Pennsylvania State University

Digital
              Government:  Collaborative Research: Quality Graphics for Federal Statistical
              Summaries

The Federal government distributes a vast quantity of statistical
              summaries in printed and electronic form.  The full wealth of information that
              might be derived from these summaries is not being realized because limited
              attention is paid to disseminating summaries in understandable forms.  This
              research will develop and assess quality graphics for federal statistical
              summaries.  The development and assessment process will consider perceptual and
              cognitive factors in reading, interacting with and interpreting statistical
              graphs, maps and metadata representatives.  The purposes of the quality
              graphics include exploration by agency users evaluating data quality and
              looking for emergent trends, decision making by public policy makers and
              communication of statistical summaries to the public.  The proposed research
              addresses four topic areas: converting tables to graphs, representing metadata,
              interacting with both graphs and maps, and conveying multivariate spatial and
              temporal relationships.  The research features use of Web-based "middleware"
              components to provide rapid development of graphics for usability testing.  The
              featured middleware is a Java Graphics Component Library (GPL).  A long history
              of research has recently culminated in a rigorous graph algebra that is the
              foundation for the library.  The library also benefits from the collective
              intellectual effort being poured into Java.  Principles of human perception and
              cognition will be used to guide the construction of statistical graphics, and
              usability tests will help to refine those principles in the context of federal
              statistical summaries.  The research team has been carefully selected to bring
              together outstanding and compatible investigators who will provide expertise in
              statistical graphics, cartography, human perception and cognition, and software
              development and is composed of university, industrial and federal agency
              personnel.

