Title       : CAREER: Investigating the Sources of the X-ray Background with Chandra and the
               Hobby-Eberly Telescope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  2000     
File        : a9983783

Award Number: 9983783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330356             (Estimated)
Investigator: William N. Brandt niel@astro.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9983783
Brandt 
Surveys of the extragalactic X-ray background are about to
              be revolutionized by the combi-nation of the data from the satellites Chandra,
              XMM, and large optical telescopes.   Research will be carried out at the
              forefront of this revolution in available data that will reveal the nature and
              evolution of the sources that create the bulk of the X-ray background. This
              research effort will exploit two of Pennsylvania State's cornerstone projects:
              the ACIS CCD camera on Chandra and the 8-m class Hobby-Eberly Telescope (30%
              owned by Penn State).  Shortly after its launch, Chandra will make a long (237
              ks) observation of the Hubble Deep Field and the area of sky surrounding it. 
              This observation is part of the Pennsylvania State guaranteed time program, and
              it will probe the 2-10 keV Universe ~30 times deeper than ever before.  The
              planned observations will make it possible to identify and study the ~150-200
              detected X-ray sources using the Hobby-Eberly Telescope and publicly available
              multiwavelength data.  The Hobby-Eberly Telescope is the ideal instrument for
              this project since it is queue scheduled and tailored for spectroscopic survey
              work.  The specific science goals are (1) to discover the nature of the sources
              that create the 2-10 keV X-ray background; (2) to determine the active galaxy
              content of the Hubble Deep Field area; (3) to examine the dependence of QSO
              X-ray spectral shapes and variability on redshift; and (4) to perform
              cross-correlation analyses to study X-ray sources that are too faint to be
              individ-ually detected.  This deep survey work will be extended by a
              moderate-depth survey over ~ one-half square degrees of sky using proprietary
              and archival Chandra and XMM data.  This moderate-depth survey will exploit the
              power of the Hobby-Eberly Telescope, and the data will be used to understand
              the X-ray evolution of active galaxies over most of the age of the Universe. 
              In particular, the data will be used to investigate recent claims of QSO
              density evolution.

A research group will be built up that will have as an
              activity the teaching to students the skills needed to make their own
              astronomical discoveries.  The group will include some of our superb
              Pennsylvania State undergraduate students in the research projects.  The
              students will concentrate on well-defined projects such as multiwavelength
              source matching and variability studies.  Their hands-on experiences will
help
              them make the critical transition between teacher-led learning and self-driven
              research activities.
Furthermore, there will be efforts to increase the study
              of astronomy in the Pennsylvania Junior Academy
of Science (PJAS).  Each year
              ~6500 junior and senior high-school students from across
Pennsylvania
              participate in a PJAS research award competition.  However, at present few
              students
choose to pursue astronomy projects because they are not aware of the
              appropriate research
topics or the astronomy resources available to them.  In
              addition, no dedicated astronomy
awards are presently offered by the PJAS.  
              The PJAS students and supervisors will be given help to pursue
suitable
              astronomy research projects via both direct communication and access to a
              dedicated World
Wide Web site.   PJAS astronomy awards will be established for
              students in grades 7-8
and 9-12.  The information obtained by judging PJAS
              astronomy projects and discussing the projects with the students and teachers
              will be used to remain aware of the needs of PJAS students and supervisors.  
              Discussions with junior and senior high-school teachers attending the
              Pennsylvania State Inservice Workshops in Astronomy (PSIWA) have indicated a
              strong interest in PJAS astronomy projects, and the PSIWA will be used as a
              vehicle to catalyze the PJAS astronomy outreach program.
***
