Title       : SBIR Phase II: Development of High-Tc Superconducting Quantum Interference
               Device (SQUID) Magnetometers for Unshielded Operation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9983502

Award Number: 9983502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. DiIorio markd@magnes.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Magnesensors, Inc. (MSI)
	      9717-A Pacific Heights Boulevard
	      San Diego, CA  92121    619/458-5752

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is aimed at developing
              an ultra-sensitive magnetic sensor technology that is capable of operation in
              an unshielded environment. These compact sensors will be based on
              superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) that are fabricated from
              high temperature (high-Tc ) superconducting materials. A collaborative effort
              between MagneSensors and U.C. Berkeley will employ novel design and materials
              processing solutions to produce high-Tc SQUIDs operating in ambient fields with
              an unprecedented level of sensitivity. The program will test the developed
              sensors on real-world applications at both low and high frequencies to
              demonstrate operation in the presence of large background magnetic field
              interference. This new enabling technology seeks to overcome the limitations in
              sensitivity, bandwidth, size, and spatial resolution, which restrict the more
              widespread application of present conventional magnetic field sensors. The
              eventual goal is the development of a low-cost, portable system with much
              greater sensitivity than is available with any other instrumentation. 

This
              technology will enable the development of an entirely new generation of
              instrumentation that will find use in a wide variety of applications. Such
              applications include non-destructive evaluation of cracks and corrosion in
              aircraft, inspection of integrated circuits, homogeneous immunoassays and DNA
              probes using magnetic labels, geophysical surveying, environmental monitoring,
              detection of unexploded ordnance, diagnosis of intestinal ischemia, and
              screening for cardiac arrhythmias The potential market size for some of the
              applications reaches over $1 billion.

