Title       : CAREER: Reactivity of Green Rust Compounds in Natural and Engineered Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9983719

Award Number: 9983719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle M. Scherer michelle-scherer@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9983719  Scherer  It is estimated that there are between 300,000 and 400,000
              sites in the USA highly contaminated with a wide variety of toxic chemicals. 
              Conventional cleanup practices have proved relatively ineffective and
              prohibitively costly, spurring a paradigm shift towards in situ cleanup
              technologies that rely on natural processes that act with little or no human
              intervention to reduce the mass, toxicity or mobility of contaminants in soil
              or groundwater.  Recently the potential role of iron mineral surfaces in these
              systems has been recognized.  Specifically, green rusts (a group of reduced
              iron compounds) has been shown to degrade a wide variety of priority pollutants
              and may be contributing to the degradation of pollutants in natural and
              engineered systems.  The goal of this research project is to improve the
              assessment and performance of in situ remediation technologies by evaluating
              the potential role of green rusts.  This will be accomplished by: (1)
              quantifying the reactivity of green rusts with a series of environmental
              contaminants, (2) investigating the mechanism by which green rusts transform
              contaminants and (3) determining the prevalence of green rusts in soil and
              groundwater.  The prevalence and reactivity of green rusts will be evaluated
              using a combination of indirect (batch and column reactors) and direct
              (electrochemical and spectroscopic) methods.  The kinetic data derived from
              this work will provide the first set of rate coefficients for reduction of
              these contaminants by green rusts.  A number of subsurface environments will be
              sampled and analyzed and the oxides that form in column experiments will be
              characterized.  The insights derived from these investigations will provide an
              improved basis for predicting the natural attenuation of contaminants and
              assessing the significance of green rusts in the performance of iron-based
              remediation technologies.
The multifaceted nature of this research provides an
              excellent environment to introduce undergraduate students to the field of
              Environmental Engineering.  A pilot program involving Undergraduate Women in
              Environmental Engineering Research will be launched to improve the retention,
              recruitment and advancement of women in engineering.  By exposing women
              undergraduates to an active research environment and providing female graduate
              student and faculty role models, the PI hopes to retain and recruit bright,
              intellectually capable women in a field in which they are currently
              under-represented. ***


