Title       : CAREER: Structural and Mechanistic Studies of Phosphoryl Group Transfer
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a9983447

Award Number: 9983447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnon Lavie Lavie@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9983447
Lavie
Phosphorylated nucleotides play a critical role in many
              biological processes, such as signal transduction, energy storage and
              metabolism, and the maintenance of the genetic code, to name only a few. The
              enzymes that catalyze the synthesis of these important molecules are called
              nucleoside kinases (NKs) or nucleoside monophosphate kinases (NMPKs) depending
              if they catalyze the addition of the first or the second phosphoryl group to a
              nucleoside (a nucleoside is the unphosphorylated form of a nucleotide that can
              have one, two, or three phosphoryl groups attached to it through the
              5'-hydroxyl sugar moiety). In such a phosphoryl transfer reaction, a phosphoryl
              donor, usually adenosine triphosphate (ATP) transfers its phosphoryl moiety to
              an acceptor nucleoside or nucleotide. Despite the great importance of this
              reaction, the enzymatic mechanism is still disputed. Additionally, significant
              information is lacking about the enzymes that are responsible for this
              reaction. It is the aim of this project to increase our understanding at the
              molecular level about how NKs and NMPKs function and the reaction they
              catalyze.To this aim, we will focus on a representative from each class: the NK
              herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase (HSV1-tk), and the NMPK
              thymidylate kinase (TMPK). Our strategy is to visualize, through the technique
              of X-ray crystallography, the various states that occur along the reaction
              pathway. That means being able to form stable protein crystals of the ground
              states of both the forward and backward directions (i.e. in the presence of
              both substrates or both products), and of the transition state. This will be
              achieved by the utilization of substrate analogs that trap the enzyme in the
              desired state, and by using the inorganic molecule aluminum fluoride to mimic a
              transferred phosphoryl group.
The above enzymes have been chosen for this
              study due to the following two main reasons. One, there are two types of TMPKs,
              with catalytic residues originating from different regions of the enzyme. The
              comparison between the two types will help to reveal the exact function of
              these residues, and aid in differentiating between the associative and
              dissociative mechanisms of phosphoryl transfer. Two, HSV1-tk has both NK and
              NMPK activity. Understanding how this enzyme achieves this dual function is
              very important and will also shed light on the catalytic mechanism.

