Title       : NEUTRAL PRODUCTS FROM IONIC REACTIONS IN THE GAS PHASE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9983610

Award Number: 9983610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Morton morton@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              University of California at Riverside.   He uses three experimental techniques
              to study organic reactions in the gas phase: collection of the neutral reaction
              products from a specially designed Electron Bombardment Flow reactor which
              produces gaseous ions, transmutation of C-bonded tritium  to give carbonium
              ions and 3He, and mass spectroscopy.   Five types of experiments illustrate the
              scope of the chemistry: cyclization of omega-alkenyl cations, rearrangements of
              hydroxylated carbocations, reduction of gaseous carbonyl compounds promoted by
              trimethylsilyl cations, production of alkyl cations via the deposition of T+
              onto ether oxygens, and changes in the neutral tritiated products on going from
              a high pressure gas to a supercritical fluid. 

Dr. Morton's work uses a
              unique Electron Bombardment Flow reactor in which an electron beam is passed
              down the center of a low pressure reaction vessel enclosed in a solenoid
              electromagnet.   With it, he is able to trap and analyze the neutral
              (uncharged) molecular products of gas phase reactions, as well as the charged
              particles produced by electron collisions.   Charged particles can also be
              produced by beta-decay of tritiated molecules.   With these methods, Dr. Morton
              is able to study the details of some important types of organic reactions, and
              to develop new instrumental approaches for analyzing the structures of neutrals
              from labeled reactants and their isotopic distributions.
