Title       : Bacterial DNA Methyltransferases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9983125

Award Number: 9983125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert O. Reich reich@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9983125
Reich
Enzymes that alter the structure of DNA perform functions that
              are essential for life. DNA methyltransferases expand the information content
              of DNA by modifying specific adenines and cytosines. DNA methylation is the
              most common form of epigenetic control of gene expression and occurs in
              organisms ranging from bacteria to man.  This is an essential modification
              whose mechanism is not completely understood.  This project addresses this
              topic using bacterial enzymes in an attempt to understand the molecular basis
              of sequence-specific DNA modification. DNA methylases bend the DNA and flip out
              their target bases prior to catalysis. This project builds on recent
              discoveries funded by NSF and conducted in this PI's laboratory, that allow the
              tracking of both DNA bending and base flipping in real time. This research
              area, the study of conformational mechanisms of DNA modifying enzymes, is only
              feasible through the use of several kinetic and spectroscopic methods pioneered
              by the PI and in conjunction with collaborators. Understanding the underlying
              mechanisms of such conformational changes is critical if we are to appreciate
              how such enzymes discriminate among DNA sequences, and carry out their
              particular chemistries. Most importantly, other methods such as x-ray
              crystallography do not provide the necessary quantitative and functional
              insights since they cannot provide dynamic information. This information is
              clearly important to gain an understanding of conformational transitions to
              enzyme specificity.  The insights provided by this research should have
              implications for understanding the mechanism of action of other enzymes such as
              those involved in DNA repair since many of them also appear to use similar
              conformational mechanisms, as revealed by other investigators using methods
              similar to those pioneered here.
	


