Title       : Mechanisms of Golgi Apparatus Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a9983332

Award Number: 9983332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Storrie Storrie@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Golgi apparatus is central to the biosynthetic processing of secretory and
              membrane proteins in eukaryotic cells.  Proteins destined for secretion or for
              insertion into the plasma membrane, as well as proteins destined for various
              intracellular compartments such as the lysosomes, are rapidly sequestered,
              usually co-translationally, into an intracellular system of compartments that
              facilitate the post-translational biochemical processing of these proteins and
              their translocation to their functional locations in the cell.  The first
              compartment into which such proteins are sequestered is the endoplasmic
              reticulum (ER); from there, the proteins are transported through the Golgi
              apparatus and from there distributed to their ultimate locations.  The Golgi
              apparatus itself is complex, and its various components (stacked cisternae) are
              specialized for various functions, e.g., in terms of postranslational
              modifications of proteins.  The mechanism of transport of proteins through the
              various cisternae of the Golgi apparatus, and the biogenesis and maintenance of
              the Golgi apparatus in the cell, is a topic of considerable significance to the
              understanding (and, ultimately, deliberate biotechnological manipulation) of
              these processes.  It is also a controversial topic, since recent discoveries
              have forced cell biologists to reconsider the working model of Golgi biogenesis
              that has dominated cell biological thinking in this area for the past twenty
              years.  This proposal addresses a key aspect of this issue, the functional and
              dynamic relationship of the Golgi apparatus to the endoplasmic
              reticulum.

The Golgi apparatus receives newly synthesized proteins and
              lipids from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and distributes them to other
              downstream organelles within the secretory pathway.  Key to Golgi function is
              an unequal distribution of 'resident' proteins, that are concentrated in one
              cisterna and are absent from other parts of the organelle, to give a
              'polarized' stack of Golgi membranes.  The proposed research centers on the
              question of how polarized Golgi stacks form; in other words, on the  biogenesis
              of the organelle.  Prior work by Dr. Storrie (Storrie et al., 1998; Storrie and
              Yang, 1998) raises the possibility that the Golgi apparatus may 'melt' into the
              ER during mitosis followed by subsequent de novo formation of the organelle
              from the ER.  In this project, exploratory research will be performed to test
              the role of two families of molecules in the postulated de novo formation of
              polarized Golgi stacks.  These molecules are the COPI class of coat proteins
              and two members of the rab family of small GTPases, rab6 and rab33b.  Each is
              known from the work of others to be involved in membrane trafficking.  Dr.
              Storrie will assess conditions that specifically block vesicular transport
              within the Golgi stack and will score for effects on de novo Golgi formation
              using as a model system Golgi reassembly from the ER following brefeldin A
              (BFA) washout.  BFA-treatment results in a reversible dispersal of Golgi
              proteins and lipids to the ER.  The experiments probe the hypothesis that
              vesicular transport processes may be necessary to mold stabilized molecular
              associations within the Golgi apparatus into polarized Golgi stacks.  A reverse
              genetic approach will be taken, in which dominant negative mutant proteins will
              be introduced into cells by microinjection. 


