Title       : CAREER: 3D Optical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a9983821

Award Number: 9983821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199997             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Barbastathis gbarb@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The program focuses on the investigation of 3-dimensional optical imaging to
              capture, store, represent and communicate visual information. The technical
              approach is based on a novel interferometric and volume holographic
              architectures for high performance imaging of three or higher dimensional
              objects. The research effort includes the development of shear interferometers
              based on light splitting due to double refraction on curved surfaces of varying
              shapes, volume holographic modal design for imaging modalities aimed at
              maximizing performance in information extraction, and a novel correlator design
              for three dimensional objects.

This CAREER award program will provide the
              foundation for the advancement and uti-
lization of  Hybrid Optical-Electronic
              Imaging (HopEI) systems focusing on visual sensing applications such as 3D
              imaging and microscopy. The research and education parts of the program will be
              combined to enhance the analysis and design of optical fields and elements, and
              their harmonious integration with cooperative technologies. Since 3D native
              spaces are ubiquitous in areas as diverse as biology, medicine, multimedia,
              entertainment, and advertisement, the effort will focus on making the most of
              state-of-the-art technologies in providing novel visual tools for these
              application areas, while answering fundamental questions about the information
              properties of imaging operations. Through the collection of optical tools and
              design methods the program attempts to advocate the  concept  of  "3D optical
              engineering". The program will examine the convergence of several technologies,
              optical, mechanical, electronic, and algorithmic, for exploiting the 3D nature
              of optical fields which should  lead to new insights reaching far beyond the
              intersection of these disciplines. 

