Title       : CAREER: Dynamics of Predator-Prey Behavior in the Antarctic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9983751

Award Number: 9983751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309392             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Veit   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1045,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal to bring two groups of undergraduate students to the
              Antarctic, where they will participate in the collection of data on seabird
              abundance and behavior. This proposal combines research on the dynamics of
              seabirds that feed on Antarctic krill, with the teaching of mathematical
              modeling of foraging behavior and spatial statistics.  Students will learn a
              broad collection of skills through collection of data on physical and
              biological oceanography as part of the research project that focuses on
              seabirds. The research goal of this proposal is to learn how foraging seabirds
              in the Antarctic respond to changes in the abundance and distribution of their
              prey, primarily Antarctic krill.  The approach will be to study bird behavior
              in the vicinity of krill swarms, and to contrast this behavior to that in areas
              lacking krill. From these comparisons, foraging models that will make
              predictions about the dispersion of birds under differing levels of krill
              abundance will be built.  The long-term goal is to be able to make predictions
              about the impact upon seabirds of future changes in krill stocks. Field work
              will be conducted in the vicinity of Elephant Island in two field seasons. In
              each season, the insular shelf north of Elephant Island will be surveyed and
              the abundance, distribution and behavior of seabirds will be recorded.  The
              primary objective will be to quantify the linkage between prey abundance and
              bird behavior, with the long-term goal of using information on bird behavior to
              index long-term changes in the prey base. The teaching goal of this proposal is
              twofold. First, the project will expose inner city college students to a
              spectacular and economically important ecosystem. Through their work on an
              oceanographic research vessel, students will be exposed to a broad diversity of
              research topics and methods, ranging from behavioral ecology to physical
              oceanography. Second, back at Staten Island, students will participate in the
              development of a mathematical biology initiative at the College of Staten
              Island. Here students will be encouraged to apply basic mathematical reasoning
              and computer modeling to a real problem - that of determining how foraging
              choices made by seabirds can ultimately impact their reproductive success.
