Title       : CAREER: Nuclear History as History of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9983981

Award Number: 9983981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208535             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathryn L. Carson clcarson@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-83981 - Cathryn L. Carson (University of California, Berkeley)
"CAREER: 
              Nuclear History as History of Science"

This CAREER project carries out an
              integrated program of work with the title "Nuclear history as history of
              science."  In research and teaching it explores the interweaving of technical
              and sociopolitical matters characteristic of the nuclear age. For the research
              component Professor Carson is framing a technically informed history of the
              conceptualizations of nuclear waste. Nuclear waste is a problem whose perceived
              nature has changed dramatically from the 1940s to the present: what was once
              thought to be a small technical difficulty, soluble with modest effort on the
              basis of readily obtainable knowledge, has become a major international field
              of research with intensely complex demands of modeling and experimentation.
              Professor Carson's study examines the changing conception of the very nature of
              the challenge -- what sort of scientific problem nuclear waste has been
              understood to be -- and so brings technical matters back into our histories of
              policy and politics. Focusing on the U.S., Germany, and either France or
              Switzerland, it takes a comparative approach as a way of opening up points of
              controversy. The resulting account will be of value to broader communities with
              practical interests, since past attitudes towards nuclear waste stand in the
              background of many of its present problems. At the same time the project
              addresses itself to historians thinking about theoretical questions, using the
              exemplary site of nuclear waste management to investigate the interface between
              the sociopolitical and the technical.

The education component then pursues
              the project's theme in a new undergraduate course that Professor Carson is
              devising at the University of California, Berkeley. As a history of science
              course on the nuclear age, the class brings together students from the
              sciences, engineering, humanities, and social sciences. In their encounters
              with this complex period, with its interweaving of technical and sociopolitical
              problems, the students will explore models of historical explanation that will
              serve them past the semester's end. The course title, "Nuclear Berkeley,
              Nuclear World," indicates its double focus: the local history of the
              university, the community, and the region, and the global context framing the
              developments at home. Along with standard pedagogical strategies of reading,
              lecture, and discussion, Professor Carson's course makes considered use of a
              web infrastructure for information and interaction. Moreover, as the
              culmination of the class experience it engages students in hands-on historical
              research, teaching them what goes into creating histories through the
              experience of practicing it themselves. The local focus of many student
              projects -- given the area's unparalleled resources -- will then return their
              work to the community, as their reports will be made available on the website
              as a gateway beyond the university.

The two components of the project are
              mutually supportive. They explore technical optimism and historical
              inevitability at scales large and small:  thus nuclear waste takes its place in
              the educational framework, while the course's overarching narrative provides
              the backdrop for the research. And the student projects, for their part, make
              connections back to Professor Carson's research, establishing contacts,
              unearthing sources, and opening up new fields to study.

