Title       : CAREER: GTPase Switches: Biological Function and Chemical Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a9983736

Award Number: 9983736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guangpu Li guangpu-li@ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma HSC
	      P O BOX 26901
	      Oklahoma City, OK  731260901    405/271-4000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9983736
Li
GTPases are molecular switches that regulate diverse cellular
              functions via binding and hydrolyzing GTP.  In many cases, however, the
              mechanism by which the GTPase cycle is coupled to biological function is
              unknown.  The long-term goal of this project is to employ a multidisciplinary
              approach to obtain a thorough understanding of the chemical principle and the
              biological function of GTPases.  This goal will be accomplished through a
              series of research and education initiatives.  The research project focuses on
              the Rab5 GTPase.  The Rab family of GTPases regulates specific intracellular
              trafficking events.  Rab5 in particular is localized to the cytoplasmic side of
              early endosomes and is important for early endosome fusion, an essential step
              of endocytosis.  In this project, the mechanism of Rab5 GTPase activity, its
              regulation by a newly identified GTPase-activating protein (GAP), and its
              specific function in endosome fusion will be investigated by using experimental
              techniques of cell biology, molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysics. 
              The structural determinants of Rab5 that are important for the specific
              interaction with the GAP will be determined, as well 
as the structural
              determinants of Rab5 that are important for its unique intrinsic GTPase
              activity. The large number of Rab GTPases not only share common properties but
              also show individual differences, including the quantitative difference in
              GTPase activity and the qualitative difference in functional specificity.  The
              molecular basis of these differences is unclear.  This project should help
              clarify these issues and will have a significant impact on the fundamental
              mechanism of GTPase activity as well as the specific Rab5 function in
              regulating endosome fusion.  

In this Career award, the current knowledge
              and cutting-edge research on GTPases and GTPase-mediated biological functions
              will be integrated into an education initiative, which focuses on the
              development of a graduate course entitled "multidisciplinary approach to
              biological problems" to explore new ways of teaching. This course will
              encourage students to think and solve biological problems from the perspectives
              of not only biology but also chemistry, physics, and mathematics.  An effective
              way to teach this course is to use specific examples.  In this regard, the
              GTPase superfamily of proteins provides a rich resource for understanding the
              principles of physical structure, chemical kinetics, and biological function. 
              This course will help overcome the barrier and cultivate a collaborative spirit
              across disciplines and better prepare biology students for careers in academia
              and industry. 

