Title       : CAREER: Integrated Teaching and Research Activities on Computational
               Thermodynamics and Systems Materials Design of Magnesium Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9983532

Award Number: 9983532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zi-Kui Liu liu@matse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9983532
Liu

The objective of this CAREER grant is to create a completely new
              methodology for magnesium alloy design through a fundamental understanding of
              process/structure/property relationships in metal alloys. This work develops
              (a) a novel system materials design approach based on a combination of
              computational thermodynamics calculation, phase transformation simulation, and
              experimental prototype evaluation, (b) an efficient methodology of
              multi-component thermodynamic modeling by integrating thermodynamic predictions
              and critically designed experiments, and (c) thermodynamic models of phase
              interfaces.  Computational thermodynamics is the important part of the program
              and is essential for understanding the fundamental mechanisms, morphology, and
              kinetics of microstructure development. The CAREER teaching program focuses on
              computational thermodynamics and system materials design, involving both
              undergraduate and graduate students. The planned effort will improve the core
              curriculum in materials science and engineering by applying fundamental
              principles in conjunction with state-of-the-art computer software to
              efficiently develop solutions to technological problems. It will enable
              students to visualize the abstract concepts in thermodynamics through phase
              diagram calculations and phase transformation simulations, strengthen their
              computational skills through computer experiments, and improve their
              communication skills through team projects and presentations.  
%%%
The
              proposed program will aid the development of magnesium alloys for automotive
              and aerospace applications and for hydrogen storage.  The program is timely due
              to increasing industrial interest in magnesium alloys, and it is especially
              desirable in the U.S. as research activities on magnesium alloys are limited in
              comparison with Europe.   New structural materials technologies are a
              determining factor in the global competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing
              industries.  As one of the lightest structural materials, magnesium alloys have
              high potential for considerably reducing the weight of transportation vehicles
              and improving fuel efficiency.
***

