Title       : CONFERENCE: Symposia in Evolutionary Developmental Biology, to be held January
               4-8, 2000, Atlanta, GA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1999  
File        : a9983454

Award Number: 9983454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Billie J. Swalla   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal's funding makes possible a unique meeting of scientists doing
              interdisciplinary work in Evolutionary and Developmental Biology.  This will
              happen at the Society for Integrative Biology's (SICB) Annual Meeting in
              Atlanta, GA on January 4-8, 2000.  At these meetings, a new Division will be
              formed within SICB, a division for Developmental Evolutionary Biology, the
              first interdisciplinary scientific group of its kind in the world.  The money
              received from NSF will allow two related symposia to take place at these
              historic meetings.  The first will be an overview and history of comparative
              embryology over the past century.  Comparative embryologists were the first
              scientists to examine the link between evolution and development.  The second
              will be a symposium examining the role of a special group of genes, the HOX
              gene complex, in determining body plans in all animals during embryonic
              development.  It is through the process of embryonic development that a unique
              organism is made, through the interaction of the genome with special factors
              within the egg.  As genome projects continue to elucidate the DNA sequences in
              the fly, worm and human genomes, we can begin to study how these genomes are
              expressed during embryonic development in a carefully orchestrated fashion in
              time and space. This new discipline of Developmental Evolutionary Biology has
              emerged to examine how different organisms are generated with a similar set of
              genes, because we know now that all animals use the same kinds of genes during
              embryonic development. The combination of the historical overview examining the
              foundations of this interdisciplinary thought and the presence of the top
              Evo-Devo researchers in the field at the meeting promises to highlight this new
              discipline and the extraordinary promise that it shows in understanding how
              body plans are made during development.    

