Title       : Vertical Integration Initiative of Research and Education For Mathematical
               Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9983646

Award Number: 9983646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2076300            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Holmes holmes@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregor Kovacic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Flaherty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce R. McLaughlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Schwendeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
RPI

The focus of Rensselaer's VIGRE activities is mathematical
              training directed towards contemporary scientific problem solving.  This
              includes disciplinary depth as well as exposure to, and participation in,
              interdisciplinary research programs in both academic and non-academic settings.
               In the process, students and postdoctoral fellows are involved in a broad
              variety of different research and educational activities. This includes
              scholarly work to learn new material, research to generate new results, talks
              to communicate new techniques and results, and curriculum development and
              excellence in classroom teaching. The fundamental integrating activity for the
              vertically structured groups are research and communication seminars.  The main
              goal of the program is the enrichment of the educational experience of students
              and postdocs, to promote the research and educational activities at Rensselaer,
              and to encourage and advance mathematical science students and postdocs toward
              academic careers.  This provides a foundation for what is essential in science
              today, that is, breadth of knowledge and the ability to communicate effectively
              across traditional disciplinary boundaries. 

Our program links
              undergraduate, graduate and postdoc career enhancing experiences together with
              K-12 outreach. Our strengths are in interdisciplinary activities including
              strong industrial connections together with nationally recognized innovative
              educational activities.  Our product will be well-trained professionals ready
              for successful academic careers.  The impact of the Rensselaer program will be
              in producing mathematical scientists with industrial problem solving
              experience, with a strong understanding of applications areas, with analysis,
              modeling and numerical computation skills, with the ability to creatively
              produce new mathematics needed to solve applied problems, with innovative
              education and teaching experiences, and with the ability to participate in the
              building of academic applied mathematics programs. 

Funding for this award
              is provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Directorate's
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.




