Title       : Reconstruction and Annotation of Transcribed Sequences in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9983070

Award Number: 9983070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John Quackenbush johnq@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Feng Liang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genomics has provided a great opportunity to identify the entire complement of
              genes within a diverse collection of organisms and has provided the tools
              necessary to begin to understand the role these genes play in development,
              disease, and evolution. The sequencing of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) has
              provided a first
glimpse of the collection of transcribed sequences in many
              organisms, and significant additional information can be obtained by a thorough
              analysis of the EST data. TIGR's analysis of the world's collection of human
              EST sequence data, captured in the Gene Indices
              (<http://www.tigr.org/tdb/tdb.html>), provides assembled
consensus sequences
              that are of high confidence and represent TIGR's best estimate of the
              collection of transcribed sequences underlying the ESTs. Based on the
              techniques developed for analysis of human EST sequences, TIGR maintains Gene
              Indices for a variety of important model organisms, including the Arabidopsis
              Gene Index (AtGI), the Rice Gene Index (OGI), the Tomato Gene Index (LGI) and
              the Potato Gene Index. Together, these Gene Indices represent a unique resource
              for the comparative analysis of plant genes and may provide insight into gene
              function, regulation, and evolution. Recent EST sequencing projects in a
              variety of important crop species have provided the sequence data necessary to
              create Gene Indices for additional plant species, including Maize (Zea mays)
              and Soybean (Glycine max). This project will create Gene Indices for these
              plants, continue to assemble the existing Plant Gene Indices, and make a number
              of improvements in the Indices, including quarterly releases, expanded
              annotation, integration with mapping and genomic sequence data, and more robust
              search capabilities. In addition, the project will generate a set of plant
              orthologues and develop a web-based presentation allowing the properties of
              these orthologue sets to be explored. Such a database would provide direct
              links between the plant EST assemblies and would represent the most extensive
              catalog of plant orthologues, providing a valuable resource for gene
              identification, elucidation of functional domains, and analysis of gene and
              genome evolution.

