Title       : Regulation of Hedgehog Signaling in the Drosophila Ovary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9983759

Award Number: 9983759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise J. Montell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	The Hedgehog (HH) family of secreted signaling proteins is important for a
              number of critical patterning events in both vertebrate and invertebrate
              embryogenesis.  HH was first identified in Drosophila, in the classic screen by
              Nusslein-Volhard and Wieschaus.  Since then, related mammalian proteins have
              been found to play multiple, essential roles in development and tumorignesis. 
              Study of HH proteins has contributed fundamental insights into novel mechanisms
              of proteolysis and post-translational protein modification.  Furthermore,
              analyses of the intracellular signaling pathway that is stimulated upon
              interaction of HH with its cellular receptors has resulted in rapid elucidation
              of a new and important signal transduction mechanism.  	Dr. Montell and others
              have found that HH signaling influences cell fates in the Drosophila ovary,
              which is emerging as an important model system for studies of cell fate
              specification and cell cycle regulation.  Specific somatic cells known as polar
              cells are specified by HH signaling, early in oogenesis.  Anterior polar cells
              subsequently recruit 4-8 additional follicle cells to become migratory "border
              cells".  In a screen for mutations that affect border cells in mosaic clones,
              Dr. Montell's laboratory identified two mutations, one on chromosome 2R and one
              on 2L, that caused a dramatic increase in the numbers of border cells.  In both
              cases, the increase could be attributed to increases in the numbers of polar
              cells, a phenotype that is also observed when HH is over-expressed.  These
              findings suggest that the new mutations might affect genes whose normal role is
              in negative regulation of the HH signaling pathway.  One of the mutations is an
              allele of costal-2 (cos2), a locus previously known to play a role in negative
              regulation of the HH pathway.  The second mutation appears to affect a
              previously unknown locus, since it maps to a region that does not contain a
              known negative regulator of the HH pathway.  This new locus has tentatively
              been named moh for modulator of hedgehog signaling.
	Dr. Montell plans to test
              the hypothesis that moh modulates HH signaling, either directly or indirectly. 
              The specific aims of this proposal are: 1) to ascertain what step in the HH
              pathway is affected by the moh mutation; 2) to identify and sequence the
              transcript corresponding to the mutated gene and search for related genes in
              mammals; 3) to characterize the MOH protein product; and 4) to carry out
              additional screening for negative regulators of the HH pathway in the ovary. 
              Since previous screens for HH pathway mutants have focussed on embryonic and
              adult viable phenotypes, there may be additional components of the pathway that
              can only be identified using mosaic analysis.
