Title       : CAREER: Analysis Techniques for the Design and Performance Evaluation of
               Wireless Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  2000  
File        : a9983462

Award Number: 9983462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed-Slim Alouini alouini@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: 

The broad goal of this research program is to contribute in the
              development of analytical techniques for the design and performance evaluation
              of several transmission technologies that are candidates for future wireless
              communication systems. The scope of the program is broad with particular focus
              on diversity and adaptive transmission techniques.  Successful completion of
              the work will allow designers of emerging wireless systems to perform tradeoff
              studies (performance versus complexity) among various options so as to
              determine the more suitable choice in the face of complexity and implementation
              constraints. In addition the developed generic analytical techniques will also
              serve for other researchers to evaluate the performance of  other practical
              applications of their own interest.  The research plan has educational benefits
              not only for the research assistants involved in the proposed research but also
              for the students enrolled in a wireless communication course that the
              investigator is developing and which will enhance the strong core curriculum of
              signal processing and communication theory classes at the University of
              Minnesota.

More specifically on the diversity techniques front the research
              involves:
1.	The metrics, performance, and low complexity implementation of 
              diversity receivers with                 multi-symbol and decision feedback
              differential detection. 
2.	Development of generic analytical techniques for
              the accurate assessment of the outage probability                 and average
              outage duration of diversity receivers.
3.	Design and performance evaluation
              of low complexity smart antennas with successive co-channel                
              interference reduction capabilities.
4.             Accurate assesement of the
              diversity gain of  more effective composite microscopic/macroscopic            
                       diversity combining techniques.

Research directions for adaptive
              techniques focuses on the
1.	Design and performance evaluation of adaptive
              embedded modulations. 
2.	Development of an analytical framework to quantify
              the spectral efficiency of adaptive multimedia cellular systems. 


3- Level
              of Effort Statement
At the recommended level of support, the investigator will
              make
every attempt to meet the original scope and level of effort of 
the
              project.



