Title       : Wyoming NSF EPSCoR: Science and Engineering in Harsh Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a9983278

Award Number: 9983278
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph V. Lewis silk@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sally J. Steadman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will enhance the research infrastructure at the University of
              Wyoming, the state's only university and its only four-year institution of
              higher education.   Wyoming chose to focus the improvement of its research
              activities around the theme of science and engineering in harsh environments, 
              a theme appropriate for the state considering its temperature extremes, limited
              precipitation, high sunlight impact, saline soil and population impact in
              limited geographic areas.  The specific scientific areas selected to be focused
              on 1) Natural Resources Sciences, and 2) Materials Sciences.

The University
              will hire at least 10 new faculty members (6 for Natural Resources and 4 for
              Materials).  These new hires are expected to engage in and develop
              multidisciplinary research teams that can improve the research competitiveness
              of the University and have a potential economic impact on the state.  Multi-use
              research equipment will be acquired to assist both new and existing university
              researchers.  A faculty development program will be initiated to assist the
              research competitiveness of junior faculty.   Programs will be supported that
              assist in the development of research-oriented small businesses within Wyoming,
              that involve high school and undergraduate students in research activities, and
              that expose K-12 teachers to university science and mathematics
              instruction.

Improvement of the University of Wyoming's research
              infrastructure is important not only to the ability of the University's
              researchers to successfully compete for federal research funds but also to the
              development of the state as a whole.  Wyoming's economy has been historically
              based on natural resource use.  Support of research infrastructure improvements
              at the University of Wyoming can play a significant role in the diversification
              of the state's economy by assisting in the development of technology-related
              businesses in the state.







