Title       : Genetic Analysis of Global Regulation of Streptomyces Antibiotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9983475

Award Number: 9983475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy C. Champness champnes@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Streptomycetes, a group of filamentous soil bacteria, possess two
              characteristics that make them attractive prokaryotes for study: they develop
              into complex, multicellular, differentiated colonies and they produce a vast
              array of secondary metabolites, many of which are useful as antibiotics. 
              Antibiotic production is usually coupled to morphological differentiation,
              beginning at the transition between vegetative growth and production of
              pre-spore differentiated hyphae.  The long-term goal of this research is to
              discover the genes that regulate antibiotic synthesis, to understand how they
              function, and to determine their functional relationships in the regulatory
              network controlling antibiotic gene expression.  The immediate objectives of
              this research are focussed on three recently-discovered genetic elements: absA,
              absB and absC.  The mechanism by which the AbsA2 response regulator of the
              absA-encoded signal transduction system exerts global negative control over
              antibiotic gene expression will be determined using genetic, molecular genetic,
              and biochemical experiments to: a) determine the antibiotic promoters that are
              directly regulated by AbsA2; and b) characterize repressor activity by AbsA2. 
              Aspects of the mechanism by which the absB-encoded RNaseIII homolog regulates
              antibiotics will be determined using suppressor analysis to identify elements
              of the pathway through which absB regulates antibiotics and by evaluation of
              the role of RNaseIII catalytic activity in antibiotic regulation.  Aspects of
              the mechanism by which the absC operon regulates antibiotic gene expression
              will be determined by defining how a 120 nt sequence of the absC locus, mia,
              exerts multi-copy inhibition of antibiotic gene expression, especially
              evaluating the strong prediction that it titrates a regulatory factor.  The
              results of this research promise to elucidate aspects of the regulatory program
              controlling streptomycete antibiotic synthesis, to provide insights into how
              antibiotic production might be rationally manipulated, and to expand our
              understanding of microbial multicellular differentiation.
