Title       : CAREER: Hyperbranched Polymeric Micelles as Novel Drug Delivery Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9983272

Award Number: 9983272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn E. Uhrich uhrich@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9983272
Uhrich
Micelles are colloids frequently used as drug delivery systems
              because of several useful properties.  First, the hydrophobic microenvironment
              of micelles can water-solubilize hydrophobic drugs, expanding the
              pharmaceutical potential of otherwise useful compounds.  This function has long
              been investigated as a means of improving solubility for drug delivery,
              particularly for parenteral or oral administration, as well as for ophthalmic,
              topical, rectal and nasal delivery.  A second important function of micelles is
              their small size (less than 100 nm) which allows them to evade the
              reticuloendothelial system (RES) and behave as passive targeting agents. 
              Third, the interplay between the hydrophobic domains of the polymer carriers
              and hydrophobic lipids of cell membranes enables micelles to be inserted into
              or passed through cell membranes.  Yet there is no systematic understanding of
              the factors that govern their ability to interact with cell membranes.  Lastly,
              the major drawback to their extended clinical use is that micelles are
              thermodynamically unstable; they disorganize upon dilution in the bloodstream,
              by temperature increases or by interacting with various blood components.  The
              desirable features of micelles as described above can be used to design a
              polymer system that models micellar systems yet overcomes their major
              limitation by covalently binding the "unimers" such that dilution is not
              possible.

Our goal is to develop rationally designed polymeric materials
              that can be used to understand the interactions and mechanisms of
              cell-biomaterial interfaces.  Our long-term objective is to use these polymeric
              micelles to probe cell-material interactions then design and develop enhanced
              drug delivery systems.  The foundation of this proposal is our synthesis of
              hyperbranched polymers that can encapsulate, and subsequently release,
              hydrophobic molecules as well as to enhance fusion processes in liposomes. 
              These polymeric materials are designed to biodegrade into nontoxic components
              over defined time period (i.e., months), thus eliminating concerns of long-term
              effects.  With the development of the proposed polymeric systems, we have the
              capability to systematically study the behavior of micelles - information that
              was previously unattainable due to the lack of appropriates materials. 
              Completion of this research will impact areas of drug delivery, controlled
              release, membrane technologies, biomaterials, and biocatalysis.

The
              continued growth and productivity of our society is dependent upon people with
              the appropriate technological skills.  Minorities and women, while representing
              a majority in American society, are currently underrepresented in the sciences.
               It is imperative that we train minorities and women in science and engineering
              to ensure the health of our economy and provide support such that these
              students remain in the science pipeline.

Two specific programs are proposed
              to address these issues.  First, to enhance participation of girls in science
              by reaching elementary school-age girls, an outreach program will be
              coordinated with Girl Scouts and with women in science at Rutgers University. 
              Second, Rutgers has a strong mentoring program for undergraduate women in
              science, but there are no formal mentoring programs for graduate women.  A
              program that allies graduate women with faculty mentors will be developed. 

