Title       : CAREER: Biomimetic Interfaces for Implantable BioMEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9983840

Award Number: 9983840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tejal A. Desai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9983840
Desai
A great deal of consideration has been given in recent years to
              the biological uses of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS).  However, such
              devices are not yet found in many clinical settings due to the lack of
              appropriate interfacing between these devices and the biological world. The
              capability of surfaces to interact intelligently with their environment is
              essential for any diagnostic or therapeutic device to be placed in contact with
              biologic cells and tissues. The overall thrust of this research, therefore, is
              to develop, characterize, and integrate functional biomolecular surfaces with
              implantable MEMS, in a manner that is both reproducible and fully integrated
              with existing technologies.

A strategy will be explored based on the
              covalently coupling of small bioactive peptides to microdevices.  Such peptides
              will be incorporated onto silicon substrates to modulate the interfacial
              response, while at the same time ensuring compatibility with microfabrication
              and micromachining processing. A central goal will be able to create stable
              multifunctional surfaces by attaching peptide/cell recognition sequences or
              multifunctional biopolymers to surfaces in order to modulate cellular response
              at various locations.  By integrating surface modification with MEMS
              processing, we can create device surfaces that interact appropriately with
              multiple populations of cells and the surrounding tissue. Besides identifying
              principles for engineering surfaces that are biofunctional, this research will
              foster advances in developing therapeutic bioMEMS, lab on a chip platforms, and
              drug delivery systems that can more effectively interface with the biological
              world.

The proposed educational plan aims to enhance the educational
              experience of students at both undergraduate and graduate levels.  In addition
              to substantial curriculum development for a new focus area in bioengineering
              called Interfacial Tissue Engineering, there will be new initiatives in
              industrial and educational outreach.  Specifically, an industrial advisory
              committee will be formed to help foster industrially relevant bioengineering
              activities and opportunities for students including internship and cooperative
              research experiences in the Chicago area. The PI will promote greater interest
              in bioengineering by increasing student and teacher exposure at the high school
              level.  Working with the Chicago Public School System, bioengineering
              career/educational materials will be developed, including an informational
              website.  We hope to use these tools to attract students not traditionally
              represented in bioengineering and raise awareness in the community.    


