Title       : CAREER: Molecular Interactions and Nucleotide Exchange Mechanism of Translation
               Factor EF1B Alpha
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a9983565

Award Number: 9983565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri G. Kinzy kinzytg@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9983565
Kinzy
G-proteins are a broad class of proteins whose activity is
              regulated by the phosphorylation state of their bound nucleotide.  When bound
              to the tri-phosphate form of guanosine (GTP), they are active in a multitude of
              biological processes such as protein synthesis.  Stimulation of the G-protein's
              hydrolytic activity by another factor, a GTPase activating protein or GAP,
              converts the G-protein to the inactive diphosphate (GDP)-bound form.  Another
              set of regulatory proteins termed guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs)
              control the nucleotide bound state of G-proteins by facilitating the conversion
              back to the 
active GTP bound form.  The translation Elongation Factor 1Balpha
              (eEF1Balpha, formerly EF-1beta) of the Baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
              is a GEF for the elongation step of protein synthesis.  As a small, essential
              protein, it serves as an excellent system to utilize biochemical and genetic
              approaches to the study of the mechanism of guanine nucleotide exchange and the
              regulation of the elongation phase of protein synthesis.  eEF1Balpha functions
              on the G-protein eEF1A (formerly EF-1alpha) which is the homolog of the first
              G-protein for which the crystal structure was know, bacterial EF-Tu.  eEF1A is
              active to bind and deliver activated amino acids attached to transfer RNAs to
              the ribosome only when in the GTP-bound form.  The GDP to GTP exchange
              catalyzed by eEF1Balpha is essential to maintain a pool of active eEF1A and is
              likely the rate-limiting step of translation elongation. The PI's large bank of
              mutant forms of yeast eEF1Balpha has demonstrated the critical role of this
              protein in efficient and accurate protein synthesis in cells.  The mechanism
              and regulation of the guanine nucleotide exchange process will be determined
              utilizing our available as well as new structurally based point mutations. 
              Purified factors and in vitro assays for protein synthesis will identify the
              critical functional motifs of eEF1Balpha and dissect the interaction between
              this GEF and its G-protein eEF1A.  The cellular growth and translation defects
              of yeast strain with a mutant form of eEF1Balpha allow us to utilize genetic
              approaches to identify factors that may regulate the GEF activity of this
              protein as well as the translation elongation process in general.  Thus, the
              yeast S. cerevisiae is an eukaryotic system that permits simultaneous analysis
              of the role of eEF1Balpha in the translation elongation cycle in vivo and in
              vitro.  The educational goals of this proposal utilize both existing minority
              enhancement programs and the work study program for undergraduates at Rutgers
              University in our research program to understand the role of eEF1Balpha in gene
              expression.  The University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey Robert Wood
              Johnson Medical School (formerly Rutgers Medical School) has a tradition of
              supporting undergraduate research and minority enhancement programs.  The work
              study placement program augments established programs with a system to identify
              economically disadvantaged students for laboratory research.  The P.I., as the
              director of the UMDNJ RWJMS DNA Sequencing core facility, is also involved in
              the integration of state of the art molecular biology techniques into high
              school student and teacher programs and undergraduate courses at Rutgers
              University. 


