Title       : Duke University Program for Vertically Integrated, Interdisciplinary Reseasrch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a9983320

Award Number: 9983320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2421444            (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold E. Layton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea L. Bertozzi  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jack Bookman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Kraines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Allard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Thomas Beale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Bertozzi

The Duke Mathematics Department's VIGRE program was
              designed with NSF's stated objectives
of "increas(ing) interdisciplinary
              activities involving mathematics" and "encourag(ing) activities aimed at
              broadening undergraduate and graduate curricula" in mind while maintaining
              existing disciplinary strengths.  Interdisciplinary research is a perfect
              setting for vertical integration and
the Duke Mathematics Department has
              existing disciplinary strengths in algebraic geometry, analysis, differential
              equations, differential geometry, numerical analysis, probability, and
              topology.

We will use the team research model to enhance our graduate
              training program and our undergraduate and postdoctoral programs.  Graduate and
              undergraduate students will confront 
research problems early in their careers
              and will have ongoing exposure to them through their respective programs. 
              Advanced graduate students and postdocs will take on new roles as project
              leaders in vertically integrated research seminar courses and in team research
              groups.
All students and postdocs will develop skills in computation,
              communication and collaboration as part of their mathematical training, thereby
              broadening the range of opportunities available
to them as mathematical
              scientists.  The goal of the program is to have students and postdocs
              completing their programs with a broad scientific knowledge and clear
              understanding of the inner workings of a scientific team, as well as an
              academic research and teaching portfolio that will enhance their career
              advancement potential.

In the undergraduate program our goal is to increase
              students' enthusiasm for mathematics and its role in research at all levels of
              their training at Duke.  We will increase the number of first-year and major
              seminars aimed at exposing students to current topics of research.  Current
              seminar course topics include cryptography, physiology and medicine, geometry,
              and optimization.  New topics include heart dynamics, gravitational lensing,
              and artificial intelligence. A new Perspectives on Science seminar aimed at
              first-year women interested in mathematics, statistics and computer science
              will expose young students to current research of senior scientists, postdocs,
              and graduate students.

The cornerstone of the undergraduate VIGRE program is
              a new two-year intensive research program, entitled `Practical Research for
              Undergraduates with VIGRE' (PRUV, pronounced "prove"), for advanced mathematics
              majors, which integrates course work, summer internships in a vertically
              integrated environment, and senior theses.  These improvements in the
              undergraduate program are targeted to involve more students in research
              activities.  We expect
that one outcome will be more senior honors theses on
              research problems and more students choosing to apply to graduate school in the
              mathematical sciences.

For the graduate program, the VIGRE grant will be
              combined with Duke resources to support all first year students without
              teaching duties.  After the first year, the strongest VIGRE-eligible students
              will receive a one semester-per-year teaching release in order to direct more
              of their energy towards research.  All graduate students in the graduate
              program will have the opportunity to work in vertically integrated research
              teams, including postdocs, graduate students PRUV students, and at least one
              mathematics professor.  Those working on interdisciplinary problems 
will also
              collaborate with at least one professor from another discipline.  Current
              interdisciplinary activities include deforestation and aerosol dynamics,
              geometric computing, granular flow,
 heart dynamics, liquid films, photonic
              band gaps,  physiology and medicine,
 string theory, and uncertainty in porous
              flow, with Duke collaborators in the School of the Environment, Computer
              Science, Physics, Biomedical Engineering, Cell Biology, Civil and Environmental
              Engineering, and the Institute for Statistics and Decision Sciences.
              

Graduate teacher training currently begins in the first-year with students
              supervising
calculus laboratories.  In order to shorten time to degree and
              increase retention, we will postpone teaching responsibilities and teacher
              training by one year for all graduate students.
This will enable all first
              year graduate students to focus on fundamental course work required to pass the
              qualifying exam before the beginning of year two. The current teacher-training
              program will be expanded to include alternative teaching experiences for
              students and postdocs
including outreach to high school teachers, and
              mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students. A new computational
              requirement will be part of their first-year curriculum. The graduate students
              currently run a weekly seminar with talks aimed at first and second year
              graduate students given by graduate students and postdocs. PRUV undergraduates
              will be encouraged to attend this seminar.

VIGRE postdocs will play a
              leadership role in the overall program. Each year, for the first three years,
              two VIGRE postdocs will be hired for three year terms.  These positions will
              parallel existing Duke funded Assistant Research Professors (ARP).  VIGRE
              Postdocs will have the opportunity to play a strong leadership role in the team
              research groups including mentoring graduate students and undergraduates and
              developing a well-defined independent research program.  They will also have
              the opportunity to take on a significant supporting role in at least one of the
              following activities:  (1) coordinating research seminars and workshops, (2)
              co-supervising summer PRUV students and graduate student internships, (3)
              helping undergraduates and graduate students in a writing workshop.

Postdocs
              and students will collaborate with high school teachers in Project CHISEL
              `Carolina High School Educational Leadership project'.  They will design
              modules for classroom use
that will introduce high school students to the use
              of mathematics in current research.

Funding for this activity was provided
              by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office for
              Multidisciplinary Activity.


