Title       : Exploring Nano-Scale Properties of Self-Assembled Monolayers: An Integrated
               Molecular Simulation and Scanning Probe Microscopy Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2000     
File        : a9983895

Award Number: 9983895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaoyi Jiang sjiang@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9983895
Shaoyi Jiang


The proposed work focuses on exploring
              and controlling nano-scale chemical, structural and frictional properties of
              self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) using a unique combination of molecular
              simulation and scanning probe microscopy techniques.  The technological,
              biological and environmental importance of SAMs cannot be overestimated.  The
              first objective of the proposed work is to explore nano-scale frictional
              properties of SAMs.  It consists of two components:  (1) interpretation of
              scanning force microscopy (SFM) experiments on SAMs using molecular dynamics
              simulations, and (2) quantitative measurements of nano-scale forces in SFM. 
              The ability to obtain quantitative data on frictional properties and to
              interpret SFM experimental result will facilitate the efforts to develop novel
              SAM-based lubricating systems for applications such as in car engines,
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and magnetic data storage devices.  The
              second objective of the proposed work is to control nano-scale chemical and
              structural properties of mixed SAMs.  It consists of two components:  (1)
              preparation and characterization of true molecular-scale mixed homogeneous
              phases of mixed SAMs, and (2) prediction of surface compositions and phase
              behavior of mixed SAMS using grand canonical ensemble Monte Carlo simulations. 
              The ability to control nano-scale surface properties will facilitate the
              efforts to develop biomaterials with superior biocompatibilities.  All four
              components in the proposed work are complementary and the proposed work is
              highly interdisciplinary.  The success of the proposed work will have a broad
              impact on new technology such as molecule-based devices, corrosion protection,
              and biosensors in addition to nanotribology and biomaterials. 


