Title       : Molecular Regulation of Pronephric Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a9983061

Award Number: 9983061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313209             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Vize pvize@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Parichy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Previous experiments have demonstrated the requirement for a number of genes for
              normal kidney development in mammals. However, little is known about why these
              genes are important, and even less is known how they interact to firstly
              specify, and then guide the differentiation of the different kidney components.
              The frog embryo is particularly well suited to investigating these types of
              questions, as a single gene can be overexpressed simply by microinjecting
              embryos with an mRNA encoding the gene product of interest. The embryo is then
              raised for three days until its kidneys are functional and the effect of the
              additional gene expression analyzed by looking at kidney structure. 

	In the
              present proposal experiments are described that will investigate key early
              steps in the patterning of the kidney precursor region. It has been
              demonstrated that two transcription factors, Xlim-1 and XPax-8, participate in
              the establishment of the kidney region shortly after gastrulation. The
              experiments outlined here will investigate how these two different proteins
              interact to achieve this effect. The experiments will also investigate how
              these genes regulate, and are in turn regulated by, the downstream effector
              gene Xenopus WT1. 

	These experiments will build on the existing models of
              how organs are established during embryonic development by analyzing the
              molecular interactions controlling this event. As all vertebrate kidneys use
              similar genetic pathways the results will be of relevance not only to
              developmental biologists, but also to researchers interested in establishing
              model systems in which to study human kidney defects. 


