Title       : Category Structure and Generative Thought
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9983424

Award Number: 9983424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The ability to generate useful new ideas underlies human accomplishment in
              technological, scientific, economic and artistic realms, and understanding how
              new ideas are formed has importance for all of those areas.  The major
              objective of this research is to develop a theoretical account of the processes
              involved in novel idea generation, and the ways in which people's existing
              knowledge influences the form of the new ideas they generate.

Previous
              research has shown that people often begin the process of developing new ideas
              by retrieving from memory fairly specific instances of known concepts to serve
              as starting points, and then patterning the novel idea after those instances,
              but much about this process remains unclear. Building on that earlier work and
              other research on the nature of human concepts, this new research seeks to
              provide a more coherent view of the process. It goes beyond the obvious point
              that new ideas are derived from existing ones to assess how the structure of
              people's existing concepts influences the structure of novel ideas they
              produce. Studies are designed to determine why some instances are more likely
              than others to be retrieved and used as starting points, the extent to which
              reliance on those instances constrains the originality of the newly formed
              ideas, the extent to which reliance on those instances is rigid versus
              flexible, and how situational factors influence what the person retrieves from
              memory as a starting point for the new idea.

Predictions are based on the
              path-of-least-resistance model, which states that people will tend to rely on
              the specific instances that are most highly representative of a given category.
               Some studies will require participants to imagine novel entities from
              particular categories (e.g., fruit that might grow on another planet, toys that
              might be used by blind children).  Base categories will include a variety of
              domains, including tools, toys, animals, fruit, vegetables, snack foods,
              rituals, and several others.  Companion studies will use multiple measures to
              determine how representative different instances are within the base categories
              (e.g., how typical, frequent, and familiar specific instances of real Earth
              fruit are judged to be).  The measure hypothesized to be most influential is
              how readily specific instances come to mind.  The idea is that the category
              instances that come to mind most readily are the ones that will be most
              frequently retrieved as candidate starting points in formulating novel ideas. 
              The rationale is that generating new ideas is cognitively demanding, and people
              tend to simplify the task by pursuing ideas that come to mind readily.  In
              these studies, the originality and other properties of the imagined ideas will
              be assessed to determine the degree to which relying on such specific instances
              constrains the form of new ideas.

Other studies will test the hypothesis
              that representativeness is flexible rather than fixed and that recent
              experiences will influence the particular instances that are retrieved and used
              in imagination.  They will attempt to influence idea generation by giving
              people prior exposure to certain instances or by presenting key attributes of
              those instances.  In other words, rather than just using the static structure
              of existing concepts to predict the form of novel ideas, the studies will
              attempt to manipulate the form of the novel ideas by way of the other factors
              present in the situation.


