Title       : SBIR Phase II: An Advanced Computational Simulation Tool for Metalorganic Vapor
               Phase Epitaxy of Compound III-V Layers in Industrial Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a9983415

Award Number: 9983415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel A. Lowry sal@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    256/726-4800

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1443,9147,9148,9163,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will produce a
              commercial simulation tool to design and optimize Metalorganic Vapor Phase
              Epitaxy (MOVPE) systems for the fabrication of III-V materials.  The Phase I
              study has demonstrated the proof-of-concept of using advanced models to
              optimize MOVPE equipment and processes.  Specifically the effects of radiative
              heat transfer, gas flow field, gas phase/surface chemistry and electromagnetic
              induction heating on the deposition rate/uniformity were quantified using the
              models.  Following preliminary validation, the models were tested for both two
              and three-dimensional commercial reactor geometries.  The proposed Phase II
              project will focus on the necessary model refinements and development
              identified during the Phase I study.  Specifically, improvements are sought in
              the areas of modeling chemistry of ternary and quaternary III-V materials,
              establishing the relationship between strain and growth rate, and development
              of mechanisms, which can model deposition accurately both in the kinetic as
              well as the mass-transport regime.  Comprehensive databases for optical,
              thermodynamic/transport properties, and reaction mechanisms will be implemented
              to ensure the commercial success of the proposed simulation tool.  Model
              developments will be followed by extensive validation studies on commercial
              MOCVD reactors, to be conducted in collaboration with Aixtron AG, one of the
              leading MOVPE equipment manufacturers.  Validations will also be performed on
              reactor geometries and cases available from the open literature as well as
              research groups currently working in collaboration with CFDRC.  Phase III work
              will focus on commercialization aspects such as improvements in software
              frontends, improved data handling and development of virtual reactor prototypes
              for commercial use.

                    The availability of the proposed
              simulation tool will facilitate the design, optimization and scale-up (to large
              wafer sizes) of reactors/processes for MOVPE.  This will result in lower
              equipment and fabrication costs and improved uniformity/quality of the grown
              materials.  Thus, the simulation tool will be an enabling technology in
              eliminating a major road block in the commercialization of III-V MOVPE
              technology.  This will also have a positive impact on the growth of the
              optoelectronic device and telecommunication industries.
