Title       : CAREER: Private Information in Auctions, Pricing Games, and Ongoing
               Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9983820

Award Number: 9983820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285745             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Athey athey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In many relationships, agents interact repeatedly over time with the goal of
              achieving a self-enforcing cooperative outcome. Problems of this nature are
              widely studied within economics, and a primary application is collusion among
              firms. I propose to incorporate into such models the presence of privately
              observed shocks to the utility of each actor, shocks that affect the efficient
              actions for the group.  I will develop a theory of such relationships,
              characterizing optimal collusive schemes, and analyzing how these schemes
              change with the economic environment (such as the nature of anti-trust
              regulation). I argue that the nature of a collusive scheme hinges critically on
              the ability of firms to track the identities and actions of individual cartel
              members over time, and implement schemes that favor or disfavor individual
              firms. When firms cannot use future market-share favors to reach agreement,
              optimal collusive schemes can be characterized by high prices and productive
              inefficiency, and the absence of equilibrium-path price wars. In contrast, when
              firms have access to future market-share favors, they use them to provide
              incentives for truthful revelation of costs, without resorting to low prices or
              price wars. Characterizations of the optimal collusive schemes in this context
              are challenging, and firms may incur productive inefficiency when trying to
              implement asymmetric outcomes. Nonetheless, I outline a methodological approach
              to this problem, with both theoretical and computational parts, and I provide
              some initial results.

With these tools in place, it is possible to evaluate
              the role of alternative instruments that might be available to the cartel. I
              propose to analyze the role of explicit communication about cost conditions,
              highlighting a tradeoff between improved coordination and market-share
              allocation, and heightened incentives to deviate from a collusive agreement
              following the revelation of cost information. I further consider monetary
              side-payments that incorporate some transaction cost, for example, due to the
              probability that the side-payment will be detected by anti-trust enforcement.
              Such "bribes" can be a substitute for future market share favors, but if they
              have any transaction cost they will not fully replace market share favors:
              optimal collusive schemes will generically be non-stationary.

Proposed
              extensions to this framework include the incorporation of business cycle
              fluctuations and alternative assumptions about the sources of private
              information. For example, I propose a model where demand is stochastic and
              firms privately forecast demand, but the final realization of demand is
              publicly observed. In such settings, firms will be willing to undergo price
              wars on the equilibrium path as a punishment for pricing behavior that does not
              "match" the realized demand level. More generally, I also plan to apply the
              framework to other contexts, including the provision of public goods in ongoing
              relationships, and problems of organizational design.

The final component of
              my proposal concerns the empirical measurement of the importance of private
              information in auctions, with a focus on Forest Service timber auctions. I
              propose a variety of approaches, both "structural" and "non-structural," to
              identify the presence of, and extent of, private information about an unknown
              attribute of the object that affects the utilities of all bidders. Quantifying
              the extent of the "winner's curse" in such settings provides insight into
              strategic use of information in auctions and other settings characterized by
              adverse selection, such as insurance markets.

In terms of education, I plan
              to integrate graduate and undergraduate students into the research process,
              train them in the new methods I propose, and advise them on related thesis
              topics. I further intend to continue to aggressively seek out undergraduates,
              mentor them, and help them apply to graduate school.

