Title       : Design of a bioinformatic database for functional evolutionary footprints in
               multigene families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a9983133

Award Number: 9983133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $677398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sudhir Kumar s.kumar@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sethuraman Panchanathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the molecular basis for origin of new function and diversificaton
              of existing gene function is of fundamental importance in molecular biology.
              Gene duplications are possibly the predominant mechanism for generating raw
              materials for functional evolution, as the duplicate copies may acquire a new
              function by accumulating mutational changes (substitutions) in their coding
              sequences. Biochemical properties and the location of such changes in the
              protein sequence are the evolutionary "footprints" of functional
              diversification. These mutations are under strong purifying selection pressures
              to maintain the novel/modified function. The goal of this project is to design
              a biological database and an informatic system with the following
              objectives:

1. Design and construction of a database of potentially
              functionally important mutations in animal multigene families to facilitate
              identification and exploration of the evolutionary footprints in the following
              contexts: (i) protein sequence context [e.g., alpha-helix], (ii) duplicate gene
              function context [e.g., DNA-binding activity], and (iii) phylogenetic context
              of gene duplication events [e.g., vertebrate-invertebrate divergence, radiation
              of mammals].

2. Development of a general purpose Web-based client/server
              resource for researchers world-wide to dynamically and interactively query,
              retrieve, explore, and analyze evolutionary footprints.

The proposed
              Evolutionary Footprint (EF) Client/Server System will be useful for researchers
              interested in exploring evolutionary footprints and will address the day-to-day
              needs of researchers in many different areas of molecular biology including
              computational genomics, evolutionary biology, immunology, systematics, and
              developmental biology. 


