Title       : An ATP Receptor in Tetrahymena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9983060

Award Number: 9983060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd M. Hennessey thennes@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ATP is an excitatory neurotransmitter in most multicellular organisms.  However,
              preliminary evidence suggests that ATP receptors are found even in unicellular
              organisms, specifically in the ciliate Tetrahymena.  This evidence suggests
              that the Tetrahymena receptor serves as a chemorepellent receptor by eliciting
              an ATP-dependent membrane depolarization (by inducing a change in membrane
              calcium conductance) and action potentials that result in repetitive bouts of
              backward and forward swimming called "avoiding reactions". This behavior
              re-orients the cells to enable them to avoid high concentrations of ATP, a
              compound normally released by lysed cells.  This is similar to the proposed
              role of external ATP as an indicator of cell lysis in pain reception in
              vertebrates.  Thus, ATP reception in Tetrahymena may be an evolutionary
              precursor to neurotransmission in higher organisms, and the Tetrahymena ATP
              receptor may have significant similarities to vertebrate ATP receptors.  Such a
              similarity is further suggested by the ability of an antibody made against a
              subset of vertebrate ATP receptors (P2X1 receptors) to cross-react with a
              membrane protein of Tetrahymena.  Experiments will determine if this protein is
              the ATP receptor and, if so, to characterize it.  Immunoprecipitation will be
              used as a basis for purification.  Behavioral bioassays, and
              electrophysiological, molecular biological and biochemical techniques will be
              utilized to verify the location of the receptor in the cell and to determine
              its properties.  Additional studies will determine of the biochemical
              mechanisms involved in chemosensory adaptation. This work will advance basic
              knowledge of chemorepellent reception and adaptation, and will provide insights
              into the evolution of neurotransmitter systems. The project will also
              contribute towards education of students at the high school, undergraduate and
              graduate levels who will participate in the research.
