Title       : CAREER: Reference Resolution for Natural Language Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a9983600

Award Number: 9983600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanda M. Harabagiu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year of funding of a 4-year continuing award. A major obstacle
              in building robust systems
that extract and interpret information, and
              summarize and answer questions from texts, is the need to identify the entities
              referred to by pronouns or other referential expressions. 
This project
              extends the PI's prior work involving the development of an empirical reference
              resolution system that relies on several sets of heuristics that correspond to
              various forms of reference. In particular, 
the framework will be extended to
              learn semantic knowledge that supports consistency checks. This enhancement
              will provide high precision reference resolution and also enhance substantially
              the recall of 
referential links. The research will be evaluated using
              referenceannotated texts and the Penn Treebank corpora. The outcome will be a
              corpus-based method for reference resolution for both pronouns and nominal
              
expressions. First, the semantics of all referential noun phrases will be
              captured. Then, by extending the 
empirical environment with bootstrapping,
              this reference resolution technique should lead to a 
powerful tool capable of
              resolving reference correctly in a large variety of texts. Finally, the tool
              will be 
incorporated both in an information extraction system and in a
              question/answering system, to measure its 
contribution to the overall
              performance of these systems. The proposed research departs from previous
              approaches to reference resolution, in that it promotes data-driven techniques
              instead of relying on combinations of linguistic and cognitive aspects of
              language. The immediate pragmatic outcome indicated by the preliminary results
              should be a substantial recall enhancement.

