Title       : CAREER: Quantum Critical Dynamics in Magnetic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9983777

Award Number: 9983777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Crowell crowell@physics.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to a young faculty member at the  University of Minnesota will
              establish a research program to study the spin dynamics of magnetic systems
              near quantum critical points.  This project will develop and implement a hybrid
              magneto-optical technique for probing real-time spin dynamics near magnetic
              phase transitions.  Relaxation on time scales of order 10 - 1000 picoseconds
              will be probed, providing information about spin dynamics that complements
              traditional techniques such as neutron scattering.  The project is
              interdisciplinary, drawing on ideas from magnetism and semiconductor physics. 
              Integrated with this research is an educational plan to enhance
              interdisciplinary approaches such as that used in this work, a new program in
              scientific communication will be established as part of an upper-level
              experimental methods course at the University of Minnesota.  A set of resources
              for improving both written and oral communication will be developed, allowing
              physics students to receive feedback from their instructors, peers, and
              teaching support personnel in the University's Online Writing Center.

This
              CAREER award to a young faculty member at the University of Minnesota will
              establish a research program to study very fast processes in magnetic
              materials.  Such processes are used for reading and writing information to
              computer hard disks.  A new probe will be developed that will be capable of
              examining processes that occur on time scales up to 200 times faster than the
              500 MHz operating speed of a desktop PC microprocessor.  The project will
              employ a pulsed laser technique that is adapted from experiments on
              semiconductors.  This is an example of how scientists benefit from
              communication across different disciplines.  The educational plan of this
              project is to improve the way that scientists communicate with each other as
              well as with the general public.  New techniques for teaching written and oral
              communication will be implemented in physics major courses at the University of
              Minnesota.  A new framework for feedback from instructors and peers will be
              developed with the ultimate goal of transferring these techniques to the larger
              forum of introductory laboratory courses.

