Title       : Regulation of Myelin Biogenesis: RabX, a Novel GTP-Binding Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a9983255

Award Number: 9983255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93616              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge N. Larocca larocca@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9983255
larocca

The myelin sheath is a highly specialized membranous
              structure that
surrounds axons of the central and peripheral nervous systems
              and is
essential for the normal saltatory conduction of the electrical
              impulse
along the axon. The cells responsible for the formation of myelin in
              the
brain are called oligodendrocytes.   Some of the myelin proteins
              are
synthesized in the body of the oligodendrocyte and subsequently
              transported
by small vesicles to the place where the myelin is formed. 
              Similarly,
myelin components can be transported from the myelin sheath to
              other parts
of the oligodendrocytes by means of small vesicles.   The
              formation,
maintenance and remodeling of the myelin sheath depend at least in
              part on
the intracellular transport of vesicles. The transport of vesicles
              is
regulated by controlling both vesicle formation and fusion. At
              present
little is known about the mechanisms in oligodendrocytes that regulate
              this
traffic, because of the previous absence of definitive
              experimental
approaches to sort out the various signalling components that
              function in
living oligodendrocytes.  We were able to design an approach that
              allows
the visualization of different pathways of vesicle transport in
              living
oligodendrocytes.  We isolated from oligodendrocytes a novel gene
              that
codifies for a protein, designated RabX, which is a member of a family
              of
proteins that are known to regulated specific vesicle trafficking
              pathways.
 The Rab family of proteins regulates intracellular transport of
              vesicles
controlling both the formation of vesicles in the membrane
              donor
compartment and the fusion/targeting of vesicles in the
              acceptor
compartment.  Additionally, Rab proteins appear to be involved in
              the
movement of the vesicles from the donor to the acceptor compartment,
              which
is facilitated by elements of the cell cytoskeleton. The functions of
              Rab
proteins to regulate different steps in intracellular vesicle
              transport
depend on their ability to alternate between two conformational
              states,
inactive (GDP-bound) and active (GTP-bound).  The capacity to
              change
conformational state relies on GTPase activity. Our research will be
              focus
in the study of RabX GTPase activity and in the analysis of the movement
              in
living cells of vesicles containing RabX. Using molecular
              biological
techniques RabX will be attached to EYFP (a fluorescent protein).
              This
chimera protein (RabX-EYFP) will be express in different cells
              including
oligodendrocytes, and since it is fluorescent we will able to see
              the
intracellular compartment that contain Rab0-EYFP by
              fluorescence
microscopy.  By taking pictures of the cells at different times
              we will
able to study the movement of vesicles that contain RabX-EYFP.   It
              is
expected that this research will result in a better understanding of
              how
RabX regulates the intracellular transport of vesicles in
              the
oligodendrocytes.  This information is essential for knowing how
              myelin
formation and remodeling take place.  We believe that this basic
              knowledge
will help in the design of novel treatments for recovering the
              myelin lost
during demyelinating disorders, such as multiple sclerosis and
              spinal cord
injury.  


