Title       : WORKSHOP: Increasing Minority Involvement In Integrative and Comparative
               Biology, to be held at the annual meeting of SICB, Atlanta, Georgia, January
               4-8, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9983235

Award Number: 9983235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dianna K. Padilla   (Principal Investigator current)
              Florence I. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5500,9133,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Expanding the reach of pure research beyond the confines of the academy is
              essential if we are to address problems facing society into the 21st century. 
              Pure research is required to allow creative approaches to problems facing
              society and to expand the scope of knowledge. However, to maximize the impact
              and usefulness of scientific inquiry, it is important that participants in
              science represent the diversity of people within the society. The goal of the
              proposed workshop is to bring together individuals who are committed to
              expanding minority participation in the field of integrative biology and in
              increasing access by the minority community to the resources of the Society of
              Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB). SICB is a national society whose
              members are scientists in many areas of organismal biology, including
              biochemistry, physiology, endocrinology, developmental biology, neural biology,
              comparative morphology, ecology, evolution, behavior, and systematics. SICB was
              formally known as the American Society of Zoologists. The recent name change
              has provided the impetus to make a number of other important changes in the
              goals and directions of SICB. One of these important changes is the recognition
              that SICB should play significant roles both in the integration of ideas and
              approaches in science and in expanding access to science to all members of the
              American social structure. To this end, the society would like to initiate a
              program that will encourage minority participation in areas of Integrative and
              Comparative Biology and increase the role of minorities and minority
              institutions in our annual scientific meeting, which is the major function of
              the society.  A workshop format will be used to organize and initiate this new
              program. This workshop will include scientists, students, representatives from
              potential sources of funding, and members of the scientific community from
              traditionally minority institutions. This group will represent a broad range of
              perspectives and a broad geographic range. The goal of this workshop will be to
              produce a plan to develop programs that will increase awareness of careers in
              Integrative and Comparative Biology among minority students and provide
              financial assistance for students to participate in future meetings of SICB.
              Further, the workshop will be the forum for the development of plans for
              obtaining funding and implementing programs designed to build a long-term
              program within SICB to increase minority participation at all levels of the
              society and in the field of Integrative and Comparative Biology. 

The
              workshop will take place at the annual meeting if SICB in Atlanta during
              January 2000. The participants will include representatives from SICB, the
              National Science Foundation, the Mellon Foundation, the United Negro College
              Fund (UNCF). Administrators and Academics from Historically Black and Minority
              Colleges or Universities that represent a broad geographic range, and an
              undergraduate and a graduate student who has participated in a minority
              oriented program.

