Title       : CAREER: Pricing and Resource Allocation in Multiservice Broadband Communication
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a9983221

Award Number: 9983221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis Paschalidis yannisp@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   New technological advances and recent developments in research are leading
              the way towards an enhanced next-generation Internet. This new medium will
              surpass the current best effort only" capability and evolve into a multiservice
              network able to accommodate differentiated classes of service to support
              various types of applications and business requirements. Now that the
              technology has dramatically evolved and computer networks have become
              ubiquitous, the proposed work aims at addressing some of the important
              remaining
challenges: (i) to use the network resources efficiently, and (ii)
              to facilitate the creation of a healthy market environment, where new network
              services can be introduced and sustained.  To this end, it is proposed (1) to
              devise mechanisms and tools that will enable network service providers to
              optimize their operations and make them economically viable, and (2) to
              provide, through pricing, sufficient incentives to users of network services
              that will help smooth spikes in demand and lead to a more efficient utilization
              of the available resources.
     The Internet, and computer networking in
              general, are evolving into a real industry. The developments in other more
              mature industries (e.g., airlines, car rentals) are indicative of its future.
              Such industries implement sophisticated revenue management practices including
              pricing and efficient resource allocation. In networking, these actions can
              also be instrumental in alleviating congestion which is not only caused by the
              lack of bandwidth but, increasingly, due to overloading of Web servers.
    
              The proposed research contains specific plans on (1) models for pricing
              multiple network services that incorporate users' reaction to prices (demand
              functions), service characteristics, network effects, and the inherent
              uncertainty in the problem; (2) estimating from measurements the amount of
              network resources consumed by various services, which can be instrumental in
              pricing and other resource allocation mechanisms; (3) optimizing the operation
              Web of servers, i.e., implementing sophisticated scheduling and routing of
              tasks in clusters of servers; and on (4) making strategic service provisioning
              decisions, which
are affected by competition and consumer choice and include
              capacity planning, buying or selling in bandwidth markets, and deciding the
              optimal menu of offered services.
     The proposed work will draw upon
              methodologies and techniques that the PI has considerable expertise and, in
              some instances, has helped in developing. These include: (i) large deviations,
              (ii) dynamic (and approximate-dynamic) programming, and (iii) potential
              function methods.
     On the educational front, the proposed plan aims at
              promoting a synergy between optimization and stochastic techniques, and at
              preparing graduate students well versed in both areas who can contribute to
              this research agenda. It consists of specific (graduate and undergraduate)
              curriculum development ideas, the organization of an invited seminar series,
              and the creation of an instructional software laboratory that will enhance
              undergraduate recruitment and teaching. Graduate students in the PI's group
              typically have strong background in stochastic processes, control, and
              optimization. Two proposed graduate courses in computer networking aim at
              helping them focusing their research in this area by providing a sufficiently
              deep survey of advances and outstanding issues.

