Title       : Digital Government: Very Large Scale Multidimensional Data Management and
               Retrieval for USGS and NIMA Imagery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9983430

Award Number: 9983430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aidong Zhang azhang@cse.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Mark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1706      DIGITAL GOVERNMENT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1387,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9983430
Zhang, Aidong
SUNY Buffalo

Digital Government:  Very Large
              Scale Multidimensional Data Management and Retrieval for USGS and NIMA
              Imagery

This project will conduct research on managing and retrieving
              multidimensional data held by partner government agencies (the United States
              Geological Survey (USGS) and the National Imaging and Mapping Agency (NIMA)). 
              In such applications, geographic image databases distributed at remote
              locations must be made available at other locations for purpose of data
              retrieval.  With the advent of content-based retrieval of image data,
              traditional methods for database design and query search will not be suitable
              in developing distributed image retrieval systems.

The objective of the
              proposed research is to investigate novel approaches to supporting effective
              and efficient access to the integrated geographic image databases over the
              Internet.  These approaches will establish a foundation for the design of
              distributed geographic image retrieval systems.  The technical challenge
              relating to the design of such integration is the creation of meta-level system
              on top of the image databases.  The specific research goals are :  (1) identify
              multi-scale representation (multidimensional) methods for geographic images,
              (2) investigate novel clustering approaches that can detect clusters of
              arbitrary shape of multidimensional image data, (3) construct a metadata model
              that formulates the metadata that are needed for the integrated system to
              direct a visual query to relevant databases, (4) develop the theoretical
              foundation of database selection approaches based on the metadata, and (5)
              design novel visual query processing approaches that integrate heterogeneous
              features extracted from the content of visual data.

During the project
              period, USGS and NIMA will provide all necessary imagery data sets and their
              categories.  A system will be disseminated at both USGS and NIMA sites at the
              end of the project period.  Through the above research activities, the
              fundamental understanding and novel techniques will be provided to support the
              design of distributed volume of multidimensional data distributed over the
              Internet and will find broad applications as a template for the development of
              distributed image database system in other government agencies, such as NASA. 
              The experimental results to be generated can be used to establish effective
              benchmarks for assessing the performance of distributed image data retrieval
              systems.

