Title       : The Regulation of Compound Leaf Development in Tomato
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9983063

Award Number: 9983063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neelima R. Sinha nrsinha@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sinha
9983063

The purpose of this research is to understand how compound
              leaves differ from simple leaves and to elucidate the developmental steps that
              give rise to this complex leaf form.  The starting point of this analysis is
              the finding that Class 1 homeobox genes like KNOTTED1 (KNOX1 genes) are
              expressed only in the shoot apical meristem (SAM) and unexpanded shoots, and
              not in the incipient leaf primordium (P0), of simple leaf producing apices in
              both dicots and monocots. Over-expression of these genes is sufficient to cause
              leaf lobing and ectopic meristem formation.  However, in compound leaf
              producing SAMs in tomato, the KNOX1 genes (like LeT6 and TKN1) are expressed
              both in the SAM and in emerging and developing leaf primordia.  This suggests
              that KNOX1 genes may provide a degree of indeterminacy to the leaf primordia in
              tomato, thereby leading to an extended stage of morphogenesis and a more
              complex leaf form.  This project will identify the proteins that interact with
              LeT6 to provide DNA binding specificity and organ specific gene regulation, and
              the downstream targets of LeT6 regulation.  Expression analyses in the tomato
              leaf mutations suggest that trans-acting factors at the LeT6 promoter, targets
              of LeT6, and other genes that may act as LeT6 partners in transcriptional
              regulation would lead to the identification of other key genes in compound leaf
              development.  Preliminary data suggests that LeT6 may regulate the expression
              of the PHANTASTICA  homolog in tomato, which in turn may regulate other KNOX1 
              genes.  The following questions will be addressed.  What are the downstream
              targets of the KNOX1 genes like LeT6?  Do the KNOX1 genes act in a complex with
              other transcription factors (TFs)?  How are the levels of KNOX1 genes like LeT6
              regulated in tomato shoot apices?  What role does PHAN play in the regulation
              of KNOX1 gene expression in tomato shoot meristems and leaves?   Are the
              expression patterns of PHAN and KNOX1 genes complementary in tomato apices (as
              shown for simple leaf producing apices)?  Does PHAN expression in tomato
              predict sites of leaflet initiation (as suggested for the simple leaved
              Antirrhinum and Arabidopsis)?  A careful study of KNOX1 genes like LeT6 and
              TKN1, PHAN, and their regulatory relationships will allow an understanding of
              the developmental steps that give rise to the complex leaf form in compound
              leaves.  

