Title       : CAREER: Instabilities in the Flow of Dry and Wet Granular Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9983659

Award Number: 9983659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arshad A. Kudrolli akudrolli@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9983659
This CAREER project will investigate experimentally the instabilities
              in the flow of cohesive and non-cohesive granular matter under a variety of
              excitations and boundary conditions that lead to granular flows, patterns, or
              segregation. There is no fundamental theoretical approach for granular matter
              similar to the Navier--Stokes equations for fluids. An important deterrent to
              the development of a comprehensive theory has been lack of quantitative
              experiments on granular matter. The results of the proposed studies using silo
              systems, and couette shear flow cells will yield critical tests of the range of
              applicability of newly developed hydrodynamic approaches, especially in light
              of recent numerical work which shows a clear breakdown of hydrodynamics for
              even nominal dissipation and raises questions about the applicability of other
              continuum approaches. A new laboratory-based course will be developed on
              nonlinear phenomena in nature as part of the undergraduate physics curriculum
              and a summer high school teacher training program.
%%%
This condensed matter
              physics CAREER project is an experimental study of the properties of dry and
              wet granular matter. Granular matter, like sand or grain, is important in many
              engineering processes and geological phenomena, but a satisfactory description
              of its properties does not exist. The proposed experiments using high speed and
              high resolution imaging will examine granular materials in various geometries
              to determine their properties under external mechanisms of adding energy. The
              basic understanding gained from the proposed experiments will ultimately lead
              to a better understanding of a range of phenomena such as conditions that give
              rise to long run-offs in landslides, and segregation of grains in hopper flows.
              A new laboratory-based course called "Patterns in Nature" will be developed as
              part of the undergraduate physics curriculum and a summer high school teacher
              training program. The write-ups and the designs for the experiments will be
              made available on the Web to offset the current lack in textbooks in nonlinear
              physics with emphasis on doing experiments.
***


