Title       : Neuronal Cooperativity in the Somatosensory System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2000     
File        : a9983285

Award Number: 9983285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Alloway   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Individual neurons in the nervous system use electrical impulses or action
              
potentials to communicate sensory information from one region of the brain
              
to another region.  This project is concerned with determining how neurons
              
in the somatosensory part of the thalamus communicate with neurons in the
              
somatosensory part of the cerebral cortex during tactile stimulation.  More
              
specifically, we wish to measure how the relative timing of action
              
potentials among neighboring thalamic neurons might alter the
              
responsiveness of neurons in the cerebral cortex.  Many neuroscientists
              
believe that cortical neurons are likely to respond with an action
              
potential when they receive communication from multiple thalamic neurons at
              
the same time but are less likely to respond if they receive communication
              
from only one thalamic neuron.  We will directly test this hypothesis by
              
inserting multiple electrodes into both brain regions and recording the
              
precise times of their neuronal action potentials when the skin is touched
              
by a computer controlled air puff.  We will use statistical analysis to
              
determine if the probability of a cortical action potential is highest when
              
pairs of thalamic neurons discharge at the same time (in synchrony) or at
              
different times (asynchronously).  We will also use our computer controlled
              
air puffer to stimulate the skin in a variety of spatiotemporal
              
configurations to determine which types of tactile stimuli are best for
              
activating pairs of thalamic neurons at the same time.  We will also use
              
this method to determine which tactile stimuli activate pairs of cortical
              
neurons at the same time.  This research project is important because it
              
will determine if neuronal synchronization is a mechanism used by the brain
              
to communicate information from one brain region to the next.  This project
              
will also provide evidence suggesting whether neuronal synchronization
              
could be used by the brain to represent certain types of sensory 
stimuli. 
              Hence, when this project is completed, we will know how 
individual cortical
              neurons respond to simultaneous inputs and this will 
greatly increase our
              understanding of how neuronal circuits operate in the 
mammalian brain.


