Title       : Genetic Analysis of Chromatically Adapting Nostoc sp.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a9983090

Award Number: 9983090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Schaefer schaeferm@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Light is a critical environmental parameter for photosynthetic organisms. In
              addition to driving photosynthesis, it provides the information necessary for
              acclimation to changes in ambient conditions. Most photosynthetic organisms at
              all levels of biological complexity can modulate their photosynthetic capacity
              to accommodate native fluctuations in light availability. Most often, genes
              that encode the components of the photosynthetic apparatus are controlled by
              wavelength-specific photoreceptors that initiate light-responsive signaling
              pathways. Although photoregulated gene expression is well documented for
              prokaryotic and eukaryotic phototrophs, little is known about the associate
              signaling and gene regulatory mechanisms. Cyanobacteria classified as Group III
              chromatic adaptors respond to spectral changes in light quality by altering the
              phycobiliprotein composition of the light-harvesting phycobilisome. Green light
              promotes synthesis of phycobilisomes enriched for phycoerythrin, whereas red
              light promotes the synthesis of phycobilisomes enriched for phycocyanin. This
              acclimation response, termed complementary chromatic adaptation (CCA), provides
              for optimal harvesting of the incident light energy by modulating the bilin
              composition of the phycobilisome rods. CCA has been most extensively studied in
              the filamentous cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon (also referred to as
              Calothrix sp. strain PCC 7601). Recent work has revealed that CCA involves a
              multi-component phosphorelay signaling pathway that links the activity of a
              photoreceptor to regulated expression of specific phycobiliprotein gene sets.
              However, the molecular genetic dissection of the CCA regulatory mechanism in F.
              diplosiphon remains compromised by the lack of a standard genetic system for
              the strain. The goal of this project is to develop a transposon-tagging system
              for identifying the molecular components of the CCA regulatory mechanism in two
              Group III chromatically adapting Nostoc sp. Using a conjugation-based protocol
              established for Anabaena sp., both Nostoc strains will be subjected to Tn5-1058
              mutagenesis with the objective of isolating phycobilisome regulatory mutants.
              Such mutants will provide for rapid identification of new phycobilisome
              regulatory genes and facilitate the molecular dissection of the CCA regulatory
              mechanism.
