Title       : SBIR Phase II: Enhanced Organic Electroluminescent Display
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9983435

Award Number: 9983435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shujun Wang shujunw@reveo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhan He  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Reveo Inc
	      3 Westchester Plaza
	      Elmsford, NY  105231609    914/345-9556

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project continues Reveo's
              successful development of unprecedented high-brightness,
              polarized-light-emitting electroluminescent devices (ELD's) for the immediate
              applications of energy-efficient liquid crystal display (LCD) and dashboard
              backlights, as well as the longer-term applications of glare-free general room
              lighting and automobile headlights.  Polarized light is essential to reduce
              distracting glare from indoor lights for LCD backlights.  However, all current
              methods of producing polarized light rely on a bulky polarizing panel placed in
              front of an unpolarized light source.  Some have the serious disadvantage of
              wasting half the energy by absorbing one polarization state, but even
              reflective panels that polarize the light without waste suffer from the
              intrinsic disadvantages of high cost, complicated manufacturing, and
              inconvenient packaging.  Reveo's ELD promises to be the first commercially
              viable polarized light source, bypassing all the disadvantages of present
              reflective polarizing panels while offering dramatic energy savings of a factor
              of two in LCD and dashboard backlights by eliminating the need for a polarizer
              altogether.  In Phase II, we will construct prototype demonstration backlights
              to attract funding commitments from strategic partners, placing this
              revolutionary technology firmly on the path to fruition for the benefit of the
              environment and humanity.

The polarization properties of light are used
              ubiquitously in modern technology, as both enabling concepts for other
              technologies and as direct, important improvements in people's lives.  Reveo's
              polarized-light-emitting electroluminescent device has immediate applications
              as an LCD backlight, allowing energy savings of a factor of two without being
              significantly more expensive than current backlights.  With further
              development, this technology offers the potential of functioning as a polarized
              "light bulb" for room light, reducing eyestrain and other health consequences
              of glare for millions of office workers.  The advent of a low-cost,
              high-brightness polarized light source has far-reaching positive impact on the
              environment, the economy, and indeed American health.


