Title       : CAREER: Oxygen Ion Conduction in Layered Aurivillius-Derived Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9983801

Award Number: 9983801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Misture misture@bigvax.alfred.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alfred U Col of Ceramics
	      2 Pine Street
	      Alfred, NY  148021296    607/871-2716

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9983801
Misture

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development
              project is to dovetail research on novel ionic conductors with new teaching and
              outreach approaches that incorporate the research instruments and computational
              facilities.  The goal of the research component of the project is to develop
              and understand new oxide ion conductors designed around the interesting
              structural features of the Aurivillius family of oxide structures.
              Oxygen-deficient perovskite-like layers will be incorporated into the
              Aurivillius structural framework and then counter-doping between layers will be
              used to increase the unit cell volume and disorder the oxygen vacancies.  The
              untapped potential of the Aurivillius-derived phases holds great promise for
              intermediate-temperature ionic conduction, and requires a clear description of
              the structures and the effects of structure on the ionic conductivity. The
              experimental work will be complemented with atomistic computer simulation to
              predict the stability of phases and to describe the nature of the defects that
              facilitate ionic conductivity. In-situ diffraction, atomistic simulation, and
              remote access to national facilities will be incorporated into course curricula
              for undergraduate and graduate education and new outreach programs. The use of
              group learning approaches with highly visual, state-of-the-art research tools
              will be evaluated from the perspective of student enthusiasm and learning. 
              Likewise, the success of outreach programs that integrate hands-on
              demonstrations supported by live virtual tours of research laboratories will be
              evaluated. 

Direct conversion of fossil fuels to electrical energy using
              fuel cells is a high efficiency, pollution-free alternative to traditional
              combustion.  New materials that conduct oxygen ions at intermediate
              temperatures are critical, however, to improve existing fuel cells and allow
              mass commercialization of the devices.  A distinct group of ceramics, called
              Aurivillius phases, has great potential for use in electrochemical devices and
              are the subject of study.  An approach that combines experimental work and
              computational modeling of the materials will be used to develop and understand
              new ionic conductors based on the Aurivillius phases.  Some of the research
              tools that will be used to make advances in this area of research are highly
              visual, very fast, or include live remote control of experiments using the
              world wide web.  The research tools are therefore widely accessible and will be
              incorporated into classroom, distance learning, and outreach activities.  In
              addition to directly including undergraduates in the research, undergraduate
              group learning laboratories with state-of-the-art research tools will be
              established and evaluated from the perspective of student enthusiasm and
              learning.  The curricular experiments will provide the background required to
              prepare effective distance learning and on-campus short courses.  Outreach
              programs will integrate hands-on demonstrations, web-based demonstrations, and
              virtual visits to the PI's laboratory and national facilities. The outreach
              efforts are designed to include non-majors on campus and to reach
              underrepresented groups in western New York through contact with a large number
              of K-12 teachers and students. 


