Title       : POWRE: Estrogen Receptor-Beta Activation of Prolactin Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9806217

Award Number: 9806217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary Steinmetz rsteinme@iupui.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rosemary Steinmetz    Project Title:  Estrogen Receptor-Beta Activation of 
              Prolactin Gene Expression    Estrogens modulate the growth and differentiation
              of many  body tissues by influencing the activation or deactivation  of
              estrogen-responsive genes.  The first, and most critical,  step that is
              involved in this activation is the binding of  estrogen to its endogenous
              intracellular receptor (ER).  ER-  alpha (ERa), the first identified and best
              characterized ER,  is composed of several regions or functional domains. Each 
              of these domains carry out a specific function which is  absolutely essential
              for the ER to induce gene activation.  Recently, a new ER variant ER-Beta
              (ER-B) has been  discovered.  ER-B differs from ERa both in size and the 
              sequence of the amino acids which comprise it.  These  differences may cause
              this new receptor to interact with new  genes or new ligands or allow it to
              interact with already  identified estrogen-sensitive genes in a manner
              different  from that of ERa.  Little is known concerning how this new  receptor
              interacts physically with the genes it governs.  The overall objective of this
              study is to determine the  functional domains of ER-B that are required for the
               activation of the estrogen-responsive prolactin gene.  Based  on information
              concerning the structure of ER-B and its  homology to ERa, the first specific
              aim is to construct a  series of expression vectors which will express either 
              truncated or mutated ER-B receptors.  Using theses mutants,  for in vitro
              transfection assays, we will be able to  identify which domain(s) of the ER-B
              molecule bind various  estrogenic compounds and which are required for gene 
              activation.    ER-B has been detected in a variety of tissues including the 
              pituitary. Prolactin is a pituitary hormone that is  exquisitely
              estrogen-sensitive. Prolactin is involved in  many physiologic functions
              including reproduction,  lactation, sexual development, cellular immunity and 
              behavior.  Little is known concerning the regulation  of the  prolactin gene by
              ER-B.  Estrogens bind to the ER and in  synergy  with the pituitary-specific
              factor Pit-1 stimulate  prolactin synthesis and release.  While the nature of
              the  interaction between Pit-1 and the ERa variant has been well 
              characterized, the interaction between Pit-1 and ER-B has  not been determined.
               The second specific aim of this study  is to characterize the molecular
              interactions between Pit-1  and ER-B that are involved in prolactin gene
              activation.  This will be accomplished by using the prepared mutant  receptors
              in gene transfer studies.  Each of the mutant  receptors will be introduced
              into heterologous cell cultures  in combination with Pit-1 and a prolactin
              reporter gene.  These cells will then be treated with selected estrogenic 
              compounds and the transcriptional activation of the  prolactin reporter gene
              will be quantified.  These studies  will determine which regions of the ER-B
              work  synergistically with Pit-1 and which are required for  induction of
              prolactin by estrogenic compounds.  Results of  these studies will begin to
              determine the physical  interactions between this new receptor isoform and the
              genes  that it controls, as well as, expanding our existing  knowledge
              concerning the mechanisms which govern prolactin  homeostasis. These results
              will advance our knowledge  concerning the actions of this newly discovered
              receptor.
