Title       : CRB: Dynamic Interactions Between Plant Distributions and Animal-Generated
               Disturbances: Trajectories of Restored Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9806377

Award Number: 9806377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omer J. Reichman reichman@nceas.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric W. Seabloom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806377
Reichman
For decades, ecologists have been aware of the importance of
              disturbance in determining the structure of communities. Less is known about
              how patterns of disturbance affect the trajectory of community development that
              might emanate from efforts such as restoring natural communities. Restoration
              provides a distinctive opportunity to investigate the relationship between
              initial conditions and disturbance and their effect on the development of
              communities because features, such as plant species and distributions, must be
              chosen rather than relying on a preexisting compliment and pattern of species.
              This project is designed to determine how the restoration of California
              grassland is influenced by the initial distribution of plants and the intensity
              and spatial pattern of disturbance generated by pocket gophers. In addition,
              this experimental system will serve as a model for analyzing general features
              of the complex interactions between resource distribution and disturbance. The
              investigators will analyze the effect of plants on each other and on the
              disturbances generated by the animals, and the reciprocal effects of gophers on
              each other and the plant community. Furthermore, the experimental design will
              provide an opportunity to distinguish between the sum of effects of individual
              gophers from the effects generated by the complex social interactions between
              gophers which generate buffer zones of reduced disturbance. While any
              restoration research has an inherent site specific component, such studies can
              reveal general ecological patterns. The plant system and disturbance agents in
              this study have wide geographic distributions in North America. More generally,
              the conclusions drawn about the interactions between animal behavior and the
              coexistence of species in restored communities will be applicable in numerous
              other systems that are dominated by animal disturbance. Complex interactions
              are difficult to study, but by imposing manipulations on a system under
              restoration, this investigation will yield important insights into the effect
              of initial conditions and disturbance regimes on the trajectory of community
              development.

