Title       : A New model System to Test the Adaptive Significance of Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9806917

Award Number: 9806917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Rice   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Rice
9806917

 Reproduction in plants and animals can occur with or without
              genetic recombination, yet most multicellular organisms utilize genetic
              recombination when producing offspring.  In contrast, many agriculturally
              important crops such as nut trees, fruit trees, grapes, berries, etc. are
              propagated clonally, i.e., without genetic recombination.  What are the costs
              of bypassing the normal recombining mode of sexual reproduction? The proposed
              research creates a new model system that permits a truly definitive test of
              most of the current theories concerning the adaptive significance of genetic
              recombination.  The model system will be used to test the hypothesis that new
              beneficial mutations are incorporated into recombining populations at a far
              greater rate than clonal populations. The capacity for rapid adaptive evolution
              is becoming increasingly important owing to the rapid environmental change
              induced by human activities, e.g. global warming, habitat fragmentation,
              introduction of exotic species and disease organisms.
 
The common fruit fly
              (Drosophila melanogaster) is used as a model system owing to its inexpensive
              culturing, short generation time, and availability of numerous genetic tools
              which are critical for the operation of these multi-generation experiments. 
              Using a new clone-generator technology recently developed in our laboratory, we
              will experimentally introduce new beneficial mutations into populations with
              low vs. high levels of genetic recombination.  Next we will measure the
              probability of accumulation of these beneficial mutations and relate this to
              the experimentally controlled level of genetic recombination.  Current theory
              predicts that genetic recombination will greatly enhance the capacity of the
              populations to incorporate new beneficial mutations, and to purge deleterious
              mutations.  Results from these experiments will contribute to our basic
              understanding of plant and animal breeding programs, long and short-term
              evolution, and will help us to predict the capacity of different life forms to
              adapt to human-induced environmental change.

