Title       : POWRE: In Vitro Analysis of LINE-1 Retrotransposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9806033

Award Number: 9806033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65621              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9806033  Martin  This POWRE project will support a one year Visiting Researcher
              Fellowship for Sandra L. Martin.  The planned research is ideally suited for a
              POWRE award because the PI will gain experience with a wide range of new
              biochemical techniques while on sabbatical leave at the Salk Institute. The
              main goals of PI are to acquire new biochemical skills and then apply them to
              studies of LINE-1 retrotransposition. LINE-1 (long interspersed repeated
              sequence one, or L1 ) is a major dynamic force in the mammalian genome. It is a
              transposable element that has amplified to high copy number numerous times
              during evolution. Retrotransposition deposits the progeny of L1 throughout the
              genome, sometimes leading to gene disruption, modified expression of adjacent
              genes, and/or transduction of neighboring DNA.  In addition, L1, as
              interspersed, repetitive DNA, provides a substrate for homologous recombination
              of mispaired sequences, leading to gene duplication, deletion, chromosome
              translocation, and potentially, exon shuffling. LINE-1 retrotransposition
              begins with transcription of a full-length, sense-strand L1 RNA and requires
              two L1-encoded polypeptides which are the products of open reading frames one
              and two, ORFI and ORF2.  The two L1-encoded proteins likely also catalyze the
              reverse transcription and integration of SINEs (short interspersed repeated
              sequences) and processed pseudogenes, thereby amplifying the effects of LINE-1
              in mammalian genome dynamics. The long-range goal of research in the PI's
              laboratory is to understand the retrotransposition process in detail, including
              the biochemical intermediates involved, as well as its control in genetic and
              evolutionary time. The sabbatical project is designed to develop the
              recipient's skills as a biochemist while devising purification and assay
              methods for L1 retrotransposition intermediates. Experimental effort will be
              directed along two fronts, development of: l) assays for detection of steps in
              the L1 retrotransposition cycle, and 2) metho ds for purification of L1
              ribonucleoprotein particles which are hypothesized to be intermediates in the
              retrotransposition reaction. Because of their complementary nature, work on
              these two objectives will proceed simultaneously. This effort will be greatly
              facilitated by working in Dr. Frederic Bushman's laboratory at the Salk
              Institute  because of its expertise in using similar approaches to study the
              integration reaction of retroviral pre-integration complexes.  Between 10 and
              20% of the genome in all mammals is comprised of the long interspersed
              repetitive element, LINE-1. LINEs have replicated to this high copy number by a
              process of duplicative transposition that uses an RNA intermediate, also known
              as retrotransposition. When LINE elements replicate, a new copy is inserted
              into a new site within the genome. Sometimes the insertion disrupts an
              essential gene, which can lead to loss of function of that gene, but most LINE
              insertions do not cause mutations. Little is known about the replication cycle
              of LINE elements, but it is clear that the two  proteins encoded by LINEs are
              essential for the retrotransposition process. The goal of this work is to
              develop an in vitro system for the retrotransposition reaction. This requires
              development of novel assays to detect various steps in the process of
              retrotransposition as well as methods for purification of transposition
              intermediates, including the two proteins made by the LINE elements themselves.
              Once these assays and materials are available, they will be used to dissect the
              pathway of LINE retrotransposition in detail. This information may be used in
              the future to prevent mutations caused by LINE insertions, and/or to harness
              LINE retrotransposition for use as a tool in biotechnology.
