Title       : Archaeology of Culture Contact at Ft. Ross, CA: The Investigation of Metini
               Village
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1999       
File        : a9806901

Award Number: 9806901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42257              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent G. Lightfoot lightfoo@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Kent Lightfoot and his colleagues
              will continue their archaeological research at the Fort Ross Colony, located on
              the coast of northern California 110 km. North of San Francisco Bay. Fort Ross
              was founded in 1812 by the Russian-American Company, a mercantile monopoly that
              represented Russia's interests in the lucrative North Pacific fur trade. It
              served as a staging area for sea otter and fur seal hunts along the coast of
              California and as an agricultural community for raising crops and livestock
              until 1841 when it was sold and disbanded. The Company assembled an
              international, multi-ethnic workforce at Fort Ross that was divided into four
              major classes or estates: `Russians,` `Creoles,` `Aleuts,` and `Indians.` The
              Aleuts, imported from the Aleutian Islands served primarily as hunters while
              the `Indians` consisted primarily of Kaashaya Pomo, a local tribe. These Pomos
              performed a variety of tasks - tending livestock, working in agricultural
              fields and hauling clay for brick production. Each group lived in its own
              habitation area near Fort Ross and the goal of Dr. Lightfoot's current project
              is to examine the social organization and behavior patterns of this Pomo
              community. With one year of support, Dr. Lightfoot and his colleagues will lay
              the groundwork for a larger scale excavation. They will conduct archival
              research and also interview lineal Pomo descendants of Fort Ross inhabitants.
              The team will carry out a topographic survey of the site to identify middens
              and other surface features. This will be augmented by a geophysical survey to
              locate subsurface counterparts. Intensive surface collection will be conducted
              and limited excavations made in promising areas.  One of the best ways to
              understand how cultures function is to observe how they adapt in new contexts
              and Fort Ross provides an excellent situation to utilize such an approach. The
              prehistoric Pomo are well documented archaeologically and through excavation at
              Fort Ross it will be possible to see how what cultural practices are
              selectively maintained, dropped or modified in a unique multi-ethnic context.
              Previous research has focused on Russian and Aleut portions of the site and
              this Pomo study will provide valuable comparative data. The project involves
              many participants, including Pomo and will serve a valuable training function. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
