Title       : POWRE: Exogenous Shocks and Strategic Responses: Canadian and Mexican Auto Parts
               Suppliers Adjust to Free Trade and to Lean Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9806093

Award Number: 9806093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kaye G. Husbands kaye.husbands@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1320,1592,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since the late 1980s, North American firms have faced a confluence of events
              with long-term effects on decision-making at firms.  Strategic decisions by
              managers were particularly affected by: trade liberalization (the 1989
              Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and the 1994 North American Free Trade
              Agreement); the implementation of lean production techniques such as reduced
              inventories, improved product reliability, 100% on-time delivery, and more
              efficient communications within and outside the boundaries of the firm; changes
              in macroeconomic conditions including exchange rate and interest rate
              variability; and changes in domestic government regulations such as tightening
              environmental standards and evolving maquiladora and PETEX rules in Mexico. 
              The purpose of this study is to determine whether there is an optimal
              configuration of responses to these economic shocks, which spans
              technology-upgrading, changes in relationships between business entities,
              internationalization, and augmentation of production techniques.  The
              automotive parts industry is a ripe example for this analysis, since firms in
              this industry have been uniquely affected by all of these events directly and
              indirectly, as their customers (the automobile assemblers) adjust to the same
              economic shocks.  Mexican and Canadian plants are targeted for differently from
              their U.S. counterparts.  The focus on the plant level instead of on the
              corporate level is deliberate; plant managers are particularly responsible for
              implementing new technology and production strategies, and they are critically
              involved in the local and international communications regarding changes in
              production configuration.  Both survey and site-interview methodologies are
              utilized to investigate the perceptions of plant managers specifically
              concerning the differential effects of free trade and lean production on their
              decisions to utilize a particular strategic response.  Empirical analysis is
              utilized to determine the `best response` strategy of these plants to the
              exogenous shocks.  Furthermore, the data gathered from the survey should reveal
              which plant characteristics are consistent with particular response strategies
              and with the ability quickly to adjust to the exogenous shocks.  The answers to
              these and other questions raised by this study should help to inform
              policymakers and industry analysts as to the distinct effects of trade
              liberalization and lean production on the economic competitiveness of firms. 
              The investigator is currently on maternity leave and using the first half of
              her two-year sabbatical to care for her child.  During the period of this
              grant, the investigator will be on the second half of her sabbatical from
              Williams College.  Since Williams is a teaching institution, it is imperative
              for her academic advancement that she have the opportunity to complete this
              research project and prepare papers for publication before returning to her
              teaching duties.  This project also presents a unique opportunity for her to
              collaborate with other key researchers on NAFTA.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
