Title       : Acclimation/Adaptation of Leaf Respiration in Eastern Deciduous Forests: A
               Biome-Wide Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2000     
File        : a9806628

Award Number: 9806628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul V. Bolstad   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Vose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Reich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1095,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Bolstad  9806628    Work by scientists over the last decade strongly points to
              human-caused  global warming, and several studies have predicted large changes
              in the  wood production, water production, and distribution of our forests. 
              Some scenarios suggest cool-loving trees such as spruces, firs, and some 
              maples, will retreat northward as climates become too warm. Others suggest 
              forests may die out altogether in some regions, to be replaced  by grass or
              other more drought or heat tolerant life forms. The PIs' study is designed to
              identify the impacts of changing temperatures on the  physiology of eastern
              deciduous forest trees, and so help better determine  how the forests will
              respond to changing climate. All living organisms  respire as the convert food
              into energy, and plants are no different.  However in plants, there is a
              balance between food production  (photosynthesis) and consumption
              (respiration), which changes, depending on  the temperature. The PIs' study is
              designed to identify just how much plants have adapted to natural changes in 
              temperatures. The PIs will measure respiration across the natural range for 
              white oak and red maple, two species found from Florida to New England  to
              Minnesota to Arkansas. By studying these species in their native  locations,
              and by planting seedlings from all these sources in common  gardens, the PIs
              will determine far plants have adjusted their physiology  to  natural changes
              in temperature, and improve our ability to predict how they  will respond to
              future temperature changes.
