Title       : POWRE: Characterization of Phase Transformations in Stratospheric Aerosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9806111

Award Number: 9806111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53152              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Oatis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Long Island U Southampton
	      Montauk Highway
	      Southampton, NY  11968    516/283-4000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                              This POWRE project will involve the investigation of the
              fundamental physical, optical and thermodynamic properties of atmospheric
              aerosols with compositions relevant to polar stratospheric clouds. The specific
              objectives for this research are: (1) to produce model aerosols based on
              atmospheric field observations, (2) to develop the ability to control a
              particle's environment (temperature and gas phase composition), (3) to develop
              the capability to produce supersaturated gas phase compositions to simulate
              cloud chamber conditions, (4) to define the phase transformation conditions for
              suspended, single particle aerosols of lower stratosphere and upper troposphere
              importance, (5) to produce multi-component phase diagrams for equilibrium and
              non-equilibrium phase transitions in pressure, temperature and composition
              domains. 
	A new low-temperature single particle apparatus will be designed
              and constructed. This particle levitation chamber will be capable of
              reproducing temperatures, cooling rates, and gas phase compositions similar to
              those prevalent in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. In addition,
              with certain modifications, this apparatus will serve as a single
              solid-particle cloud chamber. For the characterization of atmospheric aerosols,
              particle mass and Mie scattering will be used to determine the optical and
              thermodynamic properties, while Raman spectroscopy will be employed for
              determining the chemical composition and physical phase. The results from this
              investigation will define the actual aerosol composition, physical phases, and
              the transformations that can occur under conditions seen in the polar
              stratosphere. 
                This POWRE award will allow the PI to work
              closely with scientists at Brookhaven National Laboratory, where the new
              apparatus will be located. The PI will gain additional research experience in
              atmospheric chemistry, and her students will have the opportunity to get
              involved in state-of-the-art science.

