Title       : The Role of Prezygotic and Postzygotic, Extragenomic Isolating Mechanisms in
               Drosophila Population Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9806649

Award Number: 9806649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott S. Pitnick sspitnic@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Pitnick  9806649  Among fruitfly species, the length of sperm and of the
              female's sperm-storage organs have evolved very rapidly, with some species
              producing relatively few, gigantic sperm, as much as 20 times their body
              length.  Such unusual sex cells challenge our understanding of the fundamental
              nature of sex differences and of the evolution of reproductive strategy. Two
              goals of the proposed work are to determine (1) the evolutionary  relationship
              between these male and female traits and (2) the functional significance of
              variation in sperm and female sperm-storage organ length. To this end,
              populations of Drosophila melanogaster will be artificially selected for longer
              and shorter sperm-storage organs. Comparison between males within the selection
              lines and in "associated male" lines will permit discrimination of the roles of
              pleiotropy and sexual selection in generating a correlated response in sperm
              length to female sperm-storage organ length evolution.  Productivity and sperm
              competition experiments will quantify the relationships between sperm length,
              female reproductive tract morphology, and patterns of sperm use by females.  A
              third goal of the proposed work is to determine the extent to which divergence
              in sperm length and female reproductive tract morphology contributes to
              reproductive failure among populations/species. Factors that prevent
              interbreeding among populations, or "reproductive isolating mechanisms," are
              critical to the speciation process.  Reciprocal crosses among the selected
              lines will determine the extent to which divergence in  sperm and female
              reproductive morphology can lead to reproductive isolation among populations.
              Experiments determining the fate of sperm in hybrid matings among five closely
              related species will extend this analysis of reproductive isolating mechanisms.
               Number of sperm transferred, eggs fertilized, and eggs hatching per mating
              will be determined and used to quantify levels of sperm/female and sperm/egg
              compatibility for all possible hybrid a nd control crosses. Results from these
              studies will enhance our presently limited understanding of postmating,
              prezygotic and postzygotic, extragenomic reproductive isolating mechanisms and
              broaden our perspective on Drosophila speciation.
