Title       : POWRE: Acoustics Cues to Gender and Individual Identity in Speech and in
               Laughter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9806131

Award Number: 9806131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo-Anne Bachorowski j.a.bachorowski@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program is broadly concerned with the production and perception of
              nonlinguistic, indexical cues in speech and in laughter.  Recent findings
              support a theoretical approach to indexical cueing that integrates the
              source-filter theory of speech production with knowledge regarding both
              sexually dimorphic and individual variation in vocal production-related
              anatomy.  Testing vowel segment acoustics extracted from running speech, very
              high classification success rates were achieved using this framework. 
              Extensions of this work will include examining a broader range of articulatory
              gestures and testing the perceptual importance of statistically identified
              patterns of acoustic cues.  Results of preliminary analyses indicate that this
              application of the source-filter model is also useful for understanding
              indexical cueing in laughter.  Furthermore, these results indicate that while
              laugh acoustics are highly complex, they appear to vary predictably in response
              to relevant social contexts.  Together, these outcomes provide support for the
              perspective that laughter is an evolutionarily conserved vocal communication
              repertoire.  In order to understand the functional significance of laugh
              sounds, variation in laugh acoustics will be studied using both comparative and
              perceptual research strategies.  This project is concerned with fundamental
              issues in human vocal communication.  The results will advance knowledge
              regarding the production and perception of indexical and motivationally
              significant cues in speech and other species-typical vocalizations.  With this
              POWRE Visiting Professorship award, the investigator will receive training in
              some unfamiliar research methods and analytic techniques at Cornell University.
               More specifically, in the context of the experiments that will be performed in
              this project, training in comparative bioacoustics, perceptual methodologies,
              and speech synthesis techniques will be provided.  This training and
              collaboration with experts in human vocal communication will enhance the
              investigator's ongoing research and her career development.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
