Title       : Mitochondrial Molecular Phylogeny of the Peronosporomycetes (Oomycota)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9806785

Award Number: 9806785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Hudspeth mykes@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah S. Hudspeth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Hudspeth  DEB-9806785    Peronosporomycetes (=Oomycota; Oomycetes) are
              fungus-like heterotrophic organisms that constitute an economically important
              group in the newly established and extremely diverse kingdom Straminopila. The
              primary importance of oomycetes is due to the many species that cause disease
              in plants and animals.  The most publicized plant disease caused by an oomycete
              is late blight of potato, but many others exist such as downy mildews, white
              rusts, root rots, and leaf blights of a wide variety of cereals, legumes, and
              fruit trees and forest resources.  In the rapidly expanding area of
              aquaculture, oomycetes inflict damage on fish, crustaceans, and molluscs. 
              Despite their immense impact on our economic resources, the phylogenetic
              relationships of these organisms are poorly understood.  The primary goal of
              this study is to infer the evolutionary relationships of genera within and
              between established orders using DNA sequences of two mitochondrial genes (cox2
              and ndh9).  Taxa from the orders Leptomitales, Pythiales, Saprolegniales, and
              Peronosporales will be sampled to include opportunistic and obligate plant
              pathogens and parasites of terrestrial and marine animals.  The resulting
              phylogeny will form the basis for evaluation of morphologically characters for
              use in phylogenetic studies.  The PIs also may be able to  develop hypotheses
              of the origin(s), of obligate parasitism.  Are obligate parasites monophyletic?
               Have obligate parasites given "rise" to any facultative parasites (i.e., is
              change always unidirectional)?  Future studies involving questions of parasite
              control strategies should also benefit from the availability of this phylogeny.
               For example, does clade membership predict that a particular control method
              might be more suitable for other clade members?
