Title       : Collaborative Research: US GLOBEC: Predation Impacts on Target Specie: Roles of
               Frontal Proceses and Small Predator Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9806465

Award Number: 9806465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274969             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence P. Madin lmadin@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806465
Madin

The GLOBEC Georges Bank program is seeking to understand the
              physical and biological processes which determine the population dynamics of
              four target species -- larval cod and haddock, and their main forage prey, the
              copepods Calanusfinmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp. Central among these
              processes is predation by invertebrate and fish predators on these four
              species, and the objective of this study is the description and quantification
              of this source of mortality.
The approach combines information on the
              abundance and co-occurrence of predators and target prey species on Georges
              Bank, derived from the continuing Broad Scale Survey, with new data on feeding
              specificity and rates of the principal predator species. During Phases I and
              II, Drs. Madin, Sullivan and Bollens have used both gut-contents analysis (by
              microscopy and with immuno-assays) and feeding experiments (shipboard and
              laboratory, in small containers and mesocosms) to obtain feeding data.  The
              field sampling during the first two Phases focused on the themes of
              stratification effects (1995) and source, retention and loss of water and
              organisms (1997).  In Phase III they will direct field efforts (in 1999) to
              questions concerning effects of frontal regions on the transport, aggregation
              and interaction of target species and their predators. Conventional sampling
              will be supplemented with a video system to detect large gelatinous predators. 
              Significant new contributions to the study of plankton community dynamics will
              be identification of the role of omnivorous copepods in limiting production of
              herbivores, and experimental studies of the role of turbulence in controlling
              predation rates of gelatinous predators.
The physical and hydrographic
              environment of Georges Bank sets the stage for the biological interplay of
              target species and their predators. The bathymetry of the Bank and the pattern
              of circulation on and around it create frontal regions on its north and south
              boundaries, and along its 60 m isobath, between the well-mixed central Crest
              and the seasonally stratified southern Flank. This last region, the tidal
              mixing front, divides two areas which are very different in terms of
              hydrography and biology.  These researchers will work at this front on two
              cruises in 1999, to determine the distribution and abundance of prey and
              predators along and across the front, the effect of frontal dynamics on
              aggregation and interaction, and the exchange of organisms from one side to the
              other. The Crest and Flank regions are where they have concentrated efforts in
              previous process studies, and where there appears to be a critical overlap in
              occurrence between target species and their main predators. Turbulence,
              convergence and exchange associated with the front may have different effects
              on predators with different feeding biologies. 
The key to long-term
              understanding of the Georges Bank system is development of comprehensive
              physical-biological models. This study should make a major contribution to
              these models with data on predation mortality which is specific to season,
              location, species, and for principal predators, stage and density of the prey.
              


