Title       : POWRE: Testing the Power-Conflict Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9806123

Award Number: 9806123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly Kadera kelly-kadera@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1371,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project's primary objective is to rigorously test deductions derived from
              an existing formal model using established datasets supplemented with
              historical information.  The investigator will use the New York Times Index and
              Time Magazine's Almanac of the 20th Century to gather news stories on the
              conflictual behavior of major powers undergoing power transitions from the
              mid-19th century to the present.  The stories' text will then be transformed to
              numberical data, using a combination of hand coding and the KEDS content
              analysis software.  The resulting data will then be used to test existing
              deductions concerning conflict behavior near power transitions.  Completion of
              this project will achieve two purposes.  First, it will allow for a rigorous
              test of deductions from a formal model of the dynamic power-conflict
              relationship.  That model integrates two traditionally competing theories of
              war--power transition and balance of power--by examining the conditions under
              which each applies and by developing a more general theory of conflict
              behavior.  The deductions are decidedly distinct from those generated by either
              traditional theory alone.  Second, it will produce a useful dataset for other
              international conflict scholars.  Pre-WWI conflict data is an untapped
              resource.  Researchers interested in other theories of conflict, e.g. the
              democartic peace, arms races, and escalation dynamics, will also benefit from
              this collection effort.  The information gathered could potentially lay the
              foundation for a more exhaustive events dataset for the 19th and early 20th
              centuries.  This would be a very positive step toward extending the rich
              tradition of events data into the more distant past.  This award will help
              further the investigator's career objective of making a significant
              contribution to the field of international relations.  This will help her
              attain a tenurable record in a field where there are very few women and even
              fewer tenured women.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
