Title       : Mechanism Design, Reconsidered
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9806832

Award Number: 9806832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zvika Neeman zvika@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Theoretical analysis characterizes optimal mechanisms for a variety of
              problems and environments such as the construction of optimal incentive
              schemes, auctions, regulation, optimal taxation, public good provision and
              more. Optimal mechanisms are, in general, quite different from the mechanisms
              that are relied on to solve these problems in practice. This gives rise to two
              related questions: (1) What accounts for the prevalence of the mechanisms that
              are observed in practice? and (2) Why aren't the optimal mechanisms that are
              identified by the theory used in practice?  The project consists of two parts
              corresponding to these two questions.  Both rely on a single methodological
              strategy: A general argument is presented and is investigated in a specific
              context.  What accounts for the prevalence of the mechanisms that are observed
              in practice? The general answer is that existing mechanisms are simple, and
              thus easy to apply, and, while perhaps sub optimal in many environments, are
              highly effective in all environments. (The effectiveness of a mechanism is
              defined as the ratio between what is achieved by the mechanism and what could
              be achieved by an ideal mechanism. Simplicity is defined as independence of the
              mechanism from the details of the specific environment.) This argument is
              elaborated in the context of auction design. The research focuses on
              single-object, private-values auctions, and identifies worst case bounds on the
              effectiveness of the most commonly used auction form   the English auction.
              This lower bound is surprisingly high, rendering the English auction
              universally effective. For example, when there are 10 bidders whose valuations
              for the object are positively correlated and when their expected valuations of
              the object are at least as high as 60% of the maximal possible valuation an
              English auction sells the object at a price that is at least 83% of its value
              to the bidder with the highest valuation (total surplus). If bidders'
              valuations are independent of each other, worst case effectiveness increases to
              96%. It is conjectured that similar arguments can be given to justify the
              prevalence of other commonly used mechanisms as well as to the use of `rules of
              thumb` and other modes of boundedly rational behavior.  Why aren't the optimal
              mechanisms that are identified by the theory used in practice? The general
              answer is that the so-called optimality of optimal mechanisms rests on a number
              of subtle assumptions that are unlikely to be satisfied in practical
              situations.  Arguably the most important such assumption is that there exists a
              one to one relationship between agents' valuations or payoffs, and agents'
              beliefs. When this assumption is relaxed, the effectiveness of optimal
              mechanisms is dramatically affected. In contrast, the effectiveness of the
              simpler mechanisms that are used in practice is hardly influenced. The
              consequences of relaxing this assumption are investigated in the context of
              designing an optimal auction and arranging for the voluntary provision of
              public goods. It is shown that, when this assumption is relaxed, even in highly
              correlated environments, full information rent extraction (as in Cremer and
              McLean (1985, 1988) and McAfee and Reny (1992)) becomes impossible.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
