Title       : One Host Shift Leads to Another: Formation of Host Races in a Gall- and
               Stem-Boring Beetle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9806339

Award Number: 9806339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren G. Abrahamson abrahmsn@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Micky D. Eubanks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                DEB-9806339  Warren G. Abrahamson & Micky Eubanks    New species are known to
              arise when geographic barriers divide an  existing species into two or more
              isolated populations. When mountains,  oceans, or other barriers prevent
              reproduction between the isolated  populations, each can evolve along an
              independent path. If geographic  isolation lasts long enough, the populations
              may diverge so much that  interbreeding is no longer possible -- one species
              divides into several.  With parasites such as herbivorous insects, barriers to
              genetic exchange  may arise not out of geography, but out of behavior. When
              mating occurs  only on the host plant, a subpopulation consistently choosing
              one host will  not mate with that choosing the other. Thus, speciation can
              occur in the  absence of geographic separation when the two subpopulations are
              sympatric.  Many have argued that the conditions for sympatric speciation are
              too  restrictive for it to be important. Our extensive work on flies that
              induce  galls on goldenrod plants and our preliminary work with a stem and 
              gall-boring beetle indicate that host choice can be a barrier to genetic 
              exchange. We will study a host shift and potential host-race formation by a 
              common tumbling flower beetle associated with two species of goldenrod in  the
              eastern United States. Our study system is unique in that a host shift  and
              subsequent host-race formation by one herbivorous insect may have  directly
              contributed to the host shift and host-race formation of a second,  unrelated
              species. Given that nearly half of animal species are parasites,  sympatric
              speciation may be an important source of the earth's  biodiversity.
