Title       : The Physical and Meteorological Characteristics Associated with Lightning
               Flashes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  2000  
File        : a9806189

Award Number: 9806189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366907             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Orville   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9806189  Orville    We grant a three-year continuation of NSF ATM-92 13787 using
              data from the National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN) with supporting
              information from radar and satellite observations. There are two parts to the
              proposed research that we will simultaneously pursue. First, we propose to
              continue our investigations into the physical and meteorological conditions
              associated with cloud-to-ground lightning flashes. This will include continued
              analysis in the following areas, a) NLDN lightning records in the United
              States, to include peak currents, polarity, and multiplicity and their
              variation from year to year, with seasons, from month to month, from storm to
              storm, and within storms, b) research on the lightning in mesoscale convective
              complexes in Texas, c) the forecasting of active lightning days, and d) the
              characteristics of winter lightning. Second, we will investigate the NLDN
              reliability by determining the reasons behind the increased positive flash
              counts and lowering of the annual mean peak current in cloud-to-ground flashes.
              We will do this by using a recently installed Advanced Lightning Direction
              Finder and a Brook waveform digitizing recording system to obtain waveforms on
              lightning within a few hundred kilometers of Texas A&M University. We propose,
              also, to measure the detection efficiency of the NLDN at College Station,
              Texas.    This research will contribute to the education of several graduate
              students who will directly participate in the proposed research, which will
              include their sharing in data acquisition and analysis. Included in this
              proposal is support for graduate students who will write theses and
              dissertations and present their results at seminars and professional meetings,
              and write manuscripts describing their research. Research results will be
              incorporated into advanced courses on cloud physics and mesoscale phenomena.
              Undergraduates will be involved from the Departments of Meteorology, Electrical
              Engineering, and Computer Science.
