Title       : Silk Symposium; Charlottesville, VA; June 15-17, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9806699

Award Number: 9806699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kaplan david.kaplan@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9806699  Kaplan    An international symposium on silk will be held June 15-17,
              1998,  at the University of Virginia.  The symposium, cofunded by the  Division
              of Materials Research and the Division of Molecular and  Cellular Biosciences,
              will focus on biophysical, bioengineering  and materials science aspects of
              silk-based polymers.  The  symposium will include talks on the study of silk
              genetics, self-  assembly of silk protein polymers, phase transitions and
              liquid  crystalline behavior of these polymers, evolutionary  relationships
              between silk-producing organisms, shear processing  of the polymers leading to
              fiber formation in natural and  artificial systems, new analytical methods used
              to elucidate  structures and functions of silks, the analysis of mechanical 
              properties of silk materials, and biomedical and material science  applications
              for engineered silk polymers.  The studies presented  will deal with aspects of
              the genetics of highly repetitive genes  and their divergence into multigene
              families, the role of  crystalline size and orientation in fibers and how this 
              influences mechanical properties, physiological mechanisms  involved in
              converting high concentrations of water soluble high  molecular weight protein
              polymers into aqueous insoluble  materials, and the formation and function of
              mesophases during  the processing of these proteins.  %%%  The study of silk
              polymers represents an important new paradigm  for materials science.  This new
              paradigm, termed biomimetics,  suggests that new insights into the design,
              synthesis and  assembly of materials can be gained through the understanding of
               related biological processes.  This growing interface between  biology and
              materials science leads to an interdisciplinary  approach in order to
              adequately address all aspects of the field.  The talks planned for the
              symposium illustrate this  interdisciplinary approach, with sessions on
              biology, mechanical  properties, composition and characterization methods,
              structural  features, molecula r modeling, silk genes and protein expression, 
              silk transformations and processing, and applications for silks.  The
              interchange between materials scientists, molecular modelers,  biologists,
              chemists and physicists at the symposium will provide  new directions in the
              research and a new level of understanding  of silk-based polymers.  A total of
              about forty presentations  will be given at he symposium and the presentations
              will be  published in a new book on silk.  ***
