Title       : POWRE: Eyespot Assembly in Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1998  
File        : a9806135

Award Number: 9806135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol L. Dieckmann dieckmann@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The project is a study of the assembly and organization of the eyespot of the
              unicellular alga, Chlamydomonas. The eyespot is a light-sensing organelle which
              gives rise to characteristic phototactic behavior through control of the
              flagella which this organism has.  Several features of the eyespot make it an
              extremely interesting system.  It includes components of both the plasma
              membrane and a portion of the underlying, closely apposed membranes of the
              chloroplast.  Associated with this region of the chloroplast membranes are
              layers of carotenoid pigment granules which reflect light to the apposed
              rhodopsin light-sensing region of the plasma membrane.  Light activation of the
              rhodopsin leads to gated entry into the cell of calcium which initiates a
              signal transduction pathway that culminates in patterned flagellar movements to
              move the organism toward or away from the light source.  The calcium channel
              has not been characterized and may in fact be the Chlamydomonas rhodopsin. 
              Also fascinating is the fact that the eyespot is precisely positioned on the
              surface of the cell with respect to the complex rootlet structures of the
              flagella.  During cell division, the eyespot first disappears. Then two new
              eyespots form, each 90 degrees from the division plane and 180 degrees from
              each other.  The system poses numerous interesting questions of how expression
              of individual components is regulated and how these components are assembled
              into the highly ordered, functional structures. In this sabbatical study, three
              specific aims will be pursued.  The aims are (1) to use biophysical techniques
              to analyze the physiology and behavior of eyespot-assembly mutants, (2) to
              analyze multi-eye mutants which presumably have defects in the positioning
              system for eyespot assembly during cell division, and (3) to use
              immunofluorescence light microscopy, GFP-protein techniques and immunoelectron
              microscopy to determine the organization of some of the major components in the
              eyespot structure of both normal and mutant organisms.  This is a POWRE project
              which will significantly enhance the scientific training and expertise of the
              investigator.




