Title       : Experimental Software Systems: Collaborative Research: Applications of Flow
               Types in the Efficient, Modular, and Reliable Compilation of Higher-Order Typed
               Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9806747

Award Number: 9806747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93626              (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklyn A. Turbak fturbak@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2861,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9807647  Turbak, Franklyn  Wellesley College    Experimental Software Systems:
              Collaborative Research: Applications of Flow Types in the Efficient, Modular,
              and Reliable Compilation of Higher-Order Typed Languages    Modern programming
              languages (e.g. ML, Haskell, Scheme, Java) have several expressive features
              that let programmers abstract away from low-level, system-specific details and
              achieve benefits like code safety, code reuse, and modularity.   
              Unfortunately, these features are challenging to implement efficiently in a
              compiler.  The central difficulty is that the compiler must decide what
              concrete representations to assign to different abstractions of the same type
              in different contexts.  Traditional compilers (inefficiently) solve this
              problem by choosing a uniform representation for all data.    This research,
              part of the Church Project (http://www.cs.bu.edu/groups/church) addresses this
              challenge by (1) embedding type and control/data flow information in the
              intermediate representation of the program, (2) maintaining the accuracy of
              this information through the stages of the compiler and (3) using this
              information to customize data representations based on context, and to drive
              several compiler optimizations.    The goal is to experimentally evaluate the
              efficacy of these "flow types" to compile a modern language like ML.   
              Products of this research will include a compiler workbench that can be tuned
              with respect to flow information, experimental results indicating the
              effectiveness of type and flow information in compilation, and the design,
              implementation and evaluation of a new framework for the compilation of program
              fragments.
