Title       : POWRE: Links Between Anti-Predator Behavior and Mating Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9806038

Award Number: 9806038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann V. Hedrick avhedrick@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  9806038    Hedrick, Ann      This
              research investigates the ways in which mating behavior  and antipredator
              behavior may be linked.  Male crickets  (Gryllus integer) call from hiding
              places to attract  females.  However, calling is dangerous because calls also 
              attract predators.  Female crickets prefer males with long  calls, and call
              duration is inherited. Bout lengths will be  measured as males call
              undisturbed. Predator-avoidance  behavior will be measured as the time taken by
              a male to  emerge from shelter in an unfamiliar environment.  If mating 
              behavior and antipredator behavior are geneticly linked,  males with longer
              bouts will compensate for their  conspicuous calls by being more cautious, i.e.
              emerging from  shelter more slowly.  To test whether females with strong 
              preferences for long calls are also cautious, a tracking  device will be built
              to measure the female's movement as she  runs towards calling males.  This
              device will allow precise  measures of each females' preferences and the
              preferences  will be compared with the time she takes to emerge from  shelter. 
                  This study investigates the interplay of the two basic  forces in
              evolution, finding a mate and surviving.  By  examining the links between well
              defined, inherited aspects  of mating behavior and predator avoidance the
              research will  focus on the evolutionary balance between these two forces. 
              This will provide important insights and the results will be  widely applicable
              to all species where mating involves  conspicuous displays.
