Title       : U.S.-Lithuanian Cooperative Research: Techniques for Performing Microscopic
               Nuclear Structure Calculations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9806614

Award Number: 9806614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34265              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Barrett bbarrett@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5915,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
INT-9806614
Barrett

This U.S.-Lithuania Cooperative Research award is for
              a project on "Techniques for Performing Microscopic Nuclear Structure
              Calculations" between Dr. Bruce R. Barrett of the University of Arizona, for
              the U.S. side, and, for the Lithuanian side, Dr. Ramutis Kalinauskas of the
              Institute of Physics in Vilnius, and Dr. Gintautas Kamuntavicius of Vytaytas
              Magnus University in Kaunas.  A major goal in nuclear physics is to understand
              how nuclear binding, stability and structure arise from the underlying
              interactions between individual nucleons.  For many years, it has been feasible
              to calculate exactly only three- and four-body nuclei with realistic
              nucleon-nucleon (NN) interactions.  Recently, several new NN potentials, such
              as the Nijmegen, the Argonne V18 and CD-Bonn, have been constructed.  They fit
              the world data for pp and np scattering below 350 MeV with high precision and
              yield a x2/datum of about 1.  Due to advances in computing resources, it is now
              possible to apply such NN interactions in large-basis No-core Shell-model and
              Quantum Monte Carlo calculations to study the properties of light p-shell
              nuclei.  Such calculations for the A = 6 and 7 nuclei, including all the
              observed low-lying excitations, have been reported.  In these works, it is
              possible to see nuclear-shell structure emanating from a microscopic
              interaction that fits NN scattering data.  To describe and predict
              nuclear-structure properties in a similar manner for larger A nuclei will
              require much more theoretical work.  the goal of the proposed project is to
              develop modifications to the existing calculational methods, so that they may
              be used for investigating heavier-mass nuclei.

This research in theoretical
              nuclear physics fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading
              experts in the U.S. and Lithuania to combine complementary efforts and
              capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of
              equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.

***

