Title       : Limitations and Consequences of Conventional and "Living" Radical
               Polymerizations in the Synthesis of Side-Chain Liquid Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9806247

Award Number: 9806247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Coleen R. Pugh cpugh@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9806247  Pugh    The objective of this proposat is to synthesize and
              characterize  a series of well-defined side-chain liquid crystalline polymers 
              (SCLCPs) with different molecular architectures in order to  determine if
              mixtures of chemically identical SCLCPs with  different types of branching and
              branching densities are either  immiscible or have limited miscibitity, and
              thereby cause the  broad phase transitions often exhibited by SCLCPs
              synthesized by  conventional radical polymerizations.  Linear, comb, 
              hyperbranched, and 3-, 6- and 12-arm star poly{11- (4'cyanophenyl- 
              4"-phenoxy)undecyl  acrylate}s will be prepared by atom transfer  radical
              polymerization.  The miscibility of the different  molecular architectures and
              its effect on the breadth of their  phase transitions will be determined by
              comparing the  thermotropic behavior of each of the molecular architectures
              with  that of their binary blends and unmixed composites.  The GPC-  determined
              molecular weights of the polymers will be compared  with the molecular weights
              determined by light scattering  measurements and/or MALDI-MS.  The star
              polymers are designed so  that the arms can be cleaved subsequent to
              polymerization in  order to compare the molecular weight of the arms with that
              of  the original star polymers, and to determine the uniformity of  the arm
              lengths from their polydispersity in molecular weight.  The shape and
              compactness of the different architectures will be  studied by determining how
              their radius of gyration (light  scattering) and intrinsic viscosities scale
              with molecular  weight.  Atthough there are extensive experimental results on
              the  solution and melt properties of polymers (eg. polyethylene,  polystyrene
              and polybutadiene) with a variety of well-defined  molecular architectures,
              none have involved polymers with a large  side-chain in every repeat unit.  The
              synthesis and solution and  solid-state characterization of SCLCPs will
              therefore greatly  expand our fundamentat understanding of the physical chem
              istry of  polymers.  This work will also provide the only quantitative  kinetic
              data in the field of SCLCPs; chain transfer constants to  polymer will be
              determined from the Mayo equation and standard  kinetic measurements using
              model chain transfer agents  representing a broad range of chemical structures
              typical of  SCLCPs.  %%%  This research is in the area of novel materials with
              precisely  controlled molecular architectures and liquid-crystalline 
              properties.  ***
