Title       : RUI: Phylogeny of the Terebellida and Sabellida (Annelida),and Evolution of
               Larval Developmental Modes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9806848

Award Number: 9806848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Damhnait McHugh dmchugh@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806848  McHugh    The goal of this research project is to decipher the
              evolutionary  relationships among the  polychaete annelid orders Terebellida
              and  Sabellida, so that historical patterns of change in larval development can
               be examined in this group.  The orders Terebellida and Sabellida together 
              form one of the most diverse and best known groups of polychaete annelid  worms
              for which larval developmental modes have been well-characterized.  They
              provide an excellent opportunity to address some fundamental questions 
              regarding the evolution of larval development in marine invertebrates,  because
              both feeding (planktotrophic) and non-feeding (lecithotrophic)  larvae occur in
              this group of worms.          I will use nuclear (elongation factor-1a and RNA
              polymerase II) and  mitochondrial (cytochrome oxidase I) DNA sequence data to
              analyze the  phylogenetic relationships of the Terebellida and Sabellida. 
              Drawing on  the results of the phylogenetic analyses, the ancestral mode of
              larval  development will be inferred, and the frequency and direction of
              changes  among lecithotrophy, opposed-band planktotrophy, and non-metatrochal 
              planktotrophy throughout the history of the group will be examined.         
              The results of the phylogenetic analysis will provide the basis for  a
              re-classification of the Terebellida and Sabellida.  Character  optimization on
              the phylogeny will provide insights into the evolution of  larval developmental
              modes.  If it is shown that the opposed-band  trochophore of serpulids has been
              derived from an ancestor for which  non-feeding larval development is inferred,
              then homology of the  trochophore among spiralian phyla, a character upon which
              theories of early  animal evolution hinge, must be re-evaluated; if derived
              planktotrophy has  arisen more than once in the Terebellida and Sabellida, then
              arguments that  functional constraints on larval feeding have led to multiple
              parallelism  may be supported.
