Title       : CISE Experimental Software Systems: Scaleable Visualizations to Improve and
               Measure Comprehensibility of Software Systems: A Framework for Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9806777

Award Number: 9806777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $845312             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Cross cross@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kai H. Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theron D. Hendrix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2861,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9806777  Cross, James H.  Hendrix, T. Dean  Auburn University    Experimental
              Software Systems:  Scaleable Visualizations to Improve and Measure  
              Comprehensibility of Software Systems: A Framework for Evaluation    Software
              visualization is an active area of research that investigates efficient and
              effective ways of automatically producing graphical representations of program
              source code, algorithms, or the runtime behavior of software. The investigators
              have designed and implemented a set of new scaleable graphical representations
              which specifically addresses problems with other static visualizations reported
              in the literature. This research focuses on the experimental evaluation and
              refinement of this set of scaleable visualizations in the context of GRASP, a
              prototype best-practices software engineering tool. This research also
              investigates the manner in which software visualizations are used in practice
              by software professionals. Partners from government and industry are
              cooperating with the investigators to provide access to production software
              systems for experiments and case studies. The impact of this research on the
              software engineering community will include (1) providing a experimental
              software support system which provides seamless support for an integrated set
              of visualizations, (2) providing empirical evidence that directly addresses the
              open question of the relative effectiveness of visualizations on production
              software, and (3) stimulating organizations to modify their software
              development processes to include visualizations based on those experimental
              results which indicate the potential for substantial improvements both in
              technical and economic terms.
