Title       : SGER: Fractal Analysis of Pulmonary Magnetic Resonance Angiograms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9806883

Award Number: 9806883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53884              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia B. Paschal cynthia.paschal@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Knowles A. Overholser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9120,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9806883  Paschal  The goal of this proposed research is to devise  computational
              techniques that will allow the successful  application of fractal analysis and
              other signal  characterization methods to the assessment of pulmonary 
              perfusion as measured by magnetic resonance angiography  (MRA).  Fractal
              analysis quantifies the self-similarity of a  signal over a range of
              observational scales to determine if  the patterns in a small volume scale up
              to match the  patterns in a large volume.  Lungs have already been 
              demonstrated to have a fractal nature in both their tree  structure and flow
              distribution.  The application of fractal  analysis to three-dimensional
              pulmonary perfusion  information obtained with modern MRA techniques should 
              provide a unique quantitative descriptor of flow patterns in  normal and
              pathologic conditions, Issues to be researched  include how to perform fractal
              analysis on an irregularly  shaped three dimensional volume, the effect of flow
               distribution on fractal dimension, appropriate metrics to  characterize
              regional flow, and effect of MR imaging  technique on fractal analysis.  An
              irregularly shaped volume  presents a problem in that the typical fractal
              analysis  involves division of the volume into parallelepiped  elements@
              depending on element size, some voxels containing  lung tissue may be omitted
              from the analysis and some voxels  outside the lungs may be included.  Both
              cases will result  in errors that diminish the accuracy of the computation of 
              fractal dimension.  To address this issue, tests will be  done comparing
              fractal dimension computed from: (a) a  parallelepiped volume that fits
              completely within a lung  volume, (b) a parallelepiped volume that completely 
              encompasses the lungs, and (c) the entire volume treated as  a sequential list
              of data points.  The effect of flow  distribution on fractal dimension will be
              tested by  comparing the results for healthy volunteers and patients  with lung
              pathologies and also by applying the analysis  techniques to  a normal date set
              altered, for example, by  removing a large sector of flow as might result from
              a large  pulmonary embolus or by removing many small sectors of flow  as might
              result from many small emboli.  ***
