Title       : POWRE: The Interaction of Morphology and Phonology in Constraining Bantu
               Reduplication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9806180

Award Number: 9806180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121074             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Downing downing@unixg.ubc.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1311,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on two issues in phonological theory, namely the problem
              of vowel-initial structures, and the notions of `base` and `reduplicant` in
              reduplication theory.  Most work on reduplication has assumed that reduplicants
              generally take some morphological constituent as their base and that prosodic
              factors constrain the shape of partial reduplicants.  However, recent work by
              the investigator on reduplication in a few Bantu languages challenges both
              these assumptions.  The implications of the work so far are limited, though, by
              the fact that the reduplication patterns of only a handful of the several
              hundred Bantu languages have been analyzed.  The goal of this project is to
              study this problem by surveying as much of the existing literature on Bantu
              reduplication as possible using the CBOLD facilities at Berkeley and by working
              with native speakers who are graduate students in the Berkeley area.    The
              significance of the project is to contribute to our knowledge of underdescribed
              and underanalyzed Bantu languages.  The research will also contribute to
              current theoretical understanding of possible reduplication systems and the
              interaction of constraints on reduplication with other areas of the grammar. 
              This visiting professorship award will improve the investigator's chances of
              obtaining a tenure track academic position by providing an opportunity to spend
              a year focussing on research and publications.  Berkeley is the ideal location
              for the project, since it is a research center for both Bantu languages and
              theoretical linguistics.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
