Title       : Evolution of Integrated Phenotypic Plasticity: Geographic Variation and Genetic
               Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9806775

Award Number: 9806775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Thompson dthompsn@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806775  Thompson    Many animals, including insects, are able to occupy and
              thrive in a wide variety of environments. Often this ability to persist in
              regions with different elevation, climate, and vegetation is the result of
              individual adjustments to local conditions, a phenomenon termed phenotypic
              plasticity. For example, many insect species develop larger body size and
              longer wings in response to high nutrient diets and/or high temperature during
              development. These plastic changes in response to local environments may cause
              increases in reproductive output and mobility that, in turn, cause insect
              population increases and agricultural damage if the insects feed on plants
              important to humans. The questions addressed in this research concern how
              grasshoppers evolve the ability to adjust morphological traits to local
              environmental conditions and the functional consequences of the coordination or
              integration of plastic changes in head and body morphology.    Lesser migratory
              grasshoppers, Melanoplus sanquinipes, will be sampled from regions of the
              western United States that differ in summer temperature. Progeny of these
              grasshoppers will be raised in four combinations of high and low temperature
              and high and low nutrient diet to measure plastic changes in body size, head
              size, leg length, and wing length and quantify genetic variation for these
              traits. The investigator will determine if grasshopper populations from
              California, Nevada, and Utah are genetically different and whether the
              populations harbor phenotypic plasticity for environmental conditions they do
              not normally encounter. Grasshopper jumping, flight, feeding, and egg-laying
              performance will be measured to determine if coordinated plastic changes in
              head, body, leg, and wing size enhance the ability of grasshoppers to survive
              and reproduce in different temperature and food plant environments. In addition
              to answering specific questions about the integration of phenotypic plasticity
              in populations of grasshoppers, this research will te st several general
              hypotheses about the importance of genetic variation and environmental
              heterogeneity in the evolution of plastic traits.
