Title       : Pattern and Process in the Evolution of Hawkmoth-Pollination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a9806840

Award Number: 9806840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucinda A. McDade   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Raguso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              McDade  9806840    Nocturnal hawkmoths (HMs) are important pollinators
              worldwide, especially of plants whose flowers are white, tubular, nectar-rich,
              strongly perfumed and bloom at night. This suite of floral characteristics has
              evolved repeatedly in Angiosperms and, in some cases, within plant families. 
              To what extent does this floral morphological syndrome reflect historical
              trends within evolutionary lineages rather than adaptations to pollinators? Do
              HM-pollinated flowers typically evolve from other tubular flowers (e.g. those
              pollinated by hummingbirds), or can morphologically diverse ancestors give rise
              to this condition?  Similarly, do lineages with HM-pollinated species give rise
              to alternative reproductive strategies, or are they evolutionary dead ends? How
              do these trends affect the conservation of HM-pollinated plants, many of which
              are rare or produce commercially important products?      This research will
              address these questions by studying floral advertisements (color, shape,
              fragrance) and rewards (nectar) in several hawkmoth-pollinated plants and their
              close relatives in the potato (Solanaceae), evening primrose (Onagraceae), and
              four-oclock (Nyctaginaceae) families.  The investigators will use laboratory
              and field assays to determine which among these traits are effective in
              attracting hawkmoths to flowers, and then study variation in these traits using
              chemical analytical and comparative statistical methods within an evolutionary
              context. These analyses of fragrance and nectar chemistry will yield especially
              novel results, given the rarity of such data in previous studies.
