Title       : NMR Studies of Structure, Order, and Dynamics in Liquid Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9806810

Award Number: 9806810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucio Frydman lucio@samson.chem.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9806810  Frydman    This project focuses on studies of the order, structure
              and  dynamics adopted by liquid crystalline polymers. These are  important
              macromolecules with numerous practical applications as  structural materials
              and in optoelectronic devices. Their  usefulness derives from special
              characteristics including a  superior thermal and chemical stability, a
              tendency to aggregate  into ordered domains when appropriately dissolved or
              molten, and  an ability to retain these anisotropic arrangements upon being 
              frozen or coagulated into solids. Using a variety of oneand  multi-dimensional
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques,  this research proposes further
              characterizations of these  macromolecules in both their solid and fluid
              phases. A common  feature of the proposed experiments is their reliance on
              natural  abundance spin probes, an approach which imposes no  preconditions on
              the types of samples to be analyzed. In order  to deal with the spectral
              complexities arising when using such  techniques, new protocols will be
              developed involving the  collection of data in coordination with well defined
              sample  reorientations with respect to the NMR magoetic field. This will 
              enable atomic level characterizations of numerous complex liquid  crystalline
              polymers including commercial thermotropic  polyesters and their polyrner
              blends, polymers incorporating  fluorinated probes, new types of Iyotropic
              polyamidcs, and  thermotropic polymers characterized by the inclusion of metal 
              centers. These measurements will help elucidate the complex  rotational
              isomerisms occurring in these systems, and clarify  the possibility of
              chemically controlling their macromolecular  alignment. New MNR experiments
              will also be exploited to  investigate the rotational and viscoelastic dynamics
              of these  polymers in their rnelt, to monitor how these fluids change  their
              order upon freezing/coagulating into solids, as well as  the nature of the
              macromolecular relaxation processes  characterizing the resulting  glasses. 
              %%%  It is expected that as a result of these studies, a new and  deeper
              understanding on the atomic- and molecular-level behavior  of liquid
              crystalline polymers will result. This in turn should  provide valuable
              knowledge for improving the practical  characteristics of these novel kinds of
              commercial materials. It  is also anticipated that this research will enable a
              thorough  training of scientists familiar in thc application of advanced 
              spectroscopy to polymer research at postdoctoral, graduate and  undergraduate
              levels.  ***
