Title       : US-GLOBEC: Cross-Frontal Processes and Recruitment Variabiliorges Bank -- Diet
               of Calanus Finmarchicus Copepodiduplii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1998   
File        : a9806375

Award Number: 9806375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dian J. Gifford dgifford@gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Igor Belkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              US-GLOBEC:  Cross-Frontal Processes and Recruitment Variability on Georges Bank
              - Diet of Calanus finmarchicus Copepodids and Nauplii 

This program will
              examine the biological and physical processes controlling the distribution and
              abundance of marine animals in time and space, especially as related to
              cross-frontal processes.  The specific focus of this proposal is to describe
              quantitatively the contribution of nano- and micro- plankton prey fields to
              recruitment of target copepod populations on the Bank.  We hypothesize that
              copepods and nauplii located in frontal regions and on the well-mixed (on-Bank)
              side of fronts experience an enriched food environment relative to the
              stratified (off-Bank) side of fronts.  We will first define the fronts by
              hydrographic surveys which include CTD/rosette sampling of the nano- and
              microplankton (i.e. plant and animal prey 2-200 um in size) prey field which
              our studies in Phases 1 and 2 of the GLOBEC Northwest Atlantic Program have
              demonstrated are heavily utilized by target copepods and larval fish.  Exchange
              rates of these organisms will be evaluated and compared to exchange rates of
              conservative water column properties from the same hydrographic casts.  We will
              evaluate prey fields and measure consumption of nano- and microplankton
              organisms by copepodid and feeding naupliar stages of the calanoid copepod
              Calanus finmarchicus in two cross-frontal areas which are characteristic of two
              different seasons: (1) the Northeast Peak Front, which exhibits its strongest
              surface thermal signal in February-March and (2) the Tidal Mixing Front which
              separates waters of the Bank crest from the southern flank during late spring
              and summer (late May-August).  We focus on C finmarchicus because this species
              dominates the zooplankton biomass of Georges Bank during the January-June
              period.  We emphasize fronts on the Northeast Peak and the Southem Flank
              because these are potential sites for cross-frontal transport of water,
              nutrients and plankton onto the Bank.  We focus on the Northeast Peak because
              it is an area of enhanced production of both plankton and benthos relative to
              the rest of the Bank.  And we compare zooplankton across the tidal mixing front
              between the Bank crest and the Southern Flank because U.S.-GLOBEC studies
              conducted during 1994-1996 indicate that, although C. finmarchicus nauplii are
              advected onto the Bank crest early in the season, strong cohorts do not
              subsequently develop, possibly as a result of intense predation pressure in
              this area.  Ingestion rates of nauplii and copepodids will be measured directly
              in shipboard experiments using natural prey assemblages.  The proximate
              influence of omnivorous feeding will be interpreted in the context of the in
              situ prey field and physical regime.  Ultimately, the influence of plant versus
              animal prey in consumer diet will be addressed collaboratively in the context
              of measurements made by other investigators of consumer distribution,
              condition, life history parameters and production.





