Title       : Rate-Based Flow Control Algorithms for High Speed Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9806660

Award Number: 9806660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $568725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shivkumar Kalyanaraman kalyas@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this project a new control-theoretic framework will be developed
              for
rate-based robust flow controller design for high-speed networks, and
              the
algorithms derived from this framework will be adapted for implementation
              in
ATM networks and in the Internet. For this purpose the PIs will
              collaborate
to investigate specific issues arising in their areas of
              expertise: ATM and
Internet flow control, and robust control of infinite
              dimensional systems.
>
>The mathematical models to be considered in this
              project are systems with
time-varying time-delays.  For this class of systems,
              controller-design
methods will be developed by investigating several different
              approaches from
H-infinity control, Mu-synthesis, gain scheduling for linear
              parameter
varying systems, and Lyapunov stability theory.  In particular,
              existing
gain scheduling techniques for finite dimensional linear parameter
              varying
systems will be extended to time delay systems.
>
>Controllers
              derived in this framework will be validated by comparing them
with the
              existing controllers designed for ATM traffic management. New flow
controllers
              will also be implemented and tested experimentally. First they
will be
              translated into algorithms to be implemented at the network-layer
(switches
              and routers) within the scope of existing standards.  Both
connection-oriented
              networks (e.g. ATM networks) and connectionless networks
(e.g. IP based
              Internet) will be considered in the project.  In the Internet
domain,
              techniques used will include writing into TCP windows, controlling
the rate of
              acknowledgements, writing into the ECN bit in the IP layer, and
developing a
              feedback framework in the Multi-protocol Label Switching (MPLS)
architecture. 
              Towards this goal, new techniques will be developed to
translate rate-based
              control solutions into window-based control solutions
(especially for
              applicability in Internet traffic management).
>
>The algorithm design will
              be followed by a performance evaluation using
simulation and experimentation
              to assess the impact of these methods on
best-effort services offered to
              networked multimedia applications.
Experimental techniques will be used to
              determine traffic models, and
network measures of application quality, which
              will be used in simulation
studies of these algorithms in representative
              network configurations.
>

