Title       : POWRE: The Kinetics of Microbially-Mediated Reduction of Fe(III), As(V), and
               S(VI): A Laboratory Study of Non-Steady-State Conditions in Anoxic Reservoir
               Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9806121

Award Number: 9806121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa L. Stillings stilling@usgs.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9806121
Stillings

Arsenic retention and mobility in freshwater aquatic
              environments is a great concern because of its toxic effects on plants, animals
              and human health.  In the past, arsenic has been referred to as one of the "Big
              Four" metals of environmental concern (the others being lead, cadmium and
              mercury).  Arsenic is retained in aquatic sediments by adsorption at mineral
              surfaces, by precipitation as metal arsenate's at high oxidation levels, and as
              arsenic sulfides under reduced conditions.  Because arsenate, As(V), is less
              mobile than arsenite, As(III), the reduction of arsenate to arsenite is a
              primary mechanism for increasing arsenic mobility.

Predictions of arsenic
              mobility rely on assumptions of thermodynamic equilibria.  This is a large
              problem because the distribution of arsenate and arsenite are often observed to
              be out of equilibrium.  Slow reaction kinetics are a logical reason for the
              disequilibria, yet reaction rates and mechanisms are poorly understood.

This
              proposed laboratory study will investigate arsenic reduction in anoxic
              sediments with a high arsenic content.  It will test the following hypotheses:
              1) As(V) reduction occurs through microbial respiration; 2) adsorbed As(V) is
              released from ferric oxyhydroxides during reductive dissolution of the iron
              phase, yet may be reabsorbed to other substrates; 3) the sequential use of
              electron acceptors for microbial respiation follows thermodynamic predictions;
              and 4) the appearance of As(III) in solution is closely tied to sulfide, and
              the fate of As(III) (precipitated or complexed in solution) is determined by
              the total concentration of sulfate, and the relative rates of arsenate and
              sulfate reduction.

A multistage chemostat will be employed to investigate
              reduction rates of Fe(III), As(V), and S(VI) in sediment cores.  This technique
              is often used in studies on the effects of nutrient limitation on microbial
              growth and competition between populations; however, in this proposal, the
              chemostat will be used to simulate the continuous flux of water, nutrients, and
              solutes through a sediment package.  The advantage to this technique is that
              consortium of bacteria, indigenous to the sediment core, can spatially arrange
              itself among the linked vessels of the chemostat, according to its sequential
              use of various electron acceptors along a decreasing PE gradient.  Thus this
              setup will closely mimic changes in the microbial population with depth, as
              found in an anaerobic sediment.  Also, it provides an opportunity to sample and
              observe chemical processes occurring within each linked microcosm, at pe
              conditions determined by the microbial population.

Similar flow-through
              reactors have been used to study reaction kinetics in inorganic systems where
              the chemistry of the inlet solution is often manipulated to study the reactor
              response to changing and non-steady-state conditions.  Similar techniques will
              be applied to the chemostat system to observe the effect of a change in
              solution chemistry (pH, nutrient, and total concentrations of Fe, As, and S) on
              microbially-mediated kinetics of Fe(III), As(V), and S(VI) reduction.

