Title       : POWRE: The Adoption and Enforcement of Laws Banning Female Mutilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9806088

Award Number: 9806088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth H. Boyle boyle@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1332,1372,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, a number of African nations have passed laws banning female
              genital excision (FGE).  Human rights advocates question whether these laws
              will be effective in changing a cultural practice, which has existed in some
              areas for thousands of years.  Using sociological institutionalism and status
              construction theory, this study investigates whether, and under what
              circumstances, symbolic laws are able to change behavior.  Data addressing the
              incidence of FGE has been collected for 242 subnational groups.  This research
              will also consider whether laws have an effect in changing behavior over and
              above general international pressure.  The method of time series analysis will
              be employed to explain changes in the rates of FGE for these tribal groups
              during the period from 1979 to present.  One of the unique insights of
              institutional theory has been its ability to explain the existence of
              `decoupling,` that is, a weak relationship between laws and action.  This work
              extends institutional theory by considering variation in the degree of
              decoupling.  Hypotheses predict that laws will be most effective (have less
              decoupling) when they are passed as a result of internal mobilization more than
              as a result of pressure from the international community, and also when elite
              tribes discontinue the practice of FGE and interaction among tribes is common
              within the nation.  This research also has implications for the important topic
              of how best to implement a human rights agenda.  After practicing law for four
              years, the investigator took time `off` to earn a Ph.D. and raise young
              children.  She is now beginning an academic career and wishes to use her dual
              background in social psychology and international law to make a unique
              contribution to the sociology of law.  This award will enable her to explore
              the feasibility of using a comparative approach as a controlled test of whether
              and under what circumstances laws have an impact on behavior.  The research has
              direct policy implications for eradicating FGE, and also impacts the
              theoretical understanding of when and why laws change behavior.  For that
              reason, this award will enhance the investigator's leadership potential in both
              academic and policy fields.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
