Title       : Systematics of the Genus Cordyceps (Ascomycota, Hypocreales) and the Evolution
               of Host-shifts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9806936

Award Number: 9806936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Spatafora spatafoj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Humber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806936  SPATAFORA    The Clavicipitaceae (Ascomycota: Hypocreales) is a
              diverse, monophyletic family of fungi that is unusual in being composed
              entirely of obligate symbionts of other organisms: grasses, arthropods, or
              other fungi.  A number of these species are of economic importance; they
              include, for example, the grass endophyte responsible for "staggers" in sheep. 
              Cordyceps is the most diverse genus of the Clavicipitaceae, both in terms of
              number of species and in its morphology and remarkably wide range of hosts. 
              The host range exhibited by Cordyceps and the Clavicipitaceae is inconsistent
              with a hypothesis of strict cospeciation ("host tracking"); if it were, then
              once a species became associated with a particular host, then all of its
              descendants would be associated with that host and its descendants.  It is
              proposed that the current host range of Cordyceps and the Clavicipitaceae arose
              via a complex series of inter- and intrakingdom host-shifts.  A robust
              reconstruction of the history (phylogeny) of these fungi is needed to test this
              hypothesis.  None is currently available.    In this research, Joseph Spatafora
              and Richard Humber will conduct a systematic investigation of the genus
              Cordyceps and allied clavicipitacean fungi.  They will reconstruct the
              phylogeny of the fungi using characters from DNA sequence data and
              morphological studies.  They will then use the phylogeny to develop a
              phylogenetically-based infrageneric classification of Cordyceps, integrate
              asexual fungi (anamorphs) into the classification of Cordyceps, and describe
              the history of host-shifts within the genus.  The work should form a firm basis
              for ongoing and future work on the biology of this intellectually stimulating
              and economically important group of fungi.
