Title       : Functorial Calculus and Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9806981

Award Number: 9806981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Goodwillie tomg@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9806981  Goodwillie       This project is mainly concerned with the
              long-range goal of  investigating those aspects of the topology of manifolds
              that lie  beyond the reach of algebraic K-theory.  The method is a combination 
               of several kinds of "functor calculus."  One task is to investigate some      
                 interrelationships between these calculi with an eye to strengthening  the
              general method.  This is expected to involve some foundational work   on
              Poincare duality complexes.  Another task for the long haul is to  look at what
              may be called a second-order analogue of algebraic K-theory;  it arises by a
              kind of quadratic stabilization of manifold phenomena.  For the short haul
              there is the job of constructing a kind of  second-order analogue of cyclic
              homology that should be related to the  above as cyclic homology is related to
              algebraic K-theory.  There is at  least a slight hope that this would yield
              topologically defined  invariants for four-manifolds that are akin to the
              well-known  analytically defined Seiberg-Witten invariants.       The word
              "calculus" is used because of an attractive analogy with  the ordinary calculus
              of functions.  Sometimes, of course, the way to  settle a numerical question is
              to see the answer as a value of a  function; by means of the powerful apparatus
              of calculus, properties of  the function can lead to a computation of the
              number.  Likewise, a fact  about some geometrically defined object is sometimes
              best proved by  viewing the object as a particular value of a functor and using
              the  apparatus of some kind of functor calculus. This analogy may show 
              something of the flavor of the work; the content is harder to describe  to the
              non-expert, because most of the "geometric" objects in question  are connected
              to everyday reality by rather long chains of abstract ideas.   ***
