Title       : Global Joule Heating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9806600

Award Number: 9806600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey Crowley gcrowley@swri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron J. Ridley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this investigation is to enhance an understanding of the global
              morphology of ionospheric conductivity and Joule heating and to better define
              their role in the energetics of the thermosphere and ionosphere.  The
              morphology of Joule heating is not well understood at this time because of the
              difficulty of measuring all the relevant electrodynamic and neutral parameters
              (e.g. electric fields, conductivities, neutral winds) on both the local and
              global scales.   An accurate knowledge of Joule heating is important because it
              contributes >10% of the global thermospheric energy budget, and is a major
              factor in determining the global latitudinal gradients of temperature, wind,
              composition and hence the F-region electron density.  The proposers will use
              the Thermosphere Ionosphere Electrodynamic General Circulation Model (TIEGCM)
              and the Assimilative Mapping of  Ionospheric Electrodynamics (AMIE) technique
              to investigate the temporal and spatial morphology of the global conductivity
              and Joule heating, and its effects.  

The detailed study of Joule heating is
              a difficult problem, involving complex modeling techniques and the analysis of
              multiple data sets, which is beyond the scope of a single investigator.  The
              proposed work requires a team approach, and the proposal team consists of well
              known experts in their field.  

The proposed research is vitally important
              for a detailed understanding of the thermosphere-ionosphere-magnetosphere
              coupling.  This study is directly relevant to a variety of National programs
              such as CEDAR, the Space Weather Initiative and the NASA/TIMED mission.  High
              school students will be involved in the work through a mentoring program at
              SwRI.

