Title       : POWRE: Societal Values in An Age of Information Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9806234

Award Number: 9806234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen Nissenbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1338,1592,7915,8888,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this POWRE award, the investigator will conduct systematic research into
              societal and ethical dimensions of information technology.  She will focus her
              efforts on three areas of research.  One concerns the way computer systems may
              be shaped by societal and ethical values, building on past research on bias in
              computer system design.  This work will be developed in two directions; one is
              examining how other values may be embedded in computer system design, values
              such as autonomy of users.  The other is examining the role and
              responsibilities of scientists and engineers.  If it is possible to embed
              values in systems during design and development stages of a project, then this
              creates a dilemma.  On the one hand we may want to urge scientists and
              engineers to act in socially responsible ways and make sure they embed the
              `right` values.  On the other hand we may doubt the legitimacy of leaving in
              the hands of scientists and engineers decisions that might have profound
              consequences for society.  Some may argue that such decisions are more
              appropriate for representative, democratically, elected bodies.  A second area
              of research is privacy.  In the past few years, the number of books and
              articles about privacy has dramatically increased.  The specific problem that
              the project addresses is what the investigator calls `privacy in public,` which
              refers to surveillance practices that occur in realms that are not considered
              to be sensitive or personal.  The intellectual puzzle is whether these
              surveillance practices are properly to be understood as a violation of privacy
              at all.  Because privacy has for so long been associated with the personal,
              sensitive and intimate zones, some scholars have answered in the negative,
              despite substantial popular resistance.  This project tries to explain why
              public resistance is closer to the truth than some of these scholarly
              contributions would suggest.  The third area of research is societal and
              ethical dimensions of educational and research uses of information technology. 
              The project will build upon research already begun, into (1) possible
              dehumanizing impacts of information technology in schools and acceptable
              decisionmaking strategies; and (2) how an electronic infrastructure may affect
              important research norms, practices, and conventions.  This POWRE award will
              make possible a much-needed opportunity for the investigator to step down from
              her full time administrative duties and dedicate herself to research and
              teaching.  In order to make this transition, and ultimately to be competitive
              in a tight job market, she will need to intensify the rate at which she
              conducts research.  The award will provide the opportunity for just such a
              boost.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
