Title       : Grand Challenges in Environmental Science & Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9806286

Award Number: 9806286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $642000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Policansky dpolican@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1077      DDOP:LIFE & EARTH'S ENVIRONMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806286  Policansky  NAS/NRC  With this award, the National Academy of Sciences
              will  conduct a study to identify, describe, and prioritize grand  research
              challenges in environmental science and  engineering.  To provide information
              for the study  committee, the advice of the broader scientific community  will
              be sought.  Several National Research Council (NRC)  units will identify and
              prioritize up to three important  challenges, based on criteria they identify.
              Professional  societies will also be consulted.  The study committee,  based on
              information provided, will organize a workshop to  discuss the most important
              grand challenges in the  environment. A report will be issued by the end of
              1999.  The report will articulate a clear and credible intellectual  foundation
              for the next two to three decades of basic  research into the earth's
              environment and the life that it  supports.  The small number of research
              opportunities chosen  are expected to further understanding of the most 
              fundamental processes that control life and the environment  on earth and
              constitute the best opportunities for  substantial research progress.    The
              scope of the study will be broad, as indicated by the  NRC Boards that will
              provide input: Environmental Studies  and Toxicology, Water Science and
              Technology, Ocean Studies,  Biology, Agriculture, Earth Sciences and Resources,
              Polar  Research, Atmospheric Sciences and Climate, Chemical  Sciences and
              Technology, Sustainable Development, Human  Dimensions of Global Change, and
              Ecosystems.  The National  Academy of Engineering will also be involved.  The
              study  committee will be overseen by a group formed from the  various NRC
              commissions in areas of physical sciences,  mathematics, behavioral and social
              sciences, education,  geosciences, environment and resources, engineering and 
              technical systems, life sciences and agriculture.  Interdisciplinary
              opportunities will be emphasized  throughout the process.
