Title       : POWRE: Problems in Classification and Clustering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9806070

Award Number: 9806070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Olga Cordero-Brana   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mixtures distributions have been used extensively as models in situations where
              data are viewed
as arising from a population that is comprised of several
              subpopulations mixed in varying proportions.  Applications of mixture models
              covers a wide variety of fields: remote sensing, agriculture, electrophoresis,
              medical diagnosis and prognosis,  earth studies, sampling, population
              diversity, marketing research, image enhancing and picture coding, human and
              animal perception, economics, genetics, electrophoresis to name a
few.

The
              research will focus on three major areas.  First,it will extend the work of
              Cordero Brana on minimum Hellinger distance estimation from univariate mixture
              models to the multivariate case. This will involve investigating and deriving
              an appropriate multivariate density estimator for mixture models as well as
              considering the computational aspects of it.  Also convergence properties of
              the HMIX algorithm and the
adaptive density estimator will be studied.  The
              advantage of this method is that it produces estimates that
are both efficient
              and robust to the presence of data contamination unlike maximum likelihood
              methods.

Second, the applicant will consider BRM-IS algorithm for computing
              posterior distributions. The method is similar to the Weighted Likelihood
              Bootstrap (WLB) procedure of Newton and Raftery (1994) but BRM-IS is better in
              the case of incomplete data since it takes into account the prior distribution
              of the parameters of interest. BRM has been successfully applied to censored
              Weibull models, failure models with Weibull distributions and to  (univariate)
              mixtures of mixture distributions.

The plan is to carry out this work with
              Dr. Gilles Celeux and his research team at the National Institute for Research
              in Computer Science and Control (INRIA Rhone-Alpes, France).

This POWRE
              project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities
              (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).

