Title       : POWRE: Black Women in the Academy II: Service and Leadership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1999      
File        : a9806094

Award Number: 9806094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Florence B. Bonner fbonner@Howard.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide partial support for the organization and activities of a
              conference, `Black Women in the Academy II: Service and Leadership` that will
              take place   June 24-26, 1999.  The aim is to increase the number of African
              American women participating in all of the sciences (including the social
              sciences) and engineering.  The goals are threefold: 1) enhance science
              participation in the target population by enlisting a broad coalition of
              African American scholars and others to identify and make available teaching
              and training models and resources to change science-related participation by
              African American women; 2) to promote dissemination of information and adoption
              of models and strategies through communities of scholars and networks of women
              that are linked to the conference participants; 3) to modify institutional
              norms and practices in the direction of interdisciplinary work that is
              supportive of women, and the development of science and research orientation. 
              Central to the strategy is to increase participation of the target population
              and create formal networks to introduce and disseminate an interdisciplinary
              model for teaching and engaging students in science.  The conference is
              designed to allow the introduction and discussion of models to enhance
              teaching, training, affirming climates, and provide a directory of participants
              by geographic locale, discipline, and interest (teaching and/or research), and
              to launch `regional networks.`  Training and professional development workshops
              for scholars and graduate students will help to disseminate the information.  
              Also the conference will bring together persons involved in programs to
              increase the participation of Black students in science and engineering and
              will link these programs with Black women scientists/engineers in attendance. 
              Cross-disciplinary discussion will give visibility to the importance of
              science/engineering and can encourage cross-disciplinary work.  There will be
              opportunities for plenary sessions and workshops and panels where
              scientists/engineers will lead as speakers, planners, and discussants.  There
              is a paucity of the burgeoning social science research on women in science and
              engineering which addresses the experiences of Black women.  Black women
              scientists and engineers in the Academy are few and this conference offers a
              unique venue for Black women and women of color to interact with each other in
              their disciplines and an array of other women scholars.  They will have an
              opportunity to address specific issues related to race and gender in their
              workshops.  Questions to be addressed include: do white male faculty fully
              recognize the capabilities of Black women science students and scientists?  Are
              Black women being effectively integrated into scientific and engineering
              communities in the Academy?  How are the specific needs of Black female faculty
              and students being met in engineering and science departments?  It is expected
              that the networking and career enhancing activities of the conference will have
              long-term effects on the infrastructure of science.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
