Title       : U.S. GLOBEC: GEORGES BANK PHASE III Cross-Frontal Exchange Studies at the Base
               of the Tidally Mixed Front using an Injected Dye Tracer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2000   
File        : a9806361

Award Number: 9806361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Houghton houghton@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              U.S. GLOBEC: GEORGES BANK PHASE III Cross-frontal exchange studies at the base
              of the tidally mixed front using an injected dye tracer

Robert W. Houghton
              

Georges Bank is surrounded by a tidally mixed front.  The role of this
              front in maintaining the high biological productivity on the Bank (Is it a
              barrier or conduit?) is not fully understood.  There is evidence that
              cross-frontal circulation may be critical for modulating the flux of nutrients
              and the retention of particles, such as zooplankton and fish larvae, on the
              Bank both of which contributes to the high productivity of this ecosystem.  We
              propose to use a purposefully injected dye to directly measure the mixing and
              cross-bank circulation at the foot of the tidal front where on-bank flux is
              expected to be greatest.  The utility of a fluorescent dye tracer for such
              studies has recently been demonstrated at the shelfbreak front on the New
              England Shelf.  The ability of the dye to follow a constantly moving frontal
              boundary makes it a particularly powerful technique for studies on Georges
              Bank.  Since the spreading of the dye patch is referenced to the temperature
              field that defines the front, the complexity introduced by frontal
              displacements, irregular bottom topography, and a fluctuating, strong
              along-bank flow is avoided and the cross-frontal circulation and mixing is
              unambiguously defined.  The dye tracer measurements will contribute directly to
              our understanding of the processes that make Georges Bank such a highly
              productive marine ecosystem.  This understanding is necessary in order to
              manage this resource to maintain and exploit its optimum contribution to the
              nation's economy.  The understanding is also necessary to anticipate how
              changes in the forcing of this ecosystem by potential climate changes will
              affect this, and other, valuable marine resources.  This project by
              demonstrating the unique utility of the dye tracer will advance the development
              of this technology for future applications in marine research.


