Title       : A Multi-Site Ethnoastronomical Study of African Stellar Navigators and Their
               Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9806259

Award Number: 9806259
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jarita C. Holbrook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : C,Holbrook
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241301    /   -

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides fellowship support to a student for post-doctoral  research
              and training.  The student's proposed research project is entitled `A
              Multi-Site Ethnoastronomical Study of African Stellar Navigators and Their
              Communities.`  The student, who received her Ph.D in Astronomy and Astrophysics
              at the University of California at Santa Cruz, will study the current use of
              astronomical knowledge and the political and socioeconomic environments in
              which it is situated by focusing on stellar navigation, and the stellar
              navigators and their communities in Africa.  More specifically, through a
              preliminary site investigation of  Tunisia and the region around Massawa,
              Eritrea, East Africa, the student will examine how the globalization of
              non-local technologies has shifted the allocation of resources, the rites,
              privileges, and definitions of astronomical knowledge. The post-doctoral
              student will conduct ethnographic interviews in Tunisia with the stellar
              navigators, their modern navigation counterparts, and a sample of  other
              inhabitants of the island.  One goal of the research is to videotape interviews
              of several fishermen of the Kerkennah Islands about the use of stellar
              navigation and to record a boat trip with one of the stellar navigators. The
              video will be the basis of a planetarium show on the tropic.  Field work in
              Eritrea will include an examination of the origins of the Afar stellar
              navigation knowledge, the extent to which stellar navigation was used in
              Eritrean independence, and the change in political and socioeconomic status of
              the Afar people over the course of the struggle for independence. One
              hypothesis is that the introduction of navigation equipment and techniques has
              changed who has access to, control of, and expertise in the astronomical
              knowledge of stellar navigation by 1) decreasing the need for stellar
              navigation, 2) decreasing the economic status of the stellar navigators, and
              therefore, 3) limiting the transmission of the knowledge of stellar navigation.
               Another hypothesis is that the globalization of electric street lamp
              technology has contributed to a decrease in astronomical knowledge of stellar
              names and constellations due to, among other factors, light pollution.  This
              project will not only contribute to informal science education, but also to
              science and technology studies, which looks at the intellectual, value, process
              and impact factors related to the development of science and technology.   The
              student will employ the interdisciplinary fields of archaeoastronomy and
              ethnoastronomy, which combine astronomy, archaeology, and anthropology.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
