Title       : The Sechin Alto Site and its Role in Polity Development within the Casma Valley
               of Northern Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9806833

Award Number: 9806833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelia Pozorski spozorski@panam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Pozorski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785412999    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In prehistoric Peru, early civilization first arose during the Initial Period
              (2150-1000 B.C.). Irrigation agriculture, ceramics and weaving appeared almost
              simultaneously as part of this early development. One of the principal areas
              where early complex societies emerged was the Casma Valley on the North coast
              of Peru. During the Initial Period, both branches of the valley were apparently
              unified into a single large political unit or polity. With National Science
              Foundation support, Drs. Sheila and Thomas Pozorski will conduct three seasons
              of fieldwork at the main mound at the site of Sechin Alto. This complex
              stratified structure measures 300m x 250m x 35 m. tall and numerous connected
              plazas and smaller mounds extend fully 1.4 km out from the main mound. This was
              the largest structure in the New World at that time and the vast summit
              undoubtedly housed a variety of activities which were most likely concerned
              with administration of the valley-wide Sechin Alto polity by a single leader or
              a small corps of elite.  The team will continue and expand excavations on the
              mound. They will approach the summit from both the East and West sides to
              examine the interface between this sector and public access routes via broad
              staircases. They will also  attempt to determine how styles of construction and
              building layout changed over time. Just as the layout of the US capitol with
              separate chambers for the Senate and House of Representatives might provide
              future archaeologists with insight into the political organization of the
              United States, likewise structural organization of Sechin Alto may provide
              information on how the Casma Valley state was organized. Preliminary work
              suggests that mound organization changed over time and that variation in
              building style may reflect power shifts within the Valley itself.  This
              research is important because it provides insight into how complex societies
              arose and were maintained. The size and age of the site make it unique and the
              data resulting from this project will be of interest to many archaeologists.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
