Title       : Well-Controlled Polymer Structures via Metathesis Polycondensation Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a9806492

Award Number: 9806492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. B. Wagener wagener@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9806492  Wagener    This award addresses several specific research goals.  A 
              series of well defined polyolefin polymers will be designed to  model the
              crystallization behavior of polyethylene and its  related copolymers, including
              the new metallocene materials.  The synthesis concept has already been reduced
              to practice, so  the likelihood of success in this research is high.  This will
               be done by implementing total control over the identity and  frequency of
              branches along the backbone.  Inherent in this  research will be work to
              elaborate on new homogeneous-to-  heterogeneous metathesis/hydrogenation
              chemistry.  Well-  defined alcohol and ester branched polymers will be 
              synthesized to serve as polymeric substrates in a sialyl Lewis  X
              tetrasaccharide drug binding study.  This work will be done  in collaboration
              with Prof. Wong of the Scripps Research  Institute.  Precise segmented polymers
              will be synthesized by  condensation metathesis.  Segmented multiphase
              materials can  only be made by step polymerization procedures, making the 
              ADMET reaction a natural choice for this conversion.  This  synthetic strategy
              has already been demonstrated, and the  preparation of useful hard segments
              will be explored using  polyether, polysiloxane, and polyisobutylene soft
              segments.  Well defined, mixed metal rich homopolymers will be prepared 
              possessing different metals covalently fixed within the same  polymer chain. 
              %%%  While covalently bound metal containing polymers have already  been
              synthesized via condensation metathesis, polymers with  such high mixed metal
              content polymers are not known.  Each of  these areas provides significant
              opportunity for the training  of postdoctoral, Ph.D. and undergraduate students
              for their  future.  Interaction with industry continues to be strong, and  the
              information generated by this work will foster continuing  relations with a
              number of corporations.  The social impact of  this research relates to
              broadening the usefulness of the  world's largest volume, commo dity polymers
              and copolymers such  as polyethylene, polystyrene and polyvinylacetate.  ***
