Title       : US GLOBEC: Maintenance of Pseudocalanus spp. Populations on Georges Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9806591

Award Number: 9806591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis J. McGillicuddy dmcgillicuddy@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,9117,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              U.S. GLOBEC: Maintenance of Pseudocalanus spp. populations on Georges
              Bank

Ann Bucklin and Dennis J. McGillicuddy 

The planktonic copepod
              sibling species, Pseudocalanus moultoni and P. newmani, occur sympatrically
              during the spring and summer on Georges Bank.  Despite their marked
              morphological similarity, the species differ in many aspects of their ecology,
              including: patterns of distribution and abundance; preferred habitat; and
              seasonal timing of reproduction.  In comparison to P. newmani, P. moultoni is
              more abundant on the well-mixed crest of Georges Bank within the 60 m isobath
              (Bucklin et al., 1998, Mar. Biol., in press).  We hypothesize that populations
              of P. moultoni are maintained on Georges Bank by local reproduction and
              recruitment, and that the species is differentially retained within the
              tidal-mixing front located along the 60 m isobath by behavior (vertical
              distribution) in relation to physical processes (dynamics of the tidal-mixing
              front).  This hypothesis will be tested by characterization of Bank-wide,
              stage-specific distribution and abundance of P. moultoni and P. newmani in
              relation to circulation patterns (based on Broadscale Survey samples collected
              from January to June, 1999) and three-dimensional small-scale distributions in
              relation to advection and mixing in the tidal-mixing front (during field
              experiments proposed for May and June, 1999).  The goal of this work is to
              understand how P. moultoni may persist and proliferate in the complex and
              variable flow field over Georges Bank.  The technical approach will be to
              identify all life stages of P. moultoni using species-specific competitive PCR,
              and to perform numerical modeling experiments using observed distributions in a
              known physical field.  The significance of this project is to understand the
              interplay between population dynamics and ocean processes in determining the
              distribution and abundance of important members of the Georges Bank zooplankton
              assemblage.


