Title       : Phylogeny and Evolution in Lemnaceae (Duckweeds)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a9806537

Award Number: 9806537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Les les@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Les  DEB 9806537    Flowering plants (angiosperms) include a diversity of
              organisms of which the smallest are the aquatic duckweeds (family Lemnaceae). 
              These plants may have a body less than 1 mm in size with flowers only 0.2 mm
              long.   Several individual plants of the duckweed Wolffia would fit on the head
              of a pin, and the number of individual plants in a single pond might exceed the
              human population of North America.  The greatly reduced size of duckweeds
              presents a formidable challenge to systematic botanists who identify species
              and classify these tiny aquatic plants.  Accurate species identifications and
              knowledge of relationships are critical in this economically important family. 
              Because of their minute size and ease of culture, duckweeds have been
              incorporated into numerous experiments and are used routinely as bio-monitors
              of pollution and toxic substances in public waters.  Outcomes of such
              experiments can be seriously compromised if species have been misidentified. 
              How can such small plants and flowers be studied in adequate detail to provide
              the level of confidence necessary for accurate species identifications and
              estimations of relationships?  For more than a century, researchers have relied
              on light and electron microscopy to observe the few conspicuous features that
              define species and indicate their relationships; however, few living people
              possess the expertise to do so with confidence.  In this study, molecular
              techniques are used to study duckweed relationships and to facilitate their
              identification.  To supplement morphological observations, the structures of
              proteins and DNA molecules are compared to determine species relationships and
              to serve as molecular markers for identification.  Many molecular data sets
              including flavonoids, allozymes, and sequences from nuclear and chloroplast DNA
              will provide the basis for a comprehensive reconstruction of duckweed
              relationships, which will serve as a framework for constructing a meaningful
              classification.  The development of te sts using molecular markers will provide
              a simple means of identifying duckweed species and their geographical origin
              and save weeks of study.  Furthermore, molecular markers will enable the
              geographical origin of duckweed clones to be determined, an achievement
              previously impossible using morphological markers.  Molecular studies have also
              identified the existence of several cryptic duckweed species, i.e., populations
              that resemble one another morphologically, but are highly divergent genetically
              and isolated reproductively.  The identification of cryptic species in several
              widespread taxa will provide important information to estimate duckweed
              biodiversity and assist with conservation.
