Title       : POWRE: Research and Educational Enhancement at Otterbein: Effects of Surfactants
               Mesophase and Divalent Cations on Structures in Model Lipid Bilayers & Cell
               Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9806185

Award Number: 9806185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stevens                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chihae Yang cyang@otterbein.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Otterbein College
	      
	      Westerville, OH  43081    614/890-3000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award of the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education
              (POWRE) program funded by the Division of Chemistry supports the research and
              educational activities of Dr. Chihae Yang of Otterbein College.  The project
              aims to strengthen and expand Dr. Yang's research with colloid and surface
              chemistry of amphiphilic macromolecules to include biocolloid chemistry and
              ultimately to implement a biochemistry-related research program at Otterbein. 
              The proposed research will develop an understanding of the influence of
              surfactants and certain divalent cations on the mesophase structures of model
              lipid bilayers and to apply this knowledge to more complex systems in order to
              explain the effect of these additives on cell membranes.  Structural
              characterization will be accomplished using a variety of techniques, including
              XRD, NMR, IP-SANS, light scattering, and IR and fluorescence
              spectroscopy.

The opportunity afforded through the POWRE program will
              enhance Dr. Yang's research potential as well as her ultimate goal of the
              educational mentoring of undergraduate students in both classroom and research
              laboratory.   The proposed research will provide undergraduate students from a
              small liberal arts college exposure to a major research university,
              state-of-the-art instrumentation, and leading researchers in the field.  This
              project not only motivates the collaboration of the PI with researchers at the
              Ohio State University, but also encourages collaboration between faculty
              members at Otterbein to pool their resources and talents for the common goal of
              implementing biochemical research at Otterbein.

