Title       : Experimental Software Systems: Integrated Applications and Systems Research in
               Software Shared Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a9806751

Award Number: 9806751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $980000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaswinder P. Singh jps@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kai Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9806751
Singh, Jaswinder Pal
Li, Kai
Princeton University

Experimental
              Software Systems:  Integrated Applications and Systems Research in Software
              Shared Memory

A coherent shared address space (SAS) is an attractive
              programming model for parallel computing.  It is emerging as commercially
              successful when implemented in hardware on tightly coupled multiprocessors. 
              With less tightly coupled clusters of workstations or symmetric multiprocessors
              becoming important platforms, it is important to support this model in software
              on clusters as well.  Otherwise, the need to run applications on both types of
              platforms may drive the more difficult explicit message passing model to
              dominate.  This research develops and evaluates software SAS systems on
              clusters of various scales and organizations.  The research is distinguished by
              being highly application-driven, including collaboration with application
              scientists.  It examines protocols/systems and applications simultaneously
              without treating either as fixed.  Protocols and systems are enhanced based on
              bottlenecks encountered in real applications, the role of hardware support is
              examined, and different software approaches are compared.  The focus is on both
              programming ease and performance, and includes comparing the SAS and message
              passing models on tightly-coupled systems and clusters.  The research will
              result in new, scalable software SAS systems, a greater integration of
              applications and systems research that is now necessary for major advances, and
              a better understanding of the tradeoffs in programming models across platforms.
