Title       : POWRE: Early Detection of Insulation Degradation in Low Voltage Motors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9806023

Award Number: 9806023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally A. McInerny mcinerny@coe.eng.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ECS-9806023  McInery    The objective of this research project is to develop a
              method for early detection of insulation breakdown in low voltage, PWM
              controlled, ac induction motors.  The method will be empirically based, but the
              data acquired in the experimental phase of the project will be well suited to
              validation of model based / predictive methods that may be developed in the
              future.  Insulation breakdown and internal connection failures cause roughly
              37% of all motor failures.  Insulation breakdown is known to begin in a
              localized area of weakness.  It is posited that the local, small scale changes
              associated with the initial stages of insulation breakdown will be reflected in
              a motor's high frequency response.  This hypothesis forms the basis of the
              proposed research project.  In standard duty, fixed speed motors, there is
              nothing to excite the response of the motor at high frequencies.  And, whereas
              it is difficult to generate high frequency sinusoidal voltages of sufficient
              power to excite most industrial motors, PWM drives by their very nature
              generate significant energy out to frequencies well beyond 40 kHz.    In this
              project, high bandwidth, high dynamic range measurements of the voltages and
              currents into and out of a 50 HP PWM drive will be acquired over a wide range
              of operating conditions.  The motor speed (RPM) and output torque will also be
              recorded.  Localized insulation weakness will be induced in various regions of
              the motor's stator windings using spot heaters.  Local motor temperatures will
              be recorded using RTDS.  All full scale experimental tests will be performed in
              the motor test facility at Oak Ridge National Laboratories.    The acquired
              data will analyzed to determine what physical quantity (e.g., current, power,
              or impedance) and what feature extraction technique (e.g., spectral, wavelet,
              or higher order spectral analysis) are optimal for the early detection
              insulation breakdown in low voltage ac induction motors.  Once a method of
              detecting insulation breakdown  is defined, the required sensors and algorithms
              can be incorporated into adjustable speed drives by their manufacturers. 
              Ideally, no sensors beyond the control sensors currently used in these drives
              would be required.    A technique for detecting insulation breakdown in its
              early stages and monitoring its progression in low voltage motors would fill a
              significant gap in existing predictive maintenance programs.  The maturity and
              success of electronic drives suggests that their design principles and the
              techniques developed in this project could be applied to the development of
              portable instrumentation for insulation health monitoring in fixed speed motors
              (in industry, manufacturing, on hermetic chiller motors, electric vehicle
              motors,...).    A POWRE grant will provide the essential equipment, supplies
              and time to help keep the PI focused in her new research ventures.
