Title       : Pseudo-Boolean Functions: Representations and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9806389

Award Number: 9806389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Hammer hammer@rutcor.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Endre Boros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9806389
Peter L. Hammer

Numerous problems in area as diverse as VLSI design,
              game theory, artificial intelligence, neural networks, operations research,
              statistics, reliability, and finance can be modeled by using set functions,
              i.e., mappings of the subsets of a finite set into the reals.  It was noticed
              in the mid-60's by the PI that set functions can be viewed as "pseudo-Boolean"
              functions, i.e., real valued functions with 0-1 variables, and can be
              represented as multilinear polynomials.  It was noticed along the years that
              beside their polynomial representation, pseudo-Boolean functions admit also
              other algebraic representations, e.g., as additive posiforms, as logical
              posiforms, etc.  It also turns out that various types of applications may lead
              naturally to various types of representations.  Also, it can be seen that the
              solution of some of the most important problems concerning pseudo-Boolean
              problems (finding a global optimum, finding a local optimum, approximating the
              optimum, finding a good approximation of the functions, finding a good majorant
              or minorant of the function) depends heavily on the particular representation
              used.  In this proposal the investigators will deal mostly with the
              optimization of pseudo-Boolean functions with a heavy emphasis on their
              representation.  They will consider separately various problems of
              optimization, majorization, approximation, etc., for pseudo-Boolean functions
              given in polynomial form, in additive posiform, as well as in disjunctive
              posiform representation.  Beside investigations concerning the algebraic
              problems of presentation, the investigators will lay heavy emphasis on the
              computational aspects of the problem, and plan to elaborate specialized
              algorithms for exact and heuristic optimization problems of pseudo- Boolean
              functions in various forms, on local optimization, and on the detection of
              efficient methods for particular classes of problems.

In numerous real-life
              situations, optimization problems have to be solved involving decisions and
              selections between various alternatives.  When, for example, locations have to
              be found for cellular ground stations, emergency facilities, warehouses, etc.,
              the usual mathematical optimization procedures cannot be applied blindly, since
              they may recommend the location of say half a unit in one place and the other
              half in another.  Therefore, new mathematical techniques are needed to make
              sure that the solutions can only involve locating either an entire unit in one
              place or no part of it in that place.  Similar problems occur when selections
              are made between projects to be undertaken, people or equipment to be assigned
              to various tasks, or much more complex situations where a large company (e.g.
              an airline) has to assign its equipment (e.g. aircrafts) to its various
              activities (e.g. flights).  In such situations, the mathematical formulation of
              the problem requires the use of variables which can only take the values of 0
              or 1.  In spite of its apparent simplicity, this requirement can cause major
              mathematical and computational difficulties.  This project deals to a large
              extent with the problem of finding various mathematical models describing
              situations like the above ones and developing optimization techniques for
              handling them.  A substantial amount of computational experimentation is part
              of the project and will complement the mathematical developments.

