Title       : Very-High-Spin Organic Polyradicals and Chiral Alpha-Conjugated Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9806954

Award Number: 9806954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $533850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Rajca arajca1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the development of new synthetic methodologies   for
              the synthesis of novel mesoscopic molecular architectures that serve   as
              scaffolds for very-high-spin polyradicals, and the experimental and  
              computational characterization of the polyradicals.   The principles of  
              fractal geometry will be applied to achieve connectivities differing    from
              those obtainable with the current dendritic approach.   MNDO, EHT   and MM3
              molecular calculations of the electronic structure of these, and   mesoscopic
              systems possessing chiral pi-conjugated systems, will be   correlated with
              measurements of the magnetic and electronic properties of   the two- and
              three-dimensional polyradicals to achieve spin-coupled   organic magnets with
              high Curie temperatures.   Graduate and postdoctoral   students carrying out
              the experiments will be trained in the synthesis of   molecules of mesoscopic
              dimensions, and the experimental and theoretical   characterization of their
              electronic properties.  With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program and the   Advanced Materials Program support the educational
              and research   activities of Dr. Andrzej Rajca of the Chemistry Department at
              the   University of Nebraska.   Dr. Rajca will focus his research efforts on  
              developing synthetic routes to relatively large molecules, referred to as  
              mesoscopic molecules.   These multi-dimensional molecules serve as   scaffolds
              for a relatively large number of sites possessing an unpaired   electron, and
              are key intermediates in the development of organic   magnets.   Dr. Rajca will
              correlate the magnetic properties of these   mesoscopic molecules with
              theoretical analyses to achieve organic   materials that exhibit room
              temperature magnetic properties.   Dr.   Rajca's educational activities involve
              training graduate and postdoctoral   students in the synthetic methodology
              needed to achieve molecules of   mesoscopic dimensions, and their experimental
              and theoretical   characterization.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
