Title       : Nectar Robbers, Pollinators, and Plants: The Importance of Direct and Indirect
               Effects on Individuals and Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9806501

Award Number: 9806501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison K. Brody akbrody@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9806501  Alison Brody    A  fundamental goal of evolutionary ecologists is
              to understand how interactions among species govern their abundance and design.
               The interactions among plants and their pollinators have received considerable
              attention over the years and these studies have yielded much insight into the
              ecology and evolution of species interactions.  However, some floral visitors
              do not pollinate their host plants and, in fact, can do significant harm.  One
              such group of animals is nectar robbers -- animals that rob flowers of nectar
              without effecting pollination.  The focus of this study is to examine how a
              nectar robbing bumblebee, Bombus occidentalis, affects the success of its
              sub-alpine host plant, scarlet gilia (Ipomopsis aggregata), and indirectly
              affects other members of the flowering plant community. The research combines
              manipulative experiments with observations to test  three overarching
              hypotheses:  (1) nectar robbers affect realized male and female fitness of the
              hummingbird-pollinated plant, scarlet gilia, (2) floral traits known to be
              important in attracting pollinators also attract nectar robbers which may thus
              mediate floral evolution, and (3) nectar robbing indirectly affects the success
              of co-occurring plant species by changing the behavior of hummingbird
              pollinators toward robbed and unrobbed plants.  The work is timely in that it
              addresses a question of long-standing interest to ecologists and evolutionary
              biologists, i.e., the importance of multiple species interactions and their
              direct and indirect effects on each other. The work also has applied
              significance in understanding how multiple species interactions combine to
              affect the seed production of animal pollinated plants, their floral evolution,
              and community-level dynamics.
