Title       : The Genetic Architecture of Color Pattern Evolution in Heliconius erato
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9806792

Award Number: 9806792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Owen McMillan wmcmilla@rrpac.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Heckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9806792  McMillan    Despite the central position of adaptation in biological
              research, the genetic basis of adaptation in natural populations remains poorly
              explored. This is primarily because, except for a few model genetic organisms
              like mice and fruit flies, the many genetic markers necessary for detailed
              genetic analysis of adaptive traits have not been developed.    This project
              will map genes involved in color pattern change in the neotropical butterfly
              Heliconius erato. Within this species, there has been remarkable evolution into
              over 20 geographic races that show striking differences in wing color patterns.
              The vivid wing patterns of H. erato are adaptations that warn potential
              predators of the butterflies' distastefulness. A detailed genetic map of H.
              erato will provide a potent framework for studying the number, phenotypic
              effect, and position of both major and minor color pattern genes underlying the
              color pattern change in this species. Moreover, the reference genome map will
              allow important regulatory genes emerging from developmental genetic studies of
              insects to be mapped relative to the genes known to cause pattern change in H.
              erato. Markers and theory developed in this project will be generally useful
              for other studies of Lepidoptera, which comprise almost 10% of the world's
              species and include some of the most noxious pests of food and fiber.    The
              presence of a well defined developmental model underlying pattern evolution
              makes butterfly wings excellent models for integrating genetics, development,
              and morphological change. This study will be the initiating step in future
              comparative linkage analysis of the architecture of color pattern mimicry
              between H. erato and H. melpomene. Heliconius melpomene has undergone a
              parallel intraspecific color pattern radiation, such that races of the two
              distantly related species share nearly identical wing patterns across much of
              South and Central America. Understanding the genetic changes that repeatedly
              produced such remarkable converg ence in the wing patterns of these two species
              offers biologists rare insights into the evolution of mimicry and into the
              links between development and adaptive change.
