Title       : Lifetime Fitness of Hybrids in Natural Plant Populations: Testing Models for
               Hybrid Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9806547

Award Number: 9806547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane R. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nickolas M. Waser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Campbell  9806547    Hybrid zones are areas where related species, or other
              genetically distinct populations, come together and produce some viable
              offspring. Hybridization is particularly widespread in flowering plants and
              also occurs in many animal groups.  Evolutionary biologists propose several
              models to explain patterns of genetic variation across the resulting hybrid
              zones.  These models differ in the assumptions they make about natural
              selection on hybrids, and they have different important consequences for
              long-term evolution.  Understanding the processes responsible for maintaining
              hybrid zones can also be applied to prevention of hybridization between crops
              and related weeds, and to conservation of rare species that occur near more
              common relatives.    This study will test models for hybrid zones by comparing
              the lifetime fitness of parent and hybrid plants in the field.  The
              investigators will follow the survival and final reproductive success of
              offspring generated from experimental crosses between two closely related
              species, Ipomopsis aggregata and Ipomopsis tenuituba, and planted as seeds into
              several locations.  First generation and second generation hybrids will be
              planted. Each model can be distinguished by its unique predictions about the
              fitnesses of hybrids and parental individuals and how these change across
              environments.  In addition, the investigators will determine whether
              interactions between pollen grains of the two species can reduce the level of
              hybrid formation and contribute to geographical variation in the extent of
              hybridization. This goal will be met using experiments and computer simulations
              to determine the mixtures of pollen that reach flowers in natural populations,
              and by performing experimental pollinations and genetic analysis of seeds.
