Title       : POWRE: Testing the Structure Building Framework Using Functional Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9806076

Award Number: 9806076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49797              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morton A. Gernsbacher magernsb@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1311,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this award period is research/educational enhancement.  The
              investigator will gain expertise and incorporate into her research program the
              use of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).  She will use this
              expertise in fMRI to further explore the cognitive processes and mechanisms
              underlying language comprehension, which she has explored using non-imaging
              techniques and which she has summarized in a framework she calls the Structure
              Building Framework.  According to this framework, the goal of comprehension is
              to build coherent mental representations or structures.  These structures
              represent clauses, sentences, paragraphs, passages, and other meaningful units.
               To build these structures, first, comprehenders lay foundations for their
              mental structures.  Then, comprehenders develop their mental structures by
              mapping on information, when that incoming information coheres or relates to
              the previous information.  However, if the incoming information is less
              coherent, comprehenders employ a different process.  They shift and initiate a
              new substructure.  The investigator's prior behavioral investigations challenge
              her to explore more concretely the brain structures that enable the cognitive
              processes involved in structure building.  The significance of this pursuit is
              to answer both the question of `How do the cognitive processes and mechanisms
              that underlie language comprehension occur in the brain?` as well as the more
              traditional question of `Where do the cognitive processes and mechanisms that
              underlie language comprehension occur in the brain?`  Within the realm of
              language processing, fMRI has been used to investigate language processing, but
              to only a limited extent.  Training researchers who are already skilled at
              conducting behavioral, cognitive-psychological language comprehension research
              (such as the investigator) to use more complex, neuro-imaging techniques will
              allow the field to answer more complex questions about the brain activities
              that occur during language comprehension.   This award will support activities
              designed to promote the development of a scholarly and institutional leader. 
              The research and training experience will increase the investigator's
              prominence in the science and engineering community and will enhance her
              professional contribution by providing her with funding opportunities not
              ordinarily available through regular research funding mechanisms.  Such
              intensive and state-of-the-art retraining should serve to ensure the vitality
              of the nation's scientific enterprise.  Moreover, in this new area of research
              (functional brain imaging), women are even less well-represented than they are
              in the investigator's original area of research (cognitive psychology).  By
              providing the resources for this training and research, the Foundation will be
              increasing the number of women as full participants in this important and
              highly contemporary area of science.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
