Title       : Experimental Low-Dimensional Geometry and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1998    
File        : a9806408

Award Number: 9806408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Poritz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Poritz
9806408

The principal investigator employs computer visualization
              tools to aid in the study of a number of questions in low-dimensional
              differential and algebraic geometry and topology.  In particular, these
              questions have to do with fundamental domains for discrete groups of isometries
              of various three-dimensional geometries, moduli spaces of polygons in each of
              the three-dimensional space forms, and direct constructions of families of
              compactifications of semisimple Lie groups of low dimension.  Interactive
              software has been developed to explore fundamental domains on the sphere at
              infinity for cyclic groups of isometries of three-dimensional hyperbolic space
              and this is extended to the interior of hyperbolic space, other groups and
              other geometries.  Moduli spaces of polygons are investigated to determine
              aspects of their own geometry and because of their relationship to moduli
              spaces of vector bundles over punctured Riemann surfaces and some symplectic
              and geometric-invariant theory quotients.  Images have also been made of moduli
              spaces of certain algebraic compactifications of the group of isometries of the
              hyperbolic disk and further images are generated of moduli spaces of other
              algebraic compactifications as well as of the compactifications themselves.  An
              important component of this project is the direct involvement of undergraduate
              students:  while the mathematics is of various levels of abstraction, the
              computer tasks are accessible to serious students and provide them with an
              unusual opportunity for hands-on involvement in current mathematical
              research.

The fantastic interactive three-dimensional graphics that can be
              seen in many of today's commercial computer games are the result of the
              phenomenal advances that have occurred in recent years in the sophistication of
              computer software and the speed and power of computer hardware.  But in a
              larger sense they can be attributed to the increase of engineering knowledge
              based on hard science and, ultimately, on deep mathematical understanding.  It
              is thus somewhat surprising that these computational and graphics tools have
              been used very little in pure mathematical research.  The principal
              investigator uses interactive computer visualization to perform mathematical
              experiments in a variety of different fields that all have some component
              relating to two-, three- or four-dimensional geometry; as this is pure
              mathematics, experimental evidence must then be justified in a purely abstract
              setting.  An important part of this project is the direct involvement of
              undergraduate students: here again it is possible to take advantage of the very
              high level computer abilities that many undergraduates now possess to create
              the software that drives the mathematical explorations, while at the same time
              giving these undergraduates the extremely rare opportunity to have immediate
              experience of current mathematical research.


