Title       : POWRE: Simultaneity in the Timing of Young Women's Non-Martial Homeleaving,
               Non-Maritial Fertility, and Marriage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9806124

Award Number: 9806124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel A. Gordon rgordon@spc.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1331,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to provide research and educational enhancement for the
              investigator through training in and utilization of Dr. Lee Lillard's
              innovative simultaneous hazards model.  The Lillard model allows multiple
              hazard processes to be jointly studied with two forms of potential dependencies
              among processes explicitly estimated: (1) correlations among unobserved
              heterogeneity components and (2) direct effects of the past history or actual
              hazard of one process on the hazard of another process.  The Lillard model is
              also innovative in its flexible piecewise linear specification for `multiple
              clocks` that may affect the hazard rate (e.g., duration of marriage,
              individual's age, calendar time).  A substantive application will jointly model
              three processes (non-marital homeleaving, non-marital fertility, and marriage)
              and address several research questions regarding the process of leaving the
              parental home outside of marriage and its relationship to the two other
              processes.  The data include close to 4000 African American and white women who
              were born between 1938 and 1967 and participated in the National Survey of
              Families and Households.  This project addresses critical gaps in research on
              the homeleaving process of young women in general and young mothers in
              particular, and has the potential to inform policymakers regarding welfare
              policies.  The study will regorously consider developmental progressions which,
              although critical elements of life-span and life-course theories, have been
              relatively neglected by empiral research.  In addition, the research adds to
              the literature on the leaving home process by moving from static to dynamic
              (event history) models and by accounting for endogeneity amoung routes out of
              the home.  As such, the work can inform the research community regarding
              alternative explanations for shifting patterns in marital and non-marital
              routes out of the home in recent decases.  Finally, the study will
              substantially extend the investigator's own and other past research on when
              young mothers live at home.  By allowing for endogeneity in the timing and
              occurrence of childbearing, the model accounts for selective distinctions among
              childless women and earlier and later childbearers.  Thus, fair comparisons can
              be made among these groups.  In addition, by simultaneously considering exits
              from home within and outside of marriage, the study will be the first to pull
              together the small literature on AFDC effects on leaving the parental home and
              the larger literature on AFDC effects on marriage.  The products of this
              educational and research enhancement will be substantial.  The investigator's
              research involves the applied developmental and demographic sciences, and the
              joint analysis of endogenous event processes will be instrumental to her
              producing knowledge at the forefront of these fields over her career.  She is
              committed to facilitating applications of the methodological advancements of a
              particular discipline to the methodological quandaries of another discipline or
              topical area.   Through published applications of these methodologies, as well
              as instructional pieces, she hopes to facilitate the cross-utilization of such
              state-of-the-art methods.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
