Title       : Moist Absolutely Unstable Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9806309

Award Number: 9806309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422478             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Fritsch fritsch@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The theoretical characteristics of atmospheric convection have been studied for
              many years and the basic characteristics of different forms of convection are
              considered to be well-known.  The Principal Investigator presents observational
              evidence that a phenomenon that he terms "moist absolutely unstable layers"
              (MAULs) occur in the atmosphere.  It would be expected that such layers would
              dissipate quickly through turbulence, but the Principal Investigator
              hypothesizes that under certain conditions, these layers may be created faster
              than they can be dissipated.  If MAULs indeed do persist over long time periods
              and spatial scales, this may have important implications for certain types of
              atmospheric convection.  

The main objectives of this proposal are to: (1)
              determine how MAULs are created and maintained; (2) determine the properties of
              MAULs and demonstrate that the lateral extent, depth and intensity of these
              layers play a fundamental role in establishing the organizational mode of moist
              convective overturning.  

The research methodology consists of three parts:
              (1) numerical simulations of existing observational cases that appear to
              exhibit MAULs; (2) numerical sensitivity experiments to determine the effects
              of varying model resolution and artificially changing the depth and strength of
              MAULs; (3) sensitivity experiments on idealized conditions generated from
              three-dimensional analytical initializations.  

It is expected that
              knowledge gained from this research will enhance fundamental understanding of
              the organizational and lifecycle processes of mesoscale convective systems. 
              The results potentially will provide practical benefits, such as improvements
              in short-term (3 to 18 hour) weather forecasts and in the parameterization of
              convective processes in global climate models.  The results also should provide
              a basis for theoretical studies of moist absolutely unstable layers.

