Title       : Workshop on Tsunami Community Modeling Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9806287

Award Number: 9806287
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank I. Gonzalez gonzalez@pmel.noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Env Res Labs-Pac Mar Lab
	      
	      Seattle, WA  98105    /   -

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: CMS-9806287, Frank Gonzalez, PMEL/ NOAA    The objective of a
              Community Model is to provide a stable Research  and  Development
              infrastructure; an essential for the systematic and  efficient  development,
              improvement and application of mathematical/computer  models of  a physical
              process (in this case of the impact of a tsunami on a  coastline). It provides
              a more effective mechanism to update and  promulgate  needed changes in the
              models, to incorporate important advances in  the  technology. The concept of a
              Community Model has been embraced and  exploited with considerable success by
              other scientific  communities.    This action is to support a workshop that
              will bring together  leading  tsunami modelers and experts in tsunami hazard
              mitigation to  discuss the  idea of the Tsunami Community Modeling Facility
              (TCMF), to guide  and  critique the concept of the TCMF, and to identify
              important  organizational,  procedural, and technical issues that the tsunami
              hazard  mitigation  community must deal with in order that the TCMF can
              function  effectively  and provide a much-needed focal point for advances in
              tsunami  hazard  mitigation.    The Tsunami Community Model will function as a
              (perhaps  distributed)  repository for state-of-the-art tsunami models, for
              ancillary data  required  to run the models (bathymetry, topography, ...), for
              field  observational  data to test and verify models, and for an archive of
              documented  model runs  and numerical experiments. Internet and World Wide Web
              technology  will be  exploited to make this facility accessible and useful to
              the  entire tsunami  community. The concept is simple but very effective, and
              is most  easily  visualized in terms of the functions and activities of several
               important  participants: the Model Steward, the Scientific User, and Tsunami 
              Hazard  Planners. (The Model Steward functions as the expert on models 
              supported by  the community modeling facility, and maintains and provides the 
              latest  release of the model code to users .) Periodic meetings of Users, 
              Planners,  and the Model Steward are crucial. Here, important decisions on  the
              further  modification and evolution of the models and associated hazard 
              mitigation  products are discussed and agreed upon, in order to achieve the 
              primary  goals of the Tsunami Community Model.
