Title       : Adaptation to Temperate Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9806278

Award Number: 9806278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Bradshaw bradshaw@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Bradshaw
9806278
The investigators are concerned with factors that affect the
              ability of plant or animal species to invade and persist in the temperate zone
              of North America.  Range expansion into progressively more northern latitudes
              should involve two separate adaptations to temperature (a) to the duration and
              intensity of winter cold and (b) to the timing of seasonal events, i.e., the
              "fitting" of growth, development, and reproduction into the available growing
              season.  In this proposal, the investigators test explicitly for the relative
              importance of these two sources of adaptation to temperature over the climatic
              gradient of eastern and central North America.  In a wide variety of studies on
              how temperature relates to the ecology of organisms, it is usually assumed that
              environmental temperatures limit range expansion directly, and that range
              expansion occurs because of adaptive modification of cold tolerance.  The
              investigators argue that the opposite process usually occurs: adaptive
              modification in cold tolerance takes place after populations are
              well-established and after the seasonal development and hibernation of
              populations has adapted to the local seasonal cycle. The investigators will
              pursue this proposition experimentally, using the pitcher-plant mosquito as our
              model organism; they will test the specific hypothesis that fitness of this
              species from the Gulf of Mexico to Canada is due to adaptations that affect the
              timing of seasonal development and hibernation and not due to adaptations that
              affect cold-tolerance. These experiments have important implications for global
              warming.  Discussions of
global warming are limited to the direct effects of
              the duration and intensity of temperatures on plant and animal survival. 
              However, adaptation to changes in seasonality can evolve very rapidly in some
              organisms.  When facing global climate change, organisms may not need to
              confront the extreme temperatures directly; rather they may simply evade these
              extremes by modifying the timing of important events in the seasonal life
              history.  The investigators seek to determine whether it is the direct effect
              of change in habitat temperature that is most likely to impact animal fitness,
              or whether it is the indirect effect of season length that affects fitness and,
              ultimately, survival.


