Title       : Collaborative Research: Origins of Cods on Georges Bank: Contributions of Early
               Developmental Stages for the Scotian Shelf
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9806712

Award Number: 9806712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492561             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Townsend davidt@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda J. Kling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Irving L. Kornfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806712
Townsend

Recent work in the Georges Bank-Gulf of Maine area has
              documented significant, and apparently episodic, fluxes of Scotian Shelf Water
              (SSW) from the Nova Scotian continental shelf to Georges Bank. SSW is a
              relatively cold and fresh water mass with a significant component from the St.
              Lawrence River, and is commonly identifiable with temperature-salinity analyses
              of hydrographic data and in satellite images of sea surface temperature. One
              such flux episode was observed last March (1997) in satellite imagery and from
              shipboard hydrographic sampling on Georges Bank. Qualitative at-sea analyses of
              ichthyoplankton sampled on the March cruise revealed a remarkably tight
              association between abundances of gadid eggs and the distribution of SSW
              suggesting, along with other lines of evidence, that most of those eggs were
              spawned on the Scotian Shelf and were advected with the SSW water mass to
              Georges Bank. The fundamental question thus arises: to what extent are cod on
              Georges Bank imported to the Bank as early development stages by advection from
              Canadian waters to the east? The goal of this research is to answer the above
              question. 
The approach will be two tiered: (1) Drs. Townsend and Radtke will
              perform retrospective elemental analyses of otoliths from archived larval cod
              samples, as well as of ichthyoplankton samples to be collected in 1998 and 1999
              as part of the continuing Georges Bank GLOBEC project, analyzing them for Sr/Ca
              ratios, using an X-ray electron microprobe, and elemental "fingerprints", using
              UV lazer ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICPMS).   (2)
              They will also assess the genetic identity of the larvae relative to larval and
              adult populations from Georges Bank and from the Scotian Shelf using nuclear
              DNA microsatellite techniques. They will first verify the elemental composition
              of otoliths from cod larvae known to have been spawned in the two locations.
              This elemental analyses will be combined with laboratory rearing experiments of
              larvae to determine the effects of temperature, salinity, feeding, and growth
              rates on the incorporation of elements in the otoliths.   DNA based techniques
              will be used to identify individuals in these common-garden rearing
              experiments. The second step will be to identify the origin of larvae based on
              individual DNA profiles generated by characterizing nuclear DNA
              microsatellites, a new class of genetic markers that they have used to
              differentiate Georges Bank cod from those of Scotian Shelf waters. The intent
              in using the two different, independent approaches is to be able to identify
              the spawning locations of the larvae and track their transport in relation to
              hydrographic characteristics of water masses in the region.

