Title       : U.S. GLOBEC: Georges Bank PHASE III Modes of Circulation and Mixing on Georges
               Bank -- Quantifying Source Water Using the Oxygen Isotope Tracer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9806542

Award Number: 9806542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Fairbanks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Houghton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806542
Fairbanks


	Georges Bank is the most studied ocean region in the
              world.  However, more than a century of biological and physical oceanographic
              measurements have not yet lead to a predictive model of Georges Bank biological
              variability.  This is a goal of U.S. GLOBEC: Georges Bank to which this project
              seeks to make a contribution.
	Circulation over Georges Bank can be described
              by two modes: (i) the canonical mode is an anticyclonic gyre with source waters
              originating in the coastal Gulf of Maine and, (ii) the "shunt mode" which is
              characterized by direct injection of Scotian Shelf Water across Northeast
              Channel onto the south flank of Georges Bank.  The primary objective of this
              study is to make a quantitative assessment of the amount of the biological
              variance explained by these two circulation modes.
	This project is to
              continue use of the oxygen isotope tracer H 19 0 which has demonstrated
the
              unique ability to distinguish local and upstream freshwater sources. It has
              revealed significant inter-annual variations in the percent of freshwater on
              the Bank derived from local river sources.  Although the details of the mixing
              processes responsible for exchanging water onto the Bank are not yet clearly
              understood, these results demonstrate the existence of distinct modes of
              circulation and mixing.  Assessing the sensitivity of these modes to variations
              in external forcing and the consequences for the flux of particle and dissolved
              constituents onto Georges Bank is the primary objective.
	The significance of
              this project is to bring a quantitative assessment of the influence of local
              and far-field water sources on the Georges Bank environment.  The water
              molecular isotope composition provides a tracer linking modern climate
              processes (e.g., runoff, sea ice, ice sheet, and marine precipitation) and
              Georges Bank source waters. The water molecular isotope tracer is among the
              best monitors of the impact of changing climate on Georges Bank mass origins
              and their variability. The research will contribute directly to modeling
              studies to understand the physical and biological processes controlling the
              early life stages and recruitment of fish and zooplankton stock on Georges Bank
              as well as provide a baseline for monitoring the influences of any future
              climate change.

