Title       : POWRE: The Web as a Laboratory: Hands-On Astronomy in Large Lecture Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9806304

Award Number: 9806304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane Dutkevitch dutkevitch@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                It is particularly important to incorporate hands-on experience into
              introductory science courses for nonscience majors. Science is often perceived
              as a collection of facts rather than as an ongoing process of exploration. It
              is imperative that students have the opportunity to do science. It is difficult
              to include such firsthand experience in the large lecture classes typical of
              major universities. However, the problem can be successfully remedied in
              introductory astronomy courses by developing interactive laboratories for the
              World Wide Web. Most students can perform the labs in their dorms, the
              remainder in public computing areas on campus. Students desiring help can go to
              a computer-equipped tutorial room, staffed by teaching assistants.    This
              project is developing labs based on public domain images, rather than on
              simulations. Standard Web browser features will be combined with custom
              programs to turn static images into an interactive environment. Students will
              be able to blink, magnify and process images, and also make measurements.   
              Students will learn how the spectacular images on the evening news are used by
              professional scientists to attack critical astronomical questions. They will
              discover for themselves the strengths and limitations of a variety of
              telescopes and instruments. While rigorous, the labs will be designed to be
              fun. Exploration and creative thinking will be strongly encouraged. Results and
              feedback from a test lab made it clear that Web labs work!    The labs will be
              freely available on-line. Other institutions may either run them remotely, or
              install them on local Web servers.
