Title       : POWRE: Topographic Mapping of The Greenhorn Seaway Based on Planktonic
               Foraminiferal Porosity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9806235

Award Number: 9806235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75941              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia G. Fisher cfisher@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9806235
Fisher

Despite extensive research, theories of the cause of organic
              carbon accumulation in epeiric seas of the mid-Cretaceous greenhouse Earth
              remain controversial.  Development of a comprehensive model requires
              understanding of water mass circulation and its effects on phytoplankton
              productivity and sedimentation.  Latitudinal temperature gradients that today
              play a critical role in ocean circulation were reduced and therefore
              significantly different from today.  There are two basic, underlying driving
              mechanisms for circulation in the epeiric seas of Greenhouse times: 1)
              circulation dominated by wind direction and strength (e.g. Erickson and
              Slingerland, 1990; Glancy et al., 1993); and 2) circulation dominated by
              density contrasts resulting from a combination of salinity and temperature
              alterations as water moves through the meridional seaways (Hay, 1988, 1989; Hay
              et al., 1993).  Although recently there have been significant advances in
              efforts to numerically model density and wind-driven circulation in the Western
              Interior Sea (Jewel, 1993 and Slingerland et al., 1996), geologic data
              available in the literature is insufficient to critically test these models. 
              Where available, stable Oxygen and Carbon isotopes taken from species specific
              planktonic and benthic foraminifers can be used to reconstruct the vertical
              relative density profile of the water column (Fisher and Arthur, 1994). 
              Unfortunately, in many Western Interior strata the foraminifers have undergone
              partial diagenesis and geochemical analysis is not meaningful.  Thus, a
              different relative density proxy is required.  The investigator proposes that a
              focused analysis of the porosity of planktonic foraminifera from selected sites
              in the Western Interior Basin will provide evidence to resolve spatial
              differences in relative density of seawater needed to understand the nature of
              seaway circulation.

Planktonic foraminiferal porosity, measured on SEM
              photographs, will be used as a density proxy.  BÚ (1968), Frerichs et al.
              (1972), and BÚ et al. (1973) have concluded that test porosity in modern
              foraminifera can be used as an indicator of water temperature (which they
              interpreted as a density indicator).  Frerichs and Ely (1978) applied this
              hypothesis to foraminifera sampled from the Cretaceous Western Interior of the
              United States.  As predicted by the hypothesis, they found that test porosity
              in modern foraminifera can be used as an indicator of water temperature (which
              they interpreted as a density indicator).  Frerichs and Ely (1978) applied this
              hypothesis to foraminifera sampled from the Cretaceous Western Interior of the
              United States.  As predicted by the hypothesis, they found that test porosity
              increased toward lower latitudes.  The investigator's Research Planning Grant
              supported the conclusions of Frerichs and Ely (1978), showing a trend of
              increasing porosity toward the warmer, southern latitudes.  There may also be
              an additional influence on porosity from freshwater near some coastal areas of
              the WIS.

The geographic distribution of relative water density (porosity)
              will be mapped.  Water density differences are reflected in the topography of
              the sea surface; lighter water forms hills and more dense water forms low areas
              on the sea surface.  Topographic differences in the ocean surface cause water
              to flow downhill.  Seaway topography will be used to reconstruct the density
              driven circulation.

The investigator will subsample already collected
              material and collect additional sites.  By focusing on well-defined
              stratigraphic intervals, and sampling a broad latitudinal transect of the
              basin, reasonable estimates of relative water mass density and oceanographic
              dynamics for the Western Interior Sea can be interpreted from the porosity
              data.  The main objectives of the project are to: 1) determine the relative
              density of water masses (by examining planktonic foraminifera porosity); 2)
              determine the latitudinal variations in water mass density from Boreal (Canada)
              to Tethyan (Texas) source areas (by examining variations in porosity from sites
              along a N-S transect of the basin), and map the density gradients through the
              seaway; 3) determine the temporal stability and dynamics of water mass density
              for well defined and geologically significant time periods (stratigraphic
              sections representing about 1m.y., spanning a discrete transgressive episode
              during the Greenhorn marine cycle of the Western Interior Sea)

