Title       : Fireweed Rock Glacier: Geophysical Survey and Flow Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9806648

Award Number: 9806648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Echelmeyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Rock glaciers are the largest and most pronounced mountain permafrost
              landforms.  Recently, scientific interest in rock glaciers has dramatically
              increased due to the geotechnical problems and natural hazards they pose, their
              potential for archiving past and present geologic conditions in alpine
              environments, their significance in the hydrologic cycle, and their role as a
              debris transport mechanism.  Knowledge of rock glaciers' internal composition
              and rheology is important for addressing these topics.  Our understanding of
              internal structures of rock glaciers is often speculative because rock glaciers
              are difficult to inspect internally.  This is a unique opportunity to document
              the internal composition and structure in a complete transverse cross-section
              through the Fireweed Rock Glacier, Wrangell Mountains, Alaska because the
              entire snout was recently catastrophically calved.  This rock glacier consists
              of a debris-covered m(lange.  The ice matrix, which accounts for about one-half
              of the ice-rock, displays prominent flow signatures.  The Fireweed Rock Glacier
              is also unique in that it has a high flow rate.    The Principal Investigator
              will take advantage of this unique opportunity to investigate the structure and
              flow mechanics of the Fireweed Rock Glacier.  The first objective will be to
              perform a complete geophysical survey of the glacier.  Geophysical techniques
              will be calibrated using known geometry and structure at the exposed terminus
              section, and then extend up glacier to provide a detailed picture of the
              internal structure and geometry.  The second objective will be to develop a
              numerical model of rock glacier flow by analyzing velocity measurements and the
              geometry determined by the geophysical survey.  The results should
              significantly improve the application of geophysical survey techniques to rock
              glaciers and mountain permafrost and lead to a better understanding of the
              rheological laws for the ice-rock mixtures that compose rock glaciers and
              frozen ground.
