Title       : Theoretical Studies in Ecological and Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a9806462

Award Number: 9806462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie A. Asmussen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1345,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Asmussen  980462  A high degree of genetic variation is a striking and universal
              feature of natural populations.  A hint of this variability is easily seen in
              the world around us.  For instance, there is a wide diversity in such
              characters as flower color in plants, wing patterns in butterflies, and disease
              susceptibility in humans and other organisms, all of which have a genetic
              basis.  The full extent of genetic variation is found at the molecular level,
              where laboratory analyses of gene products and DNA sequences reveal that a
              single gene may have dozens or even a hundred or more different forms in a
              population.  This great genetic diversity is of vital evolutionary importance
              because it determines the ability to adapt to changing environmental
              conditions, which is critical to the long-term survival of species.  Variation
              in flower color, for example, can allow plants to attract new insect
              pollinators, thereby ensuring successful reproduction, while variation in
              butterfly wing patterns can reduce detection and predation by visual predators
              such as birds, which tend to focus on a limited set of search images.  In the
              same way, variation in immune-related genes can allow a population to survive
              an epidemic induced by a new pathogen.     Because genetic diversity plays such
              a critical role, a major goal of evolutionary genetics is to identify and
              understand the forces that account for the vast genetic variability in natural
              populations.  The proposed research will provide a new approach to this
              fundamental question by comprehensively evaluating the potential for permanent
              genetic variation when the rate of survival and reproduction of individuals
              changes through time as a function of the changing genetic composition of the
              population. Such frequency-dependent selection is ecologically important and
              thought to facilitate the maintenance of genetic diversity in a wide range of
              organisms.  To date, however, little is known about the true potential of this
              widespread form of selection to maintain th e high genetic variation found in
              natural populations.  The present proposal will initiate a long-term,
              theoretical investigation of this key issue, based on the development and
              extensive analysis of a series of novel mathematical models and computer
              simulations.  A detailed characterization will be made of the patterns and
              levels of genetic diversity, both under frequency-dependent selection alone and
              in the biologically realistic scenario in which new forms of genes constantly
              arise in the population.  The final, critical step will be to compare the
              resulting behavior to observed data.  Together, the results will provide a
              much-needed evaluation of the extent to which frequency-dependent selection can
              explain the high levels of genetic variation found in nature.
