Title       : Effects of Inbreeding on the Male and Female Functions of Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9806691

Award Number: 9806691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Stephenson as4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Winsor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  Stephenson  9806691              Inbreeding depression is the reduction in
              fitness of inbred  progeny (progeny resulting from self-pollinations or
              pollinations   by close relatives) relative to outcrossed progeny. An
              impressive   body of theory predicts that inbreeding depression is a major  
              force in the evolution of floral traits (size, shape, color, odor,   etc. of
              flowers) and mating patterns in plants. Over the past   century many studies
              have shown that inbreeding reduces relative   survivorship and the relative
              number and quality of the seeds   produced by plants. However, most studies
              have ignored the effects   of inbreeding on the male (pollen) function of
              plants despite the   fact that most plants are hermaphrodites (produce both
              pollen and   seeds). Moreover, we know little about how the magnitude of  
              inbreeding depression changes with growing (environmental)   conditions.
              Finally, there remains much debate concerning the   genetic basis of inbreeding
              depression. Consequently, we will   perform a series of projects designed 1) to
              quantify and compare   the magnitude of inbreeding depression on survivorship
              and   reproduction through both the male and female functions, 2) to   examine
              the relationship between inbreeding depression and   environmental stress, 3)
              to determine the relationship between   inbreeding and fitness across four
              levels of inbreeding, and 4) to   determine the proximate cause of inbreeding
              depression on the male   function.              The data obtained from the
              projects in this proposal will  result in the first comprehensive study of the
              effects of   inbreeding on the male function of plants; they will generate  
              testable predictions (and the seeds necessary to test these   predictions)
              concerning the genetic basis of inbreeding   depression; they will allow us to
              better predict the direction in   which floral traits will evolve under
              different environmental   conditions; and they will allow us to critically
              evaluate the   theory surrounding the evolution  of plant mating patterns. From
              a   practical perspective, our findings will have important   ramifications for
              agriculture (e.g., the hybrid seed industry uses   inbred lines of plants as
              the major component in their breeding   programs), conservation biology (e.g.,
              the preservation of   endangered plants that now exist only in small, highly
              inbred   populations), and forestry (where pollen selection is of utmost  
              importance because traditional plant breeding techniques fail due   to the long
              generation time of trees).
