Title       : Structural and Funtional Characterization of Bradykinin Receptors in Teleost
               Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9806997

Award Number: 9806997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172930             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Conlon jmconlon@creighton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creighton University
	      2500 California Plaza
	      Omaha, NE  68178    402/280-2360

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9806997  Conlon  The effects of brandykinin (BK) in mammals are mediated
              through interaction with discrete receptors, termed B1 and B2.  Activation of
              the kallikrein-kinin system in the teleost fish, rainbow trout and Atlantic cod
              generates (Arg0,Trp5,Leu8)-BK (trout/cod BK).  The effects of this peptide on
              the motility of gastrointestinal smooth muscle and on blood pressure in these
              species are mediated via receptors that are pharmacologically different from
              each other and from mammalian B1 and B2 receptors.  It is proposed to gain
              insight into BK receptor evolution by cloning BK receptors from a trout
              intestinal cDNA library and a cod genomic library and characterizing them
              structurally.  Structure-activity relationships of trout/cod BK will be
              investigated by synthesizing analogs in which each amino acid residue in the
              peptide has been systematically replaced either by alanine or by its D-isomer. 
              The effect of the substitutions on (a) receptor-binding properties using
              cultured mammalian cells that have been transiently transfected with the cloned
              trout and cod BK receptors, (b) elevation of arterial blood pressure in the
              unanesthetized cod, and (c) motility of trout stomach and cod intestine will be
              determined.  Antagonists to the trout and cod BK receptors will be developed
              and their properties evaluated in these bioassays.  The effect of trout/cod BK
              on gastric acid and pepsinogen secretion by isolated mucosa from trout stomach,
              electrolyte transport in the isolated trout intestine and on urine production
              by the trout kidney will be studied.  Taken together, the data will provide
              insight into the properties of "ancestral" BK receptor from which the mammalian
              receptors may have evolved and will lead to a greater understanding of the
              physiological role of the kallikrein-kinin system in teleost fish.
