Title       : Dissertation Research: Reconstruction of Archaeological Landscapes and the
               Changing Environment on Easter Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9806634

Award Number: 9806634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8460               (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Ayres wsayres@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. William Ayres, MS Joan Wozniak will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. With support from the Fulbright Foundation MS
              Wozniak conducted archaeological and geological fieldwork or Easter Island.
              With National Science Foundation funding she will obtain radiocarbon dates to
              determine ages of samples collected and also contract for a range of soil and
              botanical analyses. She will employ geographic information system analysis to
              integrate and spatially organize multiple sets of data.  The islands of
              Polynesia provide an excellent, almost laboratory, situation in which to study
              human adaptation. Within a relatively short period of time Polynesian peoples
              sailed across a vast expanse of the Pacific and settled on a large number of
              islands. Thus they started from a common cultural base. When first contacted by
              Europeans however forms of social organization varied widely between islands
              and for many years anthropologists have worked to find a pattern within this
              variation. The most convincing explanations have related social organization to
              natural resources and correlated larger islands with more diverse resource
              bases to more complex and hierarchical social systems. However researchers have
              come to realize that the situation is much more complicated because over
              millennia humans have had substantial impact on fragile island resources.
              Populations grew, more intensive cultivation developed and in most instances
              severe environmental degradation resulted. This in turn had substantial social
              effects.  MS Woziak's research focuses on this set of interactions on Easter
              Island. Archaeological evidence has documented social change over time and the
              impact of over cultivation and exploitation is evident in the degraded
              environment on the island today. But researchers have not examined in detail
              the complex interaction between behavioral and environmental variables. With
              the data she has collected, MS Woziak can reconstruct changing settlement
              patterns, intensity and extent of agriculture and landscape changes. The work
              will not only yield new insight into human and environmental interaction in the
              Pacific but also assist in training a promising young scientist.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
