Title       : Polymorphism and Divergence in Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9806655

Award Number: 9806655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9178,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Clark  9806655  Variation in the level of expression of a gene exists in
              populations in two different forms.  Differences in the gene itself, including
              DNA sequences up- and downstream from the gene, play a role in determining the
              rate and stability of transcripts, so such variation can clearly have
              functional consequences.  Gene expression is mediated by the assembly of
              transcription complexes, which involve numerous components which in turn are
              products of other genes.  Variation in any of these genes, which may be remote
              from the primary target gene, can also have clear functional consequences.  The
              dichotomy between variation that is in or near the gene (cis) vs. that which is
              remote from the gene (trans) is important on three levels.  First, the
              remarkable sequence similarity of genes from such morphologically distinct
              species as humans and chimpanzee, suggest that regulatory changes are critical
              in determining the differences between species.  Second, the issue of cis vs.
              trans is important from the perspective of theoretical population genetics,
              which says that clusters of very tightly linked genes will have different
              population dynamics from unlinked genetic differences.  Third, we expect
              trans-regulatory variation to exhibit effects on many genes, and having such
              manifold or pleiotropic  effects also impacts the tendency of a population to
              maintain variation in such genes.     We propose four experiments to quantify
              and characterize the cis and trans differences among lines of fruit flies that
              account for variation in the expression of a series of metabolic enzymes.  The
              first objective is to perform a mapping study of metabolic trait variation in
              D. melanogaster.  These genetic maps will tell us the number of significant
              trans factors for each trait and the relative contributions of cis vs. trans
              effects to the variance in each trait.  The second experiment is to quantify
              the magnitude of variation of metabolic traits among different environments. 
              This  experiment will reveal whether  particular genomic segments (cis and
              trans) are responsible for differential response to environmental stresses for
              each metabolic phenotype.  The third  experiment will use hybrids between two
              different species of Drosophila to ask whether the divergence between species
              in gene expression is caused by cis elements or in trans-acting  factors.  This
              will be like the first mapping experiment, except that lines of flies having
              portions of their genomes from two different species will be used.  Comparison
              of the regulatory variation within species to that between species will reveal
              many attributes of the ways differences in gene  expression change between
              species.  Finally, we will develop mathematical models of cis and trans
              regulatory variation to get a better understanding of the advantages and
              disadvantages of the two modes of regulation.
