Title       : POWRE: Synchrotron Micro-XANES Study of Fe Redox in Mantle Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9806182

Award Number: 9806182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melinda D. Dyar mddyar@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9806182
Dyar
The goal of this research is to measure in situ partition
              coefficients for Fe3+ and Fe2+ among all the Fe-bearing phases and for H among
              hydrous phases in mantle xenoliths and mantle-analog experimental runs.  The
              analyses of experimental runs will provide quantitative data on the kinetics of
              hydrogen transport via redox exchange.  In the natural samples, the proposed
              research will generate the first ever in situ, truly microscale measurements of
              Fe3+ /EFe in mantle minerals.  Use of naturally occurring samples from
              previously well-studied rocks will allow results to be considered within a
              tightly constrained petrologic framework in which the effects of pressure,
              temperature, and mineral assemblages will be considered.  These measurements
              will be made on standard 1" round petrographic thin sections using beam sizes
              of less than 10 x 20 um and the relatively rapid, non-destructive techniques of
              SmX for Fe3+/EFe, ion microprobe (SIMS) for h, and the electron microprobe
              (EPMA) for other major elements.  The P.I.s will devote their efforts to
              understanding zoning of Fe3+/EFe within individual mineral grains, variation of
              Fe3+/EFe among grains of the same mineral in the same rock, the temperature and
              pressure dependence of Fe3+/EFe (and implication for geothermometry and
              geobarometry), and substitution mechanisms that charge balance variations in
              H+, Fe3+, and Fe2+ contents.  With these results, the P.I.s can address the
              questions of 1) How do chemical analyses compare to electron microprobe
              estimates of Fe3+ and H+?; 2) How do these differences affect distribution of
              Fe2+/Mg, Fe3+/ Al, Fe3+/ Cr3+ etc. between coexisting minerals?; 3) How do
              these distribution coefficients affect petrologic interpretation of intensive
              variables?; 4) Do complete analyses affect cation site assignments (relative to
              those obtained only by EPMA only)?; 5) Do the distribution coefficients offer
              new insights into ways to interpret intensive parameters from mineral
              compositions?; 6) Do complete analyses show chemical zonation that cannot be
              seen with EPMA? Ca zonation be used to infer oxidation/dehydrogenation
              history?; and 7) How are Fe3+ and H+ related, and what are the implications of
              this relationship for estimation of mantle fO2 and fH2 ?  Once completed, the
              proposed program of study will enable formulation of expressions for estimating
              compositional variables as Fe3+, H+, etc. for rocks in which such detailed
              characterizations are not available.  Funding will be used to support the P.I.
              part-time during each of two summers, and to support her during the second
              academic year so that she can take advantage of the exciting development of the
              new SmX tool.

