Title       : Experimental Software Systems: ISAC: Integrated System Support for Adaptive
               Communication and Computation Control in Clustered Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9806741

Award Number: 9806741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ananth Grama   (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Yau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kihong Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2861,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9806741  Grama, Ananth Y.  Park, Kihong  Purdue University    ESS: ISAC:
              Integrated System Support for Adaptive Communication and  Computation Control
              in Clustered Environments    This project aims to build an integrated software
              system (ISAC) for   application development in cluster-computing environments.
              ISAC addresses   issues of communication control and load balancing to
              facilitate an   effective parallel platform. In contrast to traditional
              approaches, ISAC   views communication and computation control in an integrated
              system. It   dynamically schedules computation and communication making use of
              their   repetitive nature to achieve optimal performance. End-to-end congestion
                control is augmented by a group communication mechanism that conjointly  
              schedules communication and computation. Scheduling is carried out assuming   a
              best-effort network environment in which resources are shared among a   pool of
              applications. Communication control is adaptive, and scheduling is   performed
              dynamically as a function of network state. Assuming that routers   implement a
              form of weighted fair queuing wherein resource reservations can   be affected,
              ISAC implements guaranteed-bandwidth channels either   per-connection or
              per-multicast group using a form of admission control. In   conjunction with
              process scheduling support at host stations, this allows   critical
              applications to achieve guaranteed progress impervious to network   and
              processor loads. It also allows applications to deal with heterogeneity   among
              hosts and networking environments transparently. ISAC will   significantly
              enhance the programmability and performance of   cluster-computing applications
              ranging from scientific computing to   distributed web and database servers.
