Title       : Documenting the Age of the Bering Strait
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9806461

Award Number: 9806461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louie Marincovich louiem@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The first opening of Bering Strait is evidenced by the presence of the
              marine bivalve mollusk, Astarte, in the Miocene Bear Lake Formation on the
              Alaska Peninsula.  Astarte lived only in the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans
              in the Cenozoic until the opening of Bering Strait allowed it to migrate into
              the North Pacific.  Astarte has previously been found in North Pacific Neogene
              faunas, but not with age-diagnostic microfossils.    Astarte, with other
              abundant mollusk fauna, is present at two horizons in a 300-meter-thick,
              kilometer-long stratigraphic section of the Bear Lake Formation.  One hundred
              diatom taxa from within mollusk shells at these two horizons represent Subzone
              B of the Neodenticula kamtschatica diatom zone.  Subzone B of the Neodenticula
              kamtschatica zone has an age range of 4.8-5.5 million years ago (Ma) within a
              well-established North Pacific diatom biochronology and is significantly older
              than the approximate 3.0-4.0 Ma date for Bering Strait that is commonly cited
              by researchers.    The stratigraphic position of Astarte in the Bear Lake
              Formation section is imprecisely known.  It is likely that a significant
              portion of the section lies below the known occurrences of Astarte and will
              therefore contain older mollusks and diatoms. The first occurrence of Astarte
              in the North Pacific and, therefore, the first opening of Bering Strait was
              likely to have been in the late Miocene (more than 5.32 Ma).    The proposed
              research is to be based on one month of fieldwork in southwestern Alaska,
              followed by two years of faunal and microfloral analysis and synthesis.  The
              objectives of the study are to: (1) document a precise age for the first
              opening of Bering Strait, based on diatoms, magnetostratigraphy, and tuff ages;
              (2) understand the composition of the Bear Lake Formation molluscan fauna
              before Bering Strait opened and afterwards; and (3) place the opening of Bering
              Strait in a broader biogeographic and paleogeographic context.    This project
              is expected to  advance our knowledge  of the northern oceans and marine
              faunas, including the opening of the Bering Strait.  It should also give
              insights on the paleoecology of the marine invertebrate faunas of the North
              Pacific, Arctic, and North Atlantic oceans after Bering Strait opened.
