Title       : Mid-Atlantic Curriculum Showcase Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9806933

Award Number: 9806933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Geppert geppert@rbs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Wang-Iverson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Res For Better Schs Inc
	      
	      Philadelphia, PA  19123    /   -

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              98-06933  Geppert    Project Description    This conference grant requests NSF
              support for a two-day Curriculum Showcase Conference, targeted to the
              Mid-Atlantic States, focused on recent NSF K-12 curriculum development programs
              in matheamtics and science.  The target audience is approximately 500 local
              district math and science teachers, preservice and inservice professional
              developers, teacher educators, district and state curriculum supervisors,
              district and state education policymakers, and professional organizations such
              as NSTA, NCTM and AFT.    Conference participants will be able to attend
              workshops that provide direct, hands-on experience with the materials, and
              receive information about additional resources that facilitate implementation
              of these materials at the school level.    Conference proceedings will be
              distributed to attendees and placed on the web.    Review Process    The
              proposal was mail reviewed by three reviewers with expertise in science,
              science education and mathematics.  Two were outside independent reviewers. 
              The third was a program officer from the Division of Education System Reform. 
              One reviewer gave the proposal a rating of Excellent, and two gave it a rating
              of Very Good.    Program Officer Review Analysis and Recommendation   
              Reviewers found several strengths in this proposal. It responds to a pressing
              need by local districts and states to evaluate and select high quality,
              standards-based materials in matheamtics and science.  The PIs have excellent
              qualifications to carry out the work.  The conference appears to be well
              organized and will appeal to both newcomers and experienced reformers.  The
              project appears to have strong commitment and support from those in the region.
                 Reviewers also offered some suggestions to strengthen the proposal.  These
              include:  * Invite representatives from the Implementation Centers so
              participants can learn about their services in the implementation process.  *
              Provide a variety of structures for discussion, such as exhibit s for informal
              discussion, and breakout sessions by level of schooling and/or subject areas so
              that focused discussions about best practice and barriers to implementation are
              discussed.  * Provide additional detail on the follow-up state conferences.  *
              Have developers include research evidence (e.g., student achievement data), if
              available.  * Explore providing more support for developers to attend.   
              Reviewers agreed that this is needed and potentially helpful project to the
              participants.  The project is well conceived and shows evidence of thoughtful
              planning and support.  The Program Officer requested a revised budget that
              reflected attention to reviewer concern that developers be provided with
              sufficient funds to participate in the conference.      The Program Officer
              recommends that the project be funded for $80,000.  The cost share is $80,029.
