Title       : Excavations at Abri Castanet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9806531

Award Number: 9806531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134814             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall K. White   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the early decades of the twentieth century Denis Peyrony, a French school
              teacher conducted archaeological excavations at the site of Abri Castanet, a
              rock shelter located in the Dordogne region of France. Although the results
              were published in only cursory fashion, the material he found there played a
              central role in defining the Aurignacian industry, now recognized as the oldest
              Upper Paleolithic culture in Europe. Despite its early date, the site contained
              and abundance of art objects in the form of engraved limestone blocks, among
              the earliest known graphic representations in Europe. Peyrony discovered
              hundreds of pierced seashells from the Atlantic shore some 200 km distant at
              the time the site was occupied. Abri Castanet yielded a rich sample of tools
              and weapons in bone and antler as well as several hundred ivory and soapstone
              beads and pierced animal teeth. These are among the earliest known personal
              ornaments employed by humans. With National Science Foundation support Dr.
              Randy White will undertake a new large scale excavation at the site. Although
              Peyrony's work was pathbreaking at the time it was conducted, it does not meet
              modern standards and large numbers of stone artifacts, for example, have been
              recovered from the back dirt removed during his excavations. During his own
              preliminary fieldwork Dr. White has located and cleaned the Peyrony's trenches
              and determined that a significant amount of intact deposit still remains. He
              has also discovered that the original excavation did not reach bedrock and the
              lowest Aurignacian levels have not yet been reached. Dr. White will conduct
              large scale excavation to recover both cultural and faunal remains. The
              multiple Aurignation occupations at the site remain undated and radiocarbon
              samples will be collected. Because of the large areas to be exposed, it will be
              possible to address issues of spatial patterning and to obtain information on
              social organization.  Approximately 40,000 years ago anatomically and
              behaviorally modern peoples replaced Neanderthals who had inhabited Europe for
              over 100,000 years. Anthropologists wish to understand what adaptations these
              new people brought which allowed them to adapt more effectively to this harsh
              glacial environment and therefore particular attention should be focused on the
              earliest part of this process. Abri Castanet is important because it represents
              just this time period. Although many Aurignacian sites contain worked bone and
              art objects, Abri Castanet is unique both for the number and variety of objects
              represented. Dr. White's excavations will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and shed new light on the earliest modern human peoples in
              Europe.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
