Title       : Response to Crowding and Vegetation Shade in Impatiens capensis: Genetic
               Variation and Fitness Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a9806858

Award Number: 9806858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johanna M. Schmitt Johanna_Schmitt@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Schmitt   9806858                     Many plant species exhibit
              characteristic morphological and physiological   responses to crowding and
              vegetation shade. This "shade avoidance" response   is cued by a reduction in
              the ratio of red to far-red wavelengths (R:FR) in   light transmitted through
              or reflected from green vegetation. This R:FR   signal is perceived by
              light-sensing molecules known as phytochromes.  It   has been hypothesized that
              phytochrome-mediated shade avoidance responses   are beneficial to plants
              because it enables them to anticipate and avoid   competition for light in
              dense stands. Recent results from a related project   strongly support this
              hypothesis.  In a field experiment,   phytochrome-mediated stem elongation
              increased the reproduction of the   native annual Impatiens capensis (jewelweed
              or touch-me-not) in dense   stands, but plants induced to display the shade
              avoidance response at low   density suffered reduced fitness relative to
              non-elongated plants,   apparently due to an unmeasured physiological cost. 
              The objectives of the   proposed research are to investigate the possible
              ecological, physiological,   and genetic mechanisms underlying this cost, and
              to quantify the frequency   and pattern of natural selection on shade avoidance
              traits within a natural   population.  A specific goal is to determine  whether
              the shade avoidance   response results in increased damage from ultraviolet-B
              radiation due to a   lack of protective pigments, and to test for genetic
              variation in   morphological responses or sensitivity to UV-B. To address these
              questions,   elongated and non-elongated seedlings from replicated inbred lines
              will be   produced by manipulation of the R:FR cue, and planted into a series
              of    treatments in a natural population and an experimental garden.        
              The results of this project will provide important information about the  role
              of phytochrome-mediated shade avoidance responses in natural plant  
              populations, and will provide an ecological and  evolutionary context for  
              current research on the molecular, genetic, developmental, and   physiological
              mechanisms underlying plant responses to light.  It will also   help to inform
              selection strategies for crop improvement and provide an   ecological context
              for recent proposals to increase yield by genetically   engineering crops in
              which shade avoidance responses are blocked.   The   results will also be
              valuable for understanding how wild plants will   respond to increasing UV
              radiation levels during the current period of   rapid global change.
