Title       : U.S. GLOBEC: Cross-Frontal Distributions and Exchange of Zooplankton on Georges
               Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1998   
File        : a9806444

Award Number: 9806444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen F. Wishner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              U.S. GLOBEC: Cross-frontal distributions and exchange of zooplankton on Georges
              Bank 


Cross-frontal distributions and exchange of zooplankton on Georges
              Bank are a primary focus of Phase 3 of the U.S. GLOBEC Georges Bank program,
              which has the broader goal of understanding the response of marine populations
              to global climate change, especially interactions between zooplankton and fish.
               This proposal examines the cross-frontal exchange of zooplankton at two sites
              important to the biology of GLOBEC-targeted species: the Northeast Peak Front
              in March (coincident with expected inflow of the copepod Calanus finmarchicus
              and the presence of cod larvae and high predator abundance) and the Southern
              Flank Tidal Mixing Front in June (coincident with high concentrations of
              Calanus and predators).  Questions addressed include the interaction between
              vertically-stratified zooplankton distributions and the cross-frontal exchange
              at different depths, the temporal variability of these interactions on diel,
              tidal, and fortnightly scales, and the effects over time of the repeated
              passage of tidal fronts at particular locations along a bathymetric slope. 
              Zooplankton abundances and vertical distributions will be determined from a
              Lagrangian sampling scheme utilizing transects relative to frontal position
              conducted at different phases of the tidal cycle (semidiurnal and fortnightly),
              and will be related to hydrographic structure, tidal phase, and distance from
              the front.  In a complementary Eulerian sampling scheme employing time series
              sampling at fixed locations along a bathymetric slope, zooplankton
              distributions and variability will be related to the time since frontal
              passage.  Vertically-stratified MOCNESS tows will be used to collect
              zooplankton.  Cross-frontal exchange of zooplankton (different species and
              lifestages with different vertical distributions) will be estimated from
              concentration gradients across the front at different depths and along
              isopycnal surfaces, using various estimates of flow and water exchange provided
              by physical oceanographers.


