Title       : Sequence Variations in Spider Dragline Silk Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9806999

Award Number: 9806999
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph V. Lewis silk@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl Y. Hayashi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9806999
Lewis
The long-term goal of this proposed research is to develop
              strategies for the design of biomimetic major ampullate silk by uncovering the
              structure-function relationships of naturally ocurring spider silk proteins and
              their materials properties.  This will be accomplished through two major
              objectives.  First, the nucleotide and amino acid sequence variation in major
              ampullate silk genes among divergent spider species will be characterized.  The
              second objective is to study the structure of the proteins in the solid fiber
              to understand what provides the elastic and strength properties.  These data
              will provide the basis for construction of second generation spider silk
              biomaterials with properties designed into them.

Natural materials have been
              a part of our culture for centuries but only in the past few years has the
              study of these materials reached the molecular level.  This deeper
              understanding of biological materials has led to the new field of biomimetics. 
              One of the materials which has generated considerable interest is spider silk. 
              Spider silk fibers possess a numbrr of unique properties when compared to other
              natural or manmade fibers.  Almost all the applied research on spider silk has
              focused on major ampullate silk and its military and industrial potential. 
              This material has a tensile strength in excess of 300,000 psi and an extension
              approaching 35%.  This two factors make it one of the toughest materials ever
              tested.  These unique properties suggest promising applications in fibers,
              films and composite materials.  There is no question that the development of
              spider silk as a biomaterial will have a substantial impact on society.  These
              new materials would provide a number of new products as well as improvements on
              current ones.  These products will be fibers, films and composites with spider
              silk as the key component.  The investigators have taken some of the necessary
              steps but the information generated by this proposal will substantially enhance
              the ability to produce major ampullate silk as a biometerial as well as be the
              basis for developing synthetic silk analogs with designed mechanical
              properties.
