Title       : Ultrathin Films and Nanostructures of Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9806651

Award Number: 9806651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Franco P. Jona franco@ccvm.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Gambino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                  9806651  Jona  In this research project
              Professors F. Jona and R. Gambino of the  Department  of  materials Science and
              Engineering  of  the  State  University  of  New  York  at Stony Brook  will 
              investigate  the  epitaxial growth and the properties of ultrathin films of
              metals,  especially  magnetic  metals  and  fabricate  and  evaluate   the 
              performance of novel magnetic devices.  The general goals are the  development 
              of  procedures for the growth of  epitaxial  single-  crystalline  fims,  the 
              determination  of  their  structure  and  strains,   and   the  preparation  of
               magnetic  nanowires   with  controlled  widths, lengths and separations.  
              Additionally,  the  stabilization  and  characterization  of  metastable 
              phases   of  magnetic  and  nonmagnetic  materials and  of  selected  magnetic 
              binary alloys.  %%%  In this research project Professors F. Jona and R. Gambino
              of the  Department  of  materials Science and Engineering  of  the  State 
              University  of  New  York  at Stony Brook  will  investigate  the  epitaxial
              growth and the properties of ultrathin films of metals,  especially  magnetic 
              metals  and  fabricate  and  evaluate   the  performance of novel magnetic
              devices.  The general goals are the  development  of  procedures for the growth
              of  epitaxial  single-  crystalline  fims,  the  determination  of  their 
              structure  and  strains,   and   the  preparation  of  magnetic  nanowires  
              with  controlled  widths, lengths and separations.   Additionally,  the 
              stabilization  and  characterization  of  metastable  phases   of  magnetic 
              and  nonmagnetic  materials and  of  selected  magnetic  binary alloys.  ***
