Title       : Phylogenetic Analysis of Fungal Reproductive Strategies Using Mating Type Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1998 
File        : a9806935

Award Number: 9806935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Gillian Turgeon bgt1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Turgeon  DEB 9806935      Species of  the ascomycete genus Cochliobolus and its
              allied genera have been chosen as the focus for this study for their array of
              reproductive strategies, their suitability for genetic and molecular
              technology, and the ability of certain species within the group to cause
              devastating diseases of important crops.  Our goal is to understand the
              evolution of fungal reproductive strategies and, eventually, pathogenic
              capability.   Results will be directly relevant to the assessment of fungal
              biodiversity, to the exploitation of fungi in bioprospecting programs, and to
              design of strategies for control of diseases caused by fungi.  Fungi are
              favorable subjects for these studies because they are small, tractable in the
              laboratory, and have features which make them ideal for comparative studies of
              reproduction.  Closely related fungi can be self sterile (requiring a partner
              for mating), self-fertile (no partner required), obligately sexual or
              obligately asexual.  We will use DNA sequences for genes that regulate sexual
              development  the mating type (MAT) genes  to explore the evolution of
              reproductive strategies in sexual and asexual fungi.  MAT genes hold great
              promise for tracing relationships among fungal groups because they have
              superior phylogenetic resolving power.  We will determine:  1)  If asexual
              fungi really are asexual or if the sexual state is just undiscovered,  2)  if
              MAT genes can be used to delineate species, and 3) if MAT gene phylogenies,
              together with new information on sexuality and species boundaries, can be used
              to predict future changes in fungal pathogenicity, and possibly the evolution
              of new pathogenic races.  In addition, phylogenetic information will guide
              identification of fungi producing metabolites with potential pharmaceutical
              application and ongoing investigations into the molecular mechanisms of fungal
              pathogenesis.
