Title       : Systematic Study of Late Cretaceous Lizards from the Mongolian Gobi Desert
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1998 
File        : a9806811

Award Number: 9806811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keqin Gao kgao@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Norell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806811  Gao    The Late Cretaceous is a crucial interval for the establishment
              and  early diversification of most extant lizard clades.  The Mongolian Gobi 
              Desert is a major source of fossil lizards of this age.  A large fossil 
              collection amassed by the Mongolian Academy of Sciences-American Museum of 
              Natural History Expeditions from the Gobi provides the core material for 
              undertaking the proposed project.  The collection consists of some 700 
              exceptionally well-preserved skulls in articulation with mandibles; some  with
              postcranial skeletons.  This material documents some 30 taxa in four  higher
              groups, among which at least 11 new taxa need to be described.  As  the samples
              include phylogenetically important basal taxa of various modern lizard clades,
              study of these fossils will substantially improve knowledge of lizard
              phylogeny, and holds great promise for better appreciation of the Late
              Cretaceous proliferation of the major lizard groups.          Previous studies
              of Late Cretaceous lizards from the Gobi Desert  reveal serious taxonomic and
              phylogenetic problems.  Many phylogenetically  important taxa were inadequately
              or incorrectly described, and the problems stemming from misdescription of
              anatomical structures or misinterpretation of relationships of the relevant
              taxa badly need to be resolved.  The proposed study includes major taxonomic
              revision of the poorly understood taxa, in order to clarify specifics of their
              anatomy and  to provide faithful assessment of their relationships. 
              Comprehensive cladistic analyses of selected lizard taxa will be conducted. 
              These analyses will include important basal members of various clades from the
              Gobi sample and will incorporate data from previous work on extant lizard
              clades.  The proposed study promises to clarify the existing chaotic 
              classification of the Gobi lizards and provides an explicit classification
              scheme on the basis of recovered phylogenetic relationships of Gobi and related
              taxa.
