Title       : POWRE: Stable Isotope Systematics of Soil Water and Soil CO2For Selected Sites
               in Washington State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9806178

Award Number: 9806178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carey A. Gazis cgazis@geology.cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9806178
Gazis

This proposal seeks support for a stable isotopic study of
              soil water, soil CO2, and precipitation from three sites in Washington State. 
              The principal objectives of this study are (1) to place constraints on the
              oxygen isotope composition of the CO2 flux from soils to the atmosphere. (2) To
              assess the degree of oxygen isotope equilibrium between soil CO2 and soil
              water, both temporally and spatially.  (3) To characterize the stable isotope
              systematics of soil water in sites where tree ring isotope studies are being
              done.  To achieve these objectives, soils and soil gas will be sampled at
              regular intervals from different depths in the soil profile and rain collectors
              will be installed at each site and sampled every two weeks.  The stable isotope
              compositions (H, C, and O) of soil water, precipitation and soil CO2 will be
              determined and soil-profile data will be compared to one-dimensional models
              which account for infiltration, evaporation, production of CO2 by soil
              respiration, isotopic exchange between soil CO2 and water, and differential
              diffusion of molecules containing D, 18O and 13C.

One unique aspect of the
              proposed study is that it will be done in conjunction with a study of stable
              isotopes in tree rings and their ability to retain climate records (NSF-funded
              project of Dr. Xiahong Feng).  One of the greatest uncertainties in the
              interpretation of isotopes in tree rings is how the isotopic composition of
              precipitation is modified before it is incorporated into wood cellulose.  To
              address one aspect of this question, isotope data from soil water, rain water,
              sap water and tree rings will be collected at two sites in the Olympic
              Peninsula where Dr. Feng has begun her study of tree rings.  This will be the
              first time that isotopic data for tree rings, precipitation, soil water, and
              sap water are all collected at the same time.

On a global scale, a
              quantitative model of the isotopic systematics of soil CO2 can constrain the
              flux and isotopic composition of CO2 that enters the atmosphere from soils
              ("soil-respired" CO2).  At high latitudes, the 18O/16O ratio of atmospheric CO2
              is lower than that predicted for equilibrium with ocean water, a difference
              that has been attributed to substantial flux of lower-18O CO2 to the atmosphere
              from plants and soils.  However, the oxygen isotopic composition of the
              soil-respired CO2 is poorly understood and direct measurements are difficult to
              make.  Measurements and quantitative descriptions of the 18O/16O of soil CO2
              can constrain the 18O/16O of soil respired CO2, and will thus improve global
              models of atmospheric CO2.

The PI, Dr. Carey Gazis, has recently begun a
              tenure-track position in the Geology Department at Central Washington
              University, with active and growing graduate and undergraduate programs.  This
              is a critical time in her career as she strives to build a laboratory and
              establish a research program.  Support from the POWRE program will greatly
              enhance her scientific development by providing an important boost for this
              transition.

