Title       : Quantitative Genetics of Foraging and Predator Avoidance in Anuran Tadpoles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9806293

Award Number: 9806293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. McPeek mark.mcpeek@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy B. Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9178,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              McPeek
9806293

Most organisms in nature are faced with the conflicting
              demands of trying to acquire enough food for themselves while simultaneously
              trying not to become food for some other organism (e.g., a predator). Because
              both resource acquisition and predator avoidance contribute to growth and
              survival, respectively, the conflict between these two performance measures
              usually causes a trade-off between two important fitness components. This
              trade-off has been frequently described in phenomenological terms but, like
              many ecologically-important features of organisms, its underlying functional
              and genetic determinants are unknown.  Consequently, we know very little about
              what characters actually influence growth and predator avoidance, and thus we
              know almost nothing about the evolution of such networks of characters.  In
              this proposal, we describe research to examine the phenotypic and genetic
              architecture of characters that are hypothesized to determine growth and
              predator avoidance in bullfrog and green frog tadpoles (Anura: Ranidae).
              Bullfrogs (Rana catesbiana) and green frogs (Rana clamitans) are most closely
              related to one another, and they tend to segregate between habitats with
              different suites of predators.  Bullfrogs occur primarily in lakes that support
              predatory fish, while green frogs occur primarily in ponds that do not support
              fish but do support predatory dragonflies and salamanders.  This segregation
              appears to be strongly influenced by differences between the two species in
              their levels of activity, foraging, and their defenses against predatory fish
              and dragonflies.

This pair of species, therefore, offers an excellent
              opportunity to 1) identify the properties that determine growth and predator
              avoidance success in a pair of closely related species, 2) examine how the
              patterns of variation in these properties have changed as these species have
              adapted to their respective environments, and 3) explore the evolutionary
              dynamics of these traits and predict their responses to natural selection.  To
              do this, we will conduct two major experiments, both of which examine variation
              in growth and antipredator performance at the species, population, and
              individual levels.  In the first experiment, we will measure a suite of
              behavioral and morphological characters that we hypothesize are related to
              growth and antipredator success.  We will make these measurements on a large
              number of individuals from six populations of each species, and examine
              patterns of variation among traits.  In the second experiment, we will estimate
              magnitudes and patterns of genetic variation and heritability for most of these
              traits in a single population of each species.  Analyses will test hypotheses
              about functional and genetic constraints on phenotypic evolution and how
              couplings among characters have changed during adaptation to different
              environments.

