Title       : POWRE: Kinetic Analysis of the AMPA Receptor After C-Terminal Modification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9806215

Award Number: 9806215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Arai aarai@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-06215  ARAI      Neurons throughout the brain contain a calcium-activated
               protease called 'calpain' that can cleave various intracellular  proteins.  It
              has been shown that the moderate increase in  intracellular calcium produced by
              a few bursts of synaptic  activity is sufficient to activate this enzyme. Such
              activity  under the proper circumstances induces a long lasting enhancement  of
              synaptic transmission called 'long-term potentiation' (LTP),  which is thought
              to be one of the mechanisms responsible for  encoding memory.  Suppression of
              calpain in fact prevents both LTP  and memory formation, which suggests that
              this enzyme plays an  essential role in these processes.  Expression of LTP is
              now  commonly thought to involve a change in currents through AMPA  receptors,
              a subtype within the glutamate receptor family, that  mediates excitatory
              synaptic transmission between most neurons in  higher brain regions.  It is
              thus of particular interest that AMPA  receptors were recently found to be
              cleaved by calpain near their  intracellular C-terminal, and that the domain
              removed by  proteolysis contains target sites for kinases and a site which 
              anchors the receptor to cytoskeletal proteins.  The goal of this  project is to
              identify whether and in what way C-terminal  modification of the AMPA receptor
              by calpain alters the functional  properties of this receptor. It will be
              specifically tested (1)  whether direct application of activated calpain into
              neurons  changes the time course of the current flow through the receptors, 
              (2) whether AMPA receptors truncated at their C-terminal exhibit 
              characteristic alterations in their physiological properties, and  (3) whether
              modulation of AMPA receptors by kinases is altered  after truncation.  The
              proposed experiments supported by this  POWRE award represent a new direction
              for Dr. Arai and will give  her the opportunity to learn new skills in the
              field of molecular  biology which will complement her expertise in
              neurophysiology.  Acquiring thes e skills will be critical for her career goal
              to  start an independent research laboratory, to expand her research  scope,
              and to develop further her leadership in the field of AMPA  receptor research
              and synaptic plasticity.
