Title       : US GLOBEC: Productivity of Calanus Finmarchicus and Fluctuations in Growth and
               Survival of Cod and Haddock Larvae on Georges Bank: A Synthesis of Observations
               and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9806565

Award Number: 9806565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco E. Werner cisco@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
9806565
Werner

This project addresses a hypothesis linking
              spatial/temporal variability in copepod productivity and the growth and
              survival of cod and haddock larvae on Georges Bank.  It represents a synthesis
              of survey results and process observations conducted prior to and during the
              U.S. CLOBEC Georges Bank Program, and uses a recently-developed biophysical,
              individual-based model (IBM) of cod and haddock larvae to investigate the
              importance of variation in copepod prey field production relative to other
              factors, including circulation, temperature, turbulence and light, that
              potentially contribute to the success or failure of recruitment into Georges
              Bank fish stocks.
Cod and haddock larvae on Georges Bank feed primarily on the
              eggs and nauplii of the dominant copepod species.  The vertically-integrated
              copepod egg production (VIP), in terms of eggs m-2 d-1 or mg-C M-2 d-1) is
              therefore an index of the daily production of larval fish prey.  Research
              during earlier phases of the Georges Bank program showed that, over three-month
              periods, the total copepod VIP can vary by 1-2 orders of magnitude on the
              southern flank of Georges Bank; with Calanus finmarchicus being a dominant
              influence on the pattern of total copepod VIP.
These data suggest that
              variability in Calanus and total copepod egg production is potentially a major
              influence on the availability of prey to fish larvae on Georges Bank.  However,
              there is little knowledge about inter-annual variation in both the magnitude
              and spatial structure of total and Calanus egg production.  Dr. Werner and
              associates suggest that the pattern and magnitude of total egg production on
              Georges Bank is highly variable from year to year.  If a high abundance and
              sufficient nutrition for Calanus females is set up in some years on the
              northeast peak and southern flank, food conditions for fish larvae could
              increase by an order of magnitude or more, with consequent dramatic improvement
              in their growth and survival.
Based on these considerations, the investigators
              put forward the following, three-part hypothesis: (1) the spatial, seasonal and
              inter-annual variation in the total VIP (all dominant copepods) is substantial
              (i.e., orders of magnitude), (2) there is a significant relationship between
              the VIP and growth and survival of fish larvae on the eastern and southern
              flanks and (3) variability in the productivity of Calanus finmarchicus
              influences the growth and survival of cod and haddock larvae on Georges Bank. 
              The hypotheses will be tested by a combined synthesis and modeling study.

