Title       : CRB: Interactive Effects of Parasitism and Food Supplementation in a Natural
               Avian Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a9806765

Award Number: 9806765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew P. Dobson dobber@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Coombs-Hahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806765  Dobson    Understanding the role that infectious diseases play in
              natural populations is one of the key questions in population ecology.  This
              study will examine the impact that 'malaria-like' protozoan parasites have on
              the reproduction and survival of mountain white-crowned sparrows (Zonotrichia
              leucophrys oriantha).  The study takes advantage of more than two decades of
              work on the population biology and behavior of white-crowned sparrows in the
              Sierra Nevada.  Nearly all of the individuals in the breeding population at
              Tioga Pass are marked with individually numbered leg-bands and their previous
              breeding history is known.  This project will extend our present understanding
              of the population's demography by examining how blood parasites affect the
              observed birth and survival rates for the population. This will allow
              determination of the role that these infectious diseases play in determining
              changes in population numbers between years.  Antiparasitic drugs will then be
              used to treat both infected and uninfected individuals and to examine the
              resultant changes in survival and fecundity.    Host nutrition plays a crucial
              role in determining how an individual responds to infection with blood
              parasites.   A second major component of the study uses a series of
              supplemental feeding experiments to examine the interaction between nutrition
              and the host's ability to survive a challenge by a blood parasite.   Thus the
              work will provide important insights into the interaction between nutrition,
              infectious diseases and host population biology in natural populations.
