Title       : Dissertation Research: The Archaeology of Trade, Settlement, and Islam in the
               Banda Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9806320

Award Number: 9806320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas D. Anderson Douglas_Anderson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  Under the direction of Dr. Douglas Anderson, Mr. Peter Lape will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation.  At the close of his current fieldwork in
              the Banda Islands of Indonesia he will visit colonial archives in  Amsterdam,
              London and Lisbon to supplement archaeological data he has collected. The goal
              of the research is  to reconstruct the social and political organization of the
              Banda Islands in the period immediately preceding  European contact. Early
              European colonists described a situation in which an Islamic tradition
              prevailed and  they believed that the inhabitants of the islands had been
              incorporated into an expanding Islamic sphere of  influence before Western
              arrival. Mr. Lape believes that this oversimplifies reality and that the error
              results  from the fact that European traders had most in common with and
              interacted most with Islamic Banda inhabitants.  To test this hypothesis he
              will conduct extensive surface survey for archaeological remains and carry out 
              selective excavation. In pre-Islamic times pig was a widely eaten food and this
              practice terminated with  conversion to Islam. Thus examination of excavated
              faunal remains provides an excellent indicator of religion.  Mr. Lape will look
              at the distribution of Islamic and non-Islamic groups and attempt, on the basis
              of ceramics  and trade objects, to determine the interaction spheres of each. 
              Archival research will compliment the  archaeological data and set it into a
              broader context.    Anthropologists long ago realized that most of the 
              primitive  cultures studied in the late 19th and early 20th  centuries were in
              fact far from untouched and that their behavior had in fact been strongly
              influenced by  contact which in some cases extended over hundreds of years.
              Models of cultural interaction, most importantly  Wallerstein s world systems
              theory were based on this assumption. However, Mr. Lape believes, they focused
              too  strongly on colonial interaction and domination by Western and Islamic
              societies and underestimate d that  complexity of exchange and economic systems
              among indigenous groups. The Banda Islands, he believes provide just  such an
              example and the ethnographic and historical complexities of the region can not
              be understood solely  through recourse to Islamic and European contact. The
              purpose of this research is to examine this proposition.    The work is
              important for several reasons. Anthropologists wish to examine and understand
              the patterns of  behavior they observe in the world around them. These
              behaviors are affected by both history and adaptation and  it is likely that
              the complexity of historical input is underestimated. In this context, the
              Banda Islands  provide a useful case study. The project will also assist in
              training a promising young researcher.  ***
