Title       : The Influence of Spatial Subsidies, Temporal Variation and Predation on Dynamics
               of Insular Rodent Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a9806657

Award Number: 9806657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul T. Stapp   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Polis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gary Huxel  (Principal Investigator former)
              Francisco Sanchez-Pinero  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1673,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              PI:     Gary Polis  Institution:    University of California - Davis  Proposal
              Number:  DEB - 9806657    The dynamics in one habitat can sometimes be
              dramatically influenced by factors from a second habitat.  This proposal will
              examine how resources from one habitat can influence consumers in a second
              habitat, specifically how materials produced in offshore marine habitats affect
              terrestrial communities near the Gulf of California.  It would particularly
              address how El Nino related changes in rates of terrestrial production effect
              long-term patterns in these inter-habitat transfers of materials.  It will
              focus on rodents as potential consumers of marine-generated resources and
              document their inter-annual population responses and movements relative to
              changes in the relative availability of resources from marine and terrestrial
              habitats.  It will examine the extent to which rodents use marine resources and
              how far inland rodents may transport such materials. It will test the extent to
              which rodents are influenced by marine resources relative to terrestrially
              produced resources and how the relative use of these two sources changes with
              El Nino related climatic phenomena. It will also examine the nature of
              resource-based vs. predator-based controls on rodent populations and examine
              any links between the resource availability in the marine habitat and the
              dynamics of the terrestrial habitat.  This project will provide basic
              information on how processes in one habitat can influence nearby habitats and
              how these interactions can be influenced by global climatic events.  It will
              also provide important natural history information on a series of islands in
              the Gulf of California several of which have endemic rodent species.
