Title       : The Production of Plant Growth Regulators in Soil through Interactions between
               Earthworms, Microorganisms and Organic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9806526

Award Number: 9806526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clive A. Edwards   (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Subler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Metzger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A. PROJECT SUMMARY    There is considerable evidence that earthworms can have
              major influences on the growth of plants in natural and managed ecosystems. It
              is well-established that the key roles of earthworms in soils are: the
              fragmentation and decomposition of organic matter, the promotion of microbial
              activity and the release and transformation of plant nutrients. However, the
              contributions of earthworms to improvements in plant growth often greatly
              exceed the potential that they have to improve soil structure and nutrient
              availability. There is very good research evidence that interactions between
              earthworms and microorganisms may influence plant growth through various
              biological factors that are not fertility-mediated, e.g. by producing
              substances that promote plant growth similar in effect to or even possibly
              including auxins, gibberellins or cytokinins. Such a possibility, if occurring
              widely enough to affect the growth of plants significantly, has important
              implications for both the growth of plants in .natural ecosystems as well as
              crop production in managed ecosystems, and would have-important ecological and
              economic implications for the role of the soil biota in overall plant
              productivity.    During the last  2-3 years it has become increasingly clearly
              demonstrated that soil microorganisms can produce significant amounts of plant
              growth regulators (PGRs). This raises the question whether earthworms can
              influence the production of PGRs indirectly, through increasing microbial
              activity and as a consequence affect plant growth significantly, independent of
              their infiuences on nutrient availability.    This project focuses on
              establishing whether earthworms can stimulate the overall production of plant
              growth-regulating substances in soil, what form they take, whether they occur
              in amounts sufficient to influence plant growth significantly, and how long
              they persistS.    The three main objectives in this project are:      To
              determine, using laboratory plant bioassays, whether plant grow th-influencing
              substances (PGIs), other than nutrients, are produced through in the soil
              through the activities of earthworms in organic matter breakdown.      To
              isolate, characterize, identify and quantify, using physico-chemical methods,
              some specific plant growth-regulating compounds (PGRs) produced through the
              activities of earthworms in organic matter breakdown.      To determine whether
              plant growth can be influenced significantly by plant growth regulators (PGRs)
              produced in the soil through the activities of earthworms in organic matter
              breakdown.    The project will attempt to confirm and  quantify the production
              of PGRs by interactions between two species of earthworm and microorganisms on
              two kinds of plant organic matter in laboratory cultures. It will also assess
              the production of PGRs in the soils of two long-term field experiments with
              manipulated earthworm populations.  The influence of PGR's in aqueous extracts
              from earthworm cultures and from earthworm-manipulated field soils on growth of
              vegetables and other plants will be integrated .
