Title       : POWRE: Preparations for Testing Magnetic Models of RoAp Star Dynamics Using
               Remote Observatories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a9806188

Award Number: 9806188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90634              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth J. Zita zita@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1215,1592,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-9806188  Zita    Research quality astronomy observations by students and
              staff at Evergreen State College will be carried out  at the University of
              Washington at Seattle's (UW) Manastash Ridge Observatory (MRO).    The first
              step is to train observers  to use the telescope and work at MRO.  
              Observations, analysis of data, and upgrading the telescope will be carried 
              out. The MRO telescope will be upgraded  so that observations may by made
              remotely.  The facility will be with shared with other observers from other
              institutions.  Undergraduate students will take active part in the research,
              and they will be the first generation of students doing astronomy research at
              the Evergreen State College.    The  ongoing theoretical work strongly
              motivates the establishment of an Evergreen astronomy research program.  The 
              testing of new stellar dynamics models will guide the longer-term directions of
               the future observational work.   At the present, astronomy observations at MRO
              will provide needed experience in observational research, and will facilitate
              improved communication with other observational astronomers, whose data
              presently relate to the  theory.   These activities will lay the groundwork for
              future theoretical and observational research.    A mechanism for the
              previously unexplained sound waves in magnetic, rapidly oscillating peculiar A
              stars is being examined.  The model extends the basic theory of force-free
              plasmas and describes how oscillations about a minimum in magnetic energy can
              drive magnetosonic modes. which appear as sound waves in the stars.   The
              energy, wavelength, and frequency for  the theoretical test case is consistent
              with observations.  The model can be tested further by making more detailed
              calculations and observations.   It is planned to learn enough observational
              astronomy to design a future research program to help test the model.   This is
              a key goal of the future activities.    The University of Washington will be
              involved in the training of  Evergreen faculty  and students to use the
              Manastash Ridge Observatory telescope.   The telescope will be  upgraded so
              that it can be operated remotely.    Students will work at the observatory in
              the summer and be involved in theoretical research  with Evergreen faculty.  
              Students will be able to participate in remote observations at MRO throughout
              the academic year.  They will  use software such as that developed by the
              University of California -Berkeley's Hands-On Universe project and UW's IRAF
              astronomical data processing system.    The  activities will build on new
              working relationships with local colleagues; enhance Evergreen students'
              education as well as research; and enable staff and students  to share remote
              astronomy observations with teachers and students throughout Washington state. 
              ***
