Title       : US GLOBEC: Program Services and Data Management for Phase III of the Northwest
               Atlantic Georges Bank Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9806381

Award Number: 9806381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $735845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Wiebe pwiebe@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Groman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806381
Wiebe

The primary objective of the U.S. GLOBal ocean ECosystem
              dynamics program (U.S. GLOBEC) is to understand the underlying physical and
              biological processes that control the population dynamics of key populations of
              marine animals in space and time. As part of U.S. GLOBEC, the U.S. GLOBEC
              Georges Bank Program is a large multi-disciplinary multi-year oceanographic
              effort. The goal is to understand the population dynamics of key species on
              Georges Bank - Cod, Haddock, and two species of zooplankton - in terms of their
              coupling to the physical environment and in terms of their predators and prey.
              The Program Service and Data Management Office is responsible for providing the
              basic common services, logistical support, and data management required by the
              scientific investigators (and the Program) as they conduct their field
              research, analyze the data from their individual efforts, and integrate the
              results with those from other research components. 
	During the Phase III, the
              office will manage data sets (CTD, biomass, meteorological, satellite, model
              results, etc.) from an estimated seventy-five scientific investigators and make
              these available via an on-line, World Wide Web based, data management system;
              work with principal investigators on data quality control; maintain an
              inventory and program thesaurus of strictly defined field names; support field
              operations (estimated to be 25 cruises in 1999); reproduce and distribute
              program documentation including cruise and data reports, and data acquisition
              procedures and protocols; ensure submission of data to national data centers;
              support and encourage data synthesis by providing new, on-line, web-based
              display tools; and facilitate program, national, and international data and
              information exchange..


