Title       : Collaborative Research: Identifying Ecosystem Controls on Biodiversity: A U.S.
               and U.K. Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9806438

Award Number: 9806438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Seastedt tims@culter.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Soils are the critical and dynamic center for the majority of ecosystem
              processes in both natural and managed terrestrial ecosystems.  Although soil 
              communities generally are thought to regulate many of these processes (e.g.
              decomposition, nutrient cycling), there are suprisingly little data on the
              factors that affect soil community structure and function, or the relation of
              soil biodiversity to ecosystem function.  Central questions of this project
              are: (A) How do plants influence belowground biodiversity? and (B) What are the
              consequences of soil biodiversity to ecosystem processes?  Specific hypotheses
              and manipulative field experiments will be used to test controls on soil
              community structure and diversity.  The controls to be examined in the
              experiments to test controls on soil community structure and diversity.  The
              controls to be examined in the experiments include plant species diversity,
              plant functional diversity (C3 vs. C4 species), resource quality, net primary
              productivity, and soil abiotic characteristics. Field experiments will test the
              effects of soil biodiversity on the decomposition of homogeneous and
              heterogeneous substrates.  Main experiments will be at the Konza Prairie
              Long-Term Ecological Research (KNZ LTER) site, a site with substantial
              background information on ecosystem properties, soil processes and soil
              invertebrates.  Analysis of targeted soil invertebrate communities known to be
              important in ecosystem function in grasslands will be examined at a fine
              taxonomic resolution throughout the experiment.  A one time sampling at the
              Cedar Creek Natural History Area LTER site will also provide an additional test
              of the hypothesis that soil nematode diversity tracks plant biodiversity.  The
              studies will form the basis for a collaborative and coordinated effort with a
              grasslands site in the UK (parallel proposal funded by UK-NERC).  The
              partnership between ecosystem scientist and invertebrate taxonomists in the
              comparative US-UK field experiments will provide a unique contrib ution
              determining the relative importance of factors affecting belowground
              biodiversity and ecosystem functioning.  Simulation modeling at the USA KNZ
              LTER site will be used to synthesize, interpret and explore the nature of
              controls and consequences of soil biodiversity, and then to compare with
              parameters of the UK site.
