Title       : POWRE: Modulation of the Blood-Brain Barrier by Astrocytes and Microglia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9806128

Award Number: 9806128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73153              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lola C. Hudson lola_hudson@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-06128  HUDSON     The blood-brain barrier (BBB) forms a unique boundary
              between the  circulating blood and the tissue of the brain and spinal cord. 
              Normally the barrier prevents the entry of most immune cells  (cells
              participating on the body's immune response to foreign  pathogens), bacteria,
              viruses, antibiotics, and chemotherapy drugs  into the nervous system. The BBB
              is formed by "endothelial" cells  lining the capillaries that exhibit "tight
              junctions" between  adjacent cells.  The presence of these tight junctions,
              which can  be recognized by their special dense appearance in electron 
              micrographs, stands  in contrast to the situation for endothelial  cells of
              other organs. The formation of the tight junctions is  induced by a certain
              type of cell from the nervous system, termed  an "astrocyte."  Astrocytes have
              processes which make contact with  the endothelial cells. The role of
              astrocytes and other "glial"  cells (cells closely associated with nerve cells)
              such as  microglia in influencing additional BBB functions is not known. 
              Certain immune cells are capable of adhering and penetrating the  BBB,
              surveying the nervous tissue for antigen, and continuing to  the lymphoid
              tissues for immunity functions. What is not clear,  however, is the mechanism
              for selecting which immune cells  penetrate the BBB. Experiments in this
              project are designed to  determine if astrocytes and microglia, stimulated by
              factors found  in circulation, can alter the ability of immune cells to adhere
              to  and penetrate the endothelial cells of the brain. This will  primarily be
              accomplished using cell culture methods in various  combinations of endothelial
              cells, astrocytes, and microglia,  stimulated and unstimulated. Immune cells
              will be applied to the  combinations of cells and the ability of immune cells
              to penetrate  the cell layers will be determined using staining techniques and
              a  special microscope that allows the cell layers to be visualized in  3
              dimensions. Because adherence and trafficking of i mmune cells in  non-nervous
              tissue is controlled by activation of endothelial  cells with increased
              expression of adhesion molecules, it is  possible that astrocytes and/or
              microglia influence expression of  adhesion molecules in brain endothelium
              through secretion of  "cytokines". The presence or absence of adhesion
              molecules will be  detected through staining techniques specific to each.
              Results of  this project will expand understanding of BBB function and 
              immunity in the nervous system of mammals.  This POWRE award will  promote the
              further development of Dr. Hudson's research career in  this important area.
