Title       : Collaborative Research: US GLOBEC: Egg Production, Growth and Mortality, and the
               Role of Frontal Processes in Copepods Population Dynamics on Georges Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9806506

Award Number: 9806506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward G. Durbin edurbin@gsosun1.gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806506
Durbin

	U.S. GLOBEC Phase I and II results showed that the abundance
              and production rates of Calanus finmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp. differ
              greatly between the shallow well-mixed crest waters of Georges Bank and the
              deeper waters of the northeast peak and the southern flank.  Dr. Ohman and
              associates suggest that this smaller scale temporal and spatial variability is
              controlled by variations in vital rates (recruitment, growth and mortality) and
              frontal processes on GB (convergences, exchange rates across fronts).  They
              will address these questions through the following specific objectives: (1)
              Determine spatial and temporal changes in abundance of nauplii of Calanus,
              Pseudocalanus, and of other copepods on Georges Bank during the winter/spring
              period as a part of the zooplankton broad-scale survey. (2) Determine the
              spatial, seasonal and inter-annual variation in egg production, growth rates,
              physiological condition and mortality for the dominant copepod species
              including Calanus and Pseudocalanus. (3) Determine abundance, individual growth
              rates, and physiological condition of the target copepod species, as well as
              the abundance of other zooplankton species, over fine spatial scales across the
              crest-southern flank tidal mixing front during late April-early May. (4)
              Provide the modeling and synthesis groups with data on copepod distribution,
              recruitment, growth and mortality rates.
	This project is composed of four
              separate components which have been combined in one proposal.  These components
              are: (1) the broad-scale pump survey, (2) the egg laying rate measurements of
              Calanus, Pseudocalanus, and other dominant copepods (3) the growth rate
              measurements of Calanus and Pseudocalanus, and (4) the estimation of egg and
              naupliar mortality of Calanus and Pseudocalanus.  The pump survey will take
              place during each of the broad scale survey cruises while the latter three
              components will be carried out during each of the process cruises although
              broad scale survey female abundance data will be used in bank-wide egg
              production estimates. 

