Title       : Molecular Evolution of Pericentromeric Duplications among Higher Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9806913

Award Number: 9806913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan E. Eichler eee@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9806913   Eichler      Gene duplication is one of the primary forces of
              evolutionary change.  It is by this process that new genes are believed to
              arise in the genome of an organism.  Despite its importance in evolution, the
              mechanism by which this process occurs is not well understood. The objective of
              this proposal is to investigate one such mechanism that has been recently
              identified within the genomes of higher primates.  An unusual bias for
              duplicating segments containing entire genes or gene-segments has been
              documented for regions near the centromeres of primate chromosomes.      Dr.
              Eichler will conduct experiments to determine precisely what segments of the
              genome have been duplicated, when the duplication events occurred within an
              evolutionary timeframe, how large are the duplicated segments, where these
              duplication events have occurred and what molecular sequences define the
              breakpoints between ancestral and duplicated loci. Due to the unusually high
              degree of sequence similarity between these segments, the study will focus
              primarily on man and his most closely related species (chimpanzee, gorilla and
              orangutan).     The chromosomes of multiple individuals from each species will
              be analyzed to determine if these events contribute to differences in the
              architecture of the genome both between species and within species.  The
              results of this process should provide important clues in understanding the
              mechanism which has been responsible for the distribution of these segments
              across the primate genome and help to explain the bias for these events to
              occur near the centromeres of chromosomes.  Furthermore, the results of these
              studies should shed light on the role of gene duplication in the evolution and
              organization of chromosomes in man and other primates.
