Title       : POWRE: Spatial Modeling of Count Data on a Lattice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9806051

Award Number: 9806051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Christman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9806051  Christman  Research is proposed to develop new statistical models and
              related inference for count data observed on spatial lattice.  Two spatial
              models for count data on a lattice are available in the classical frequentist
              approach: (1) a conditionally specified model in which the distribution of the
              variable, Y at a single site, depends functionally on the values of the
              variable in its surrounding neighborhood, and (2) a simultaneously specified
              model in which the joint distribution of Y over the entire region is given. 
              The purpose of the proposed research is to extend the methodology of
              conditionally specified models to other types of auto-distributions that do not
              necessarily belong to exponential families.  The specific types of
              distributions that are to be studied are hierarchical and mixture models
              commonly seen in environmental applications.  In addition to determining the
              conditions underwhich conditional auto-models have valid joint distributions,
              the PI will study several aspects of modeling that are also relevant to models
              based on exponential families.  For example, one area of research will be to
              identify the appropriate means of expressing spatial dependence, i.e. through
              which parameter is it better expressed.  The PI will perform this research
              while a visiting professor for academic year 1998-99 in the Department of
              Stateistics at Iowa State University.  There exists at Iowa State University a
              remarkable concentration of expertise and interest in the faculty that is
              relevant to the proposed research.  This collection of people is ideally suited
              to bringing new ideas, observations, and expertise to bear on the problems of
              modeling count data on a spatial lattice, especially as it applies to
              environmental problems.  The proposed research will allow her to develop
              statistical and computer skills that increase her capabilities and research
              potential and will allow her to contribute to the advancement in the
              statistical sciences as it relates to spatial modeling.   Further d evelopment
              in her research abilities will directly improve the PI's teaching capability
              both at the undergraduate and graduate levels by increasing her own
              understanding of stochastic modeling general and spatial modeling in
              particular.  The opportunity to build her expertise in modeling would provide
              her with the tools to effectively mentor graduate as well as undergraduate
              students and to collaborate fully with other researchers in spatial models. 
              This POWRE project is  supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA).
