Title       : Experimental Software Systems: Experimental Evaluation of Scalable Optimization
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9806525

Award Number: 9806525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Soffa soffa@cs.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajiv Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2861,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9806525
Soffa, Mary Lou
Gupta, Rajiv
University of Pittsburgh

Experimental
              Software Systems: Experimental Evaluation of Scalable Optimization
              Techniques

While extensive research efforts have been expended on developing
              compiler optimization techniques, little attention has been paid to the
              scalability and effectiveness of these techniques for large programs. Although
              many optimizations have been shown to be effective for greatly improving the
              performance of moderately size programs, the increasing complexity and size, as
              well as the modular design of applications make the optimization techniques too
              costly or not effective.

The goal of this research project is to develop and
              experimentally verify a scalable approach to compiler optimizations. Instead of
              simultaneously considering optimization opportunities across the whole program,
              as current techniques do, program paths are used to limit the scope of
              optimizations.  A demand driven framework for analyses and code transformations
              forms the foundation for the development of the techniques. Benchmark programs
              from government, industry, and standard benchmark suites are targeted to test
              
the scalability of techniques developed.

Scalable techniques will be
              useful in industry to improve the performance of large programs, and the
              optimizer developed will serve as a platform to enable researchers to
              experimentally evaluate the scalability of optimizations. The demand driven
              analysis algorithms will not only be useful for scalable optimizations, but
              also for software engineering tools.


