Title       : A Re-Examination of the Algal Class Xanthophyceae Based Upon 18S r RNA and rbc L
               Sequence Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9806743

Award Number: 9806743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey C. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Andersen  DEB-9806743    The class Xanthophyceae includes a diverse assemblage
              of approximately 600 species of yellow-green colored algae. Some species are
              found in soil, but the majority are found in aquatic environments where they,
              and other algae, form the base of the food chain. With few exceptions,
              xanthophytes have not been studied using modern biological techniques. In fact
              many species have not been re-examined since they were described originally on
              the basis of light microscopic observations nearly 50 years ago.  Historically,
              species have been classified based upon their "life form," i.e., 1) amoeboid
              cells, 2) walled cells lacking flagella, 3) flagellate cells, 4) filamentous
              cells, 5) walled cells held in a gelatinous envelope, or 6) multinucleate
              filaments that lack cross walls. The smaller flagellate species are generally
              regarded as being more primitive than the larger, filamentous and siphoneous
              forms.  In preliminary phylogenetic analyses, we already have found that that
              some filamentous organisms are more similar to coccoid organisms than they are
              to each other. Similarly, several siphoneous organisms were not found to be
              closely related. Preliminary data also showed that a species currently placed
              in the Xanthophyceae should be classified within a completely different algal
              group. Anderson and Bailey, uniquely qualified for this study, will accomplish
              a long-overdue re-evaluation of the traditional classification of
              Xanthophyceae.  The objectives are 1) to identify a group of species that can
              unequivocally be placed in the Xanthophyceae, 2) to construct a modern
              classification for the group, and 3) to re-classify elsewhere those species
              that belong in other algal groups.
