Title       : The Functional Significance of Biodiversity in Changing Environments: An
               Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9806427

Award Number: 9806427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340599             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Morin pjmorin@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy M. Casey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806427
Morin
This research focuses on several issues emerging from recent
              research on relations between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. Recent
              studies have fueled a growing controversy about whether species richness, the
              number of functional groups, or the biomass of dominant species best explains
              variation in ecosystem function. A series of independent manipulations of
              species richness, numbers of functional groups, and biomass of dominant species
              within functional groups will be conducted to separate effects of these factors
              on variation in several ecosystem processes. Other manipulations of species
              composition will explore causes of limited community membership, specifically
              by exploring whether simple assembly rules provide an adequate explanation of r
              differences in community composition along a productivity gradient. Finally,
              manipulations of environmental variation will test whether responses of simple
              and complex communities to environmental change depend on the extent of
              temporal autocorrelation in changing temperature regimes. An important goal of
              this research is the rigorous identification of links between population
              dynamics, community structure, and ecosystem function. Such links are best
              explored in systems where population dynamics, community structure, and
              ecosystem processes are simultaneously measured. This level of integration is
              quite tractable in microbial communities established in experimental
              microcosms, which are particularly amenable to manipulations of various aspects
              of biodiversity and environmental change.

