Title       : Symmetry, Epitaxy and Ordering Processes of Supramolecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a9806684

Award Number: 9806684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander M. Jamieson amj@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Hudson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9179,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9806684  Hudson    A number of new synthetic liquid crystalline materials that
              form  spherical or cylindrical nanostructures (supramolecular  assemblies) that
              are similar to certain biological materials will  be investigated. 
              Thermotropic materials are selected for this  study, because of benefits that
              include experimental ease snd  inherent application to harsh environments
              (temperature or  vacuum), electronic and multifuntional ccomposite materials. 
              The  potential for electronic application of these materials is clear:  the
              organic photoconductors with the most rapid charge transport  operate on the
              principles of columnar assembly and liquid  crystalline alignment.   
              Order-order transitions (e.g. from columnar to spheroidal) have  been
              identified and will be studied by diffraction and electron  microscopy.  These
              can be induced either by a temperature  changeor by polymerization. 
              Investigation of these transitions  will provide significant understanding of
              thestructure and  stability of each phase.  Homologous series of molecules are 
              being provided through several collaborations with the PI, so  that the
              influence of molecular architecture on supramolecular  shape and packing will
              be determined.  The similarities and  differences between long and short chain
              molocuhs will be  elucidated.  Such knowledge will be useful input for the 
              development of theoretical concepts concerning the phase behavior  of small
              amphiphiles.    Further insight into these materials will be gained through the
               study of their order-disorder transitions.  Using rheological ant  optical
              analysis, this project will investigate the isotropic-to-  columnar phase
              transition and the existence of pretransitional  fluctuations that would
              indicate the presence of columns within  the disordered state.  The contol of
              this ordering transition is  crucial for applicafions in which the device
              performance depends  on column orientation.  Surface anchoring and flow
              alignment of  these materials will be explored.    This project w fll provide
              the instruction and training of a  graduate student.  This project will also
              benefit a self directed  portion of a laboratory course (at the graduate and
              undergraduate  level).  %%%  Functional nanostructures in Nature (used for
              information  storage, selective transport of chemicals and energy, and 
              mechanical strength and toughness) inspire synthetic materials  development. 
              This project will investigatc the structure and  ordering processes of
              synthetic solvent-free liquid crystalline  nanostructures that are more suited
              to application in demanding  environments (such as high temperature or vacuum),
               photoelectronic and multifunctional composite materials.  This  work will
              proceed in parallel with synthetic efforts in other  labs so that principles of
              molecular design can be determined.  ***
