Title       : The Effects of Dispersal on the Population Dynamics and Parasitoid Diversity of
               a Multiparasitoid-Host System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2001      
File        : a9806635

Award Number: 9806635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl J. Briggs cbriggs@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9806635    Briggs      Theoretical studies have predicted that limited
              dispersal abilities of individuals of the component species can stabilize
              consumer-resource interactions and promote coexistence in competitive
              interactions. However, there has been little empirical evidence to back up
              these theoretical predictions, in part because of the difficulties encountered
              when attempting to apply existing general models to particular systems. The
              investigators will examine these potential effects of dispersal in a natural
              host-multiparasitoid system involving the gall-forming midge, Rhopalomyia
              californica, and its community of parasitoid species.  The following questions
              will be addressed: (a) Do limited dispersal abilities of the host and
              parasitoids in the system enhance the stability of the host-multiparasitoid
              interaction?  (b) Do differences in dispersal ability and competitive ability
              between the different parasitoid species promote coexistence of multiple
              parasitoid species on the one host species?  (c) At what spatial scale does (a)
              and/or (b) occur?  The study will involve the development and parameterization
              of a spatially explicit model tailored to the system.  The predictions of the
              model will be used to analyze the patterns of midge abundance and parasitoid
              diversity observed in natural populations, and will be tested explicitly in a
              field experiment in which dispersal will be manipulated at different spatial
              scales.  The results of this project will make a substantial contribution
              towards bridging the gap between theory and experiments in understanding the
              roles of dispersal in population regulation and multispecies coexistence.  This
              research will have direct implications for the biological control of insect
              pests, and for the conservation of endangered species.
