Title       : The Cusco Valley Archaeological Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9806971

Award Number: 9806971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43323              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian S. Bauer bsb@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inca Empire was the largest state to develop in the pre-Columbian New World.
              The last in a series of complex Andean societies, it emerged in the central
              Andean highlands of Peru, expanded across the western highlands and coast of
              South America and ultimately encompassed a territory that stretched from modern
              day Columbia to Chile. By the time of European contact, the Inca ruled a
              population of at least eight million people from their capital city in the
              Cusco Valley. Despite the importance of the Cusco Valley in the prehistory of
              the Americas, it remains the last great center of civilization in the New World
              to be systematically surveyed, and many of its archaeological remains are
              rapidly being destroyed by urban growth. While best known for the Incas, the
              Cusco Valley has a long prehistory and data from this area are relevant to a
              number of research questions. It was occupied by at least 1000 BC by small
              groups of agricultralists and underwent various periods of indigenous
              development and foreign influence. At least two other highland Andean empires
              had an impact on the valley.  With National Science Foundation support, Dr.
              Brian Bauer will continue his survey of this region. Building on two previous
              field seasons, he will complete his 100% surface examination of the Cusco
              region. He will document the location and distribution of all visible
              archaeological sites in the Cusco valley and also collect surface materials at
              all  in order to date and determine their function. Survey teams will also note
              the location of culturally significant prehistoric features such as
              agricultural and habitation terraces, canals, roads bridges and storehouses.
              Spanish eyewitness accounts provide the best available information to on the
              Inca and Dr. Bauer and his colleagues will continue their examination of these
              chronicles. They will attempt to match archaeological and written data. On the
              basis of this work they will attempt to gain insight into how complex societies
              and early states emerge and are maintained. The data they collect will be
              widely used by other archaeologists.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
