Title       : Least-Squares Finite Element Methods and Optimization-Based Domain Decomposition
               Methods for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9806358

Award Number: 9806358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max D. Gunzburger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9806358  Gunzburger      In the last few years, the engineering and mathematical
              communities have shown  increasing interest in least-squares finite element
              methods for solving a  variety of problems in fluids, electromagnetics,
              elasticity, and other  applications. The great promise of least-squares methods
              arises from the fact that, when compared to other discretization schemes, they
              lead to discrete problems that are much easier to solve on a computer. In the
              past the PI has studied numerous facets of least-squares finite element
              methods. These include: the use of mesh-dependent weights in least-squares
              functionals in order to achieve optimally accuracy, the solution of practical
              implementation issues that needed to be addressed in order to make these
              methods practical and competitive, and the application of these methods to
              problems with discontinuous coefficients that arise, e.g., from inhomogeneous
              media properties. The PI plans to apply least-squares finite element
              methodologies to optimization and control problems and to develop, analyze, and
              implement domain decomposition algorithms in the least-squares setting.   
              Domain decomposition methods have attracted even more attention due to their 
              usefulness in a parallel processing environment. The PI has developed novel 
              non-overlapping domain decomposition methods based on optimization or optimal 
              control ideas that posses numerous desirable features, the most important 
              perhaps being that they are easily extended to nonlinear problems. The PI plans
              to introduce preconditioners to speed-up the performance of the methods, to
              look at different functionals and optimization parameters on which to base the
              decomposition into subdomains so that again more efficient algorithms are
              obtained, to apply and analyze algorithms to the solution of optimization
              problems for partial differential equations, to develop  algorithms for
              time-dependent problems, and to implement  algorithms on parallel computers
              consisting of clusters of Pentium processors.
