Title       : Community Structure and Stability: Linking Theory and Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9806953

Award Number: 9806953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141599             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. Ives arives@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9806953  Ives  What determines the stability of ecological communities? This
              question is not only central to the basic science of ecology, but it is
              relevant to a wide range of practical issues such as land management and global
              climate change. Community stability is affected by three components of
              community structure: diversity, composition and pattern of interactions among
              species. Historically, ecologists have drawn very different conclusions about
              how community structure affects stability. In part, this is because theoretical
              analyses of community stability have not been easy to map onto real data.
              Therefore, there is no common framework for addressing community stability both
              in theory and in practice. This research will develop a theoretical framework
              for analyzing the stability of real communities. The theoretical framework is
              based on stochastic autoregressive models. Autoregressive models provide a
              flexible and general tool for investigating theoretically how all three
              components of community structure affect community stability. Using
              autoregressive models, it is also possible to investigate multiple properties
              of community dynamics, thereby exploring conceptually different ways to
              measuring community stability. Although autoregressive models are useful as
              theoretical tools, their main advantage is that they can be applied directly to
              analyze time-series data. This research will analyze three data sets: a
              compilation of zooplankton experimental data sets from 28 freshwater lakes,
              experimental data on prairie plant communities, and data from a long-term
              experimental study of a desert rodent community. The particular focal questions
              for each of these data sets are different, but they can all be addressed using
              an autoregressive framework. By combining theory and data, the proposed
              research will give more insight into the relationship between community
              structure and stability.
