Title       : Probabilistic Computation and Interactive Proof Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9009936

Award Number: 9009936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dana S. Richards                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36869              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance Fortnow fortnow@cs.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              An interactive proof system consists of two players, an "infinitely"           
              powerful prover and a probabilistic time-bounded verifier.  The prover         
              tries to convince the verifier of the validity of some statement.              
              However, the verifier does not trust the prover and will only accept           
              if the prover manages to convince the verifier of the validity of the          
              statement.  The prover and the verifier have a conversation with the           
              verifier using random coins to ask questions to the prover until the           
              verifier is or is not convinced of the validity of the statement.              
                                                                                             
              This project will examine the complexity of these interactive proof            
              systems and the techniques used in the recent results showing every            
              problem solvable in a reasonable amount of space has such a proof              
              system.  The new ideas, based on looking at certain hard problems with         
              a simple algebraic characterization, may prove useful in tackling some         
              of the other hard questions in structural complexity theory.                   
                                                                                             
              Using certain cryptographic assumption, one can show every interactive         
              proof system has an equivalent "zero-knowledge" proof system, i.e. the         
              verifier receives no information from the protocol other than whether          
              the statement was valid.  This project will try to determine whether           
              such a theorem is true without any cryptographic assumptions.  Perhaps         
              one could use the new ideas for interactive proofs using certain               
              "hard" functions whose hardness do not depend on unknown assumptions.          
                                                                                             
              This project will also study how much more time is needed for a                
              computer with access to random coins to be more powerful than a                
              similar computer with less time.  Standard techniques will not help to         
              solve this problem but perhaps the techniques used for interactive             
              proof systems may also prove this question.                                    
                                                                                             
              This project will also look at some complexity issues of multiple-             
              prover interactive proof systems where there are two or more provers           
              who can not communicate among themselves.  While the complexity of             
              multiple-prover interactive proof systems is known, this project will          
              look at the complexity of such proof systems with a constant number of         
              rounds of communication been the provers and the verifier and also             
              various applications of the complexity of these proof systems.
