Title       : Paradigms and Protocols for Real-Time Digital Video and Audio Services in
               Distributed Computing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1991       
File        : a9009757

Award Number: 9009757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Rangan venkat@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   With networks and storage devices beginning to offer very                 
              high capacities, distributed systems can support communication                 
              and file services in the digital video and audio domains.  The                 
              project investigates paradigms and protocols for multi-media                   
              services that support visual/voice conversations and allow                     
              selective storage/retrieval of parts of a converstation.                       
              Conferencing is used as the basic paradigm for accessing any                   
              multi-media service.  For instance, to retrieve digital video a                
              client establishes a conversation with the video file service; to              
              record parts of a conversation, the file service joins as a party              
              to the conversation transforming it into a conference; for                     
              entertainment during idle periods, a client joins a background                 
              conference with the HDTV service.  The project is developing                   
              precise models and connection management mechanisms for a                      
              powerful multi-level multi-channel conferencing paradigm.                      
                   The project uses conversational file systems for storage/                 
              retrieval of multi-media data.  The file systems handle gigabyte               
              file sizes and handle inter-media synchronization.  Multi-media                
              communication requires protocols that provide performance                      
              guarantees, and support multiple media streams while preserving                
              temporal relationships among the streams.  The project                         
              investigates the design of such protocols and algorithms for                   
              allocation of resources to performance guaranteed channels.  The               
              outcome of the research is software architectures, protocols, and              
              algorithms that will enable multi-media computing systems to                   
              replace real-world services such as physical mail, telephony,                  
              news, advertising and video/audio entertainment.
