Title       : Temporal Stimulus Attributes Influence Infants' Attention to Visual Events and
               Locations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9009781

Award Number: 9009781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie T. Balaban   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The mature human visual system, adept at detecting dynamic                     
              sensory events, often shifts attention automatically toward a                  
              detected movement or change in the environment.  There are many                
              studies of the maturation in infants of spatial aspects of                     
              vision, such as acuity and preferences for various stationary                  
              patterns, but fewer studies of the temporal characteristics of                 
              infant vision.  Yet the infant, from an early age, encounters a                
              dynamic sensory world.  This research will examine the                         
              development of infants' visual sensitivity to temporal changes.                
              The initial goal is to assess infant preferences for flashing                  
              displays by presenting two patterns flickering at different                    
              rates.  The research will use measures of the time infants spend               
              looking at each pattern, along with physiological measures of                  
              their eye movements and heart rate, to assess preferences and                  
              thus infer temporal sensitivity.  Further studies will                         
              investigate the cueing effects of flashing or moving stimuli                   
              presented in the periphery of the visual field.  Although infants              
              can localize lights and sounds coarsely soon after birth, these                
              abilities become greatly refined during early infancy.  The third              
              goal is to use the attention-attracting nature of stimulus change              
              as a probe of infant attention.  The question is how readily                   
              abrupt changes in the visual periphery will distract infants'                  
              viewing of centrally-presented stimuli.  Initial activities will               
              include selection of suitable stimuli for infants of different                 
              ages and pilot work on precise measurement of shifts in visual                 
              fixation.  This research will study infants from 2 through 6                   
              months of age, spanning the period during which temporal acuity                
              in the visual system is undergoing rapid developmental change.                 
              The research will address both the development of the visual                   
              system and the implications of more temporally-refined visual                  
              processing for the infant's attention to their surroundings.                   
              Maturation of the ability to detect change, to localize the                    
              source of the change, and to focus attention to the sensory event              
              is necessary for developing competence in interaction with                     
              persons and objects in the environment.
