Title       : Applying Space Technology to Global Change: Values, Institutions and Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9009827

Award Number: 9009827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150165             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Henry Lambright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse Research Corp
	      6225 Running Ridge Road
	      North Syracuse, NY  132122510    315/425-5100

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1577,7915,
Abstract    :
              Studies in Science, Technology and Society (SSTS) supports research            
              about the intellectual and value contexts that govern the                      
              development and use of science and technology.  Ethics and Values              
              Studies, in SSTS, supports research on ethical and value aspects               
              of the interaction between science, technology and society.  This              
              research project seeks to understand how governmental decision                 
              making, differing values, and institutional mechanisms influence               
              the development and deployment of new satellite technologies.  In              
              particular, this project focuses on the effort to study and protect            
              planet earth, embodied in the emerging Global Change program. This             
              effort requires space monitoring, and NASA is currently sponsoring             
              a "Mission to Earth" program to develop and deploy satellites for              
              this purpose.  This project will examine the role of "advocacy                 
              coalitions" in moving technology from development to use.  Advocacy            
              coalitions can be comprised of developers, users, providers,                   
              funders, and other affected parties.  The research uses the case               
              of Mission to Earth and two others -- weather satellites and land              
              satellites (Landsat) to explore how values of these parties come               
              into conflict and whether and how the conflicts are resolved.                  
              Weather satellites are generally regarded as a successful linkage              
              of technological development with earth observation.  Institutional            
              relationships were established between developers and users at                 
              national and international scales.  Maintained and built over the              
              years, these relationships satisfy providers, funders and an                   
              enormous variety of other affected groups.  In contrast, the land              
              satellite program has been called a "soap opera" from the                      
              standpoint of government management of a new earth monitoring                  
              technology.  Since land observations are critical to Global Change             
              plans, the reasons behind Landsat's relative under-utilization are             
              as important to understand as those behind the comparatively strong            
              exploitation of the weather satellite.  A comparative examination              
              of governmental decision making will explore systematically the                
              institutional dynamics of applying space technology to monitoring              
              planet earth.  It will identify institutional models that may                  
              assist in the consideration of policy alternatives for developing              
              and deploying this technology in the service of studying and                   
              protecting the earth's environment.  Results will be reported in               
              professional journals and at conferences, and presentations to                 
              federal policymakers concerned with issues of Global Change will               
              be arranged.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research has an important and timely focus; its results will              
              be useful and accessible to a wide audience.  The qualifications               
              and track record of the investigator are excellent; institutional              
              support is good; the research plan is sensible.  Support is highly             
              recommended.
