Title       : Southern Grassroots Party Activists Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9009846

Award Number: 9009846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Hadley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/286-6000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary research objective of this project is to produce a data set        
              which describes the contemporary situation of party activism and               
              organization in the eleven southern states.  Though this has not been          
              undertaken previously for any region of the United States, the                 
              objective is particulary important in a region undergoing significant          
              political transition, a region in which grassroots party organizational        
              changes are likely to impact national party politics.                          
                                                                                             
              More importantly, the project offers the possibility for analysis of           
              the role of political parties as one of the political organizations in         
              linkage politics.  In assessing the role of parties in linkage at the          
              grassroots, and in party systems on a statewide basis, the project's           
              findings will give insight into the role of parties in linkage and             
              their relationships to other linkage institutions such as campaign             
              organizations, interest groups, and the like.                                  
                                                                                             
              Research analysts from each of the eleven states will undertake                
              comparable research activities.  Utilizing common instruments, the             
              researchers will collect several types of data for each state,                 
              including:  (1) individual data from mail surveys of samples of                
              Democratic and Republican party precinct committee members; (2)                
              individual data from the entire universe of Democratic and Republican          
              party county chairs; (3) aggregate data for the counties and states;           
              and, (4) historical data about Democratic and Republican party                 
              organization and party activists at other party levels.                        
                                                                                             
              The investigation should encourage replication because of its                  
              sufficiently broad data baseline and should have a catalytic effect on         
              systematic field research about political parties.  The data base              
              created will be made available to other scholars interested in the area        
              through the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social               
              Research at the University of Michigan.
