Title       : Strategic Behavior in Small Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9009546

Award Number: 9009546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Satterthwaite m-satterthwaite@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project studies how the strategic behavior of economic agents             
              shapes equilibrium outcomes within small markets.  It has three                
              parts.  (1)  The first is bilateral bargaining when the bargainers             
              have the option to break off the bargaining and seek another                   
              bargaining partner.  The project seeks to show that the presence               
              of this outside option changes equilibrium bilateral bargaining                
              behavior from being essentially indeterminate to being essentially             
              determined.  The efficiency of decentralized markets with bilateral            
              bargaining is also compared to centralized markets with                        
              multilateral bargaining.  (2)  The second part is the study of the             
              behavior of duopolists whose costs are declining through learning-             
              by-doing.  Each period each firm decides how aggressively it should            
              produce so as to reduce its costs further.  The goal is to                     
              characterize the variety of subgame perfect equilibria that can                
              exist when learning is important.  (3)  The third part involves the            
              use of heuristics by economic agents within dynamic games.  A                  
              heuristic approximates the value function that the agent would use             
              if he or she were perfectly rational.  The goal is to understand               
              how the presence of such boundedly rational agents changes the set             
              of equilibria.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it addresses one of the basic               
              limitations in bargaining theory, i.e., bilateral bargaining theory            
              with incomplete information has been unable to narrow in an                    
              interesting way the wide range of outcomes that are compatible with            
              at least one reasonable equilibrium.  The contribution from the                
              first part of this project comes from exploring a neglected aspect             
              of the bargaining problem that could provide determinate solutions.            
              Conventional models of bilateral, incomplete information bargaining            
              neglect the option bargainers have of breaking-off bargaining with             
              a particular partner and bargaining with a new partner from the                
              outside.  The project studies bilateral, incomplete information                
              bargaining with the outside option explicitly modeled.  Preliminary            
              work by the investigator demonstrates that introducing the outside             
              option in bargaining models may eliminate the indeterminacy found              
              in standard models.  The research should provide useful new                    
              analytical tools and valuable substantive insights into the many               
              bargaining problems in economics.
