Title       : The Structure of Mental Imagery Lateralization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1992       
File        : a9009619

Award Number: 9009619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Kosslyn smk@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              For many years, most researchers believed the left cerebral                    
              hemisphere to be specialized for language and the right for                    
              perception and mental imagery.  In the early 1980's, it became                 
              clear, however, that the left hemisphere is actually better than               
              the right at some imagery tasks, but it is worse than the right                
              at other imagery tasks and roughly as good as the right at still               
              other imagery tasks.  It is now clear that complex tasks such as               
              imagery are not performed by a single part of the brain, but                   
              rather arise from the joint action of many components working in               
              concert.  Some of these actions apparently are carried out by the              
              left hemisphere, and some are carried out by the right.  This                  
              research will characterize the nature of these component                       
              processes and will determine how they are lateralized to the left              
              or right hemisphere.  For example, experiments will examine the                
              processes that allow one to activate a pattern into a visual                   
              image, to rotate patterns in images, and to "inspect" patterns in              
              images.  Patients who have suffered damage to the left or right                
              cerebral hemisphere will be tested on a set of imagery tasks, and              
              their deficits compared.  The theory underlying the research                   
              holds that some tasks will be impaired more following damage to                
              the left hemisphere than the right and others will be impaired                 
              more following damage to the right hemisphere.  Examination of                 
              which tasks are always lateralized in the same way as certain                  
              other tasks will provide evidence for the existence of distinct                
              processes.  Furthermore, these patterns of lateralization will                 
              allow for the test of computer models of how experience affects                
              cerebral lateralization.  The increased understanding of imagery               
              gained from this research is relevant to training in various                   
              branches of science and engineering, because of the critical role              
              of imagery in the spatial thinking so necessary in those areas.                
              If we understand the component processes of imagery and which                  
              processes are used in which kinds of tasks, we may be able to                  
              train people to use imagery more effectively in their thinking.                
              Such training might allow students who would otherwise drop out                
              of visually oriented technical disciplines to succeed in such                  
              work.
