Title       : Neurobiology of Peptidergic Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9009155

Award Number: 9009155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321828             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan J. Tublitz tublitz@uoneuro.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Neuropeptides are small proteinaceous molecules which are                      
              involved in a variety of brain roles, ranging from controlling                 
              movements to transmitting sensory information such as pain.                    
              These chemicals are also implicated in more long-term behavioral               
              changes such as learning and memory, arousal and various                       
              emotional states.  Although much is known about the behavioral                 
              effects of neuropeptides, relatively little is understood about                
              how these neurochemicals cause changes at the cellular and                     
              molecular levels.  Unfortunately, these sorts of physiological                 
              studies are not currently feasible in mammals because of                       
              technical difficulties and that the mammalian brain is                         
              exceedingly centralized and complex.  To overcome these problems,              
              Dr. Tublitz has capitalized on relatively simple nervous system                
              of invertebrates.  He concentrates on a family of neuropeptides,               
              the Cardioacceleratory Peptides (CAPs), that modulate several                  
              different tissues, including the heart, gut and CNS.  Dr. Tublitz              
              will examine the physiology of individual cells which synthesize               
              and release the CAPs.  He will examine why the number of                       
              neuropeptide neurons change during the animal's lifetime.                      
              Moreover, Dr. Tublitz will determine the molecular mechanisms by               
              which the CAPs exert the powerful and long-lasting effects upon                
              the target tissues.  These investigations, currently possible                  
              only in simple invertebrate preparations, will likely provide new              
              and important information about neuropeptide function that will                
              be applicable to all species, including humans.  This work will                
              lead to a better understanding of how the chemicals in the brain               
              interact with each other and with the brain's nerve cells to                   
              modify behavior.
