Title       : Research Initiation: Structural Design Optimization as a Linear Programming
               Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1990       
File        : a9009597

Award Number: 9009597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Office Automation Assistant             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar Ghattas oghattas@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The researcher will investigate conditions under which                    
              problems in structural design optimization map, without                        
              approximation, to linear programming (LP) problems, and to create              
              algorithms which exploit these special properties.                             
                   The conventional approach is to treat such problems as ones               
              in nonlinear programming (NLP).  For large systems, exact solution             
              of the resulting NLP problem is often intractable. It has been                 
              shown that a class of structural design problems can be solved much            
              more efficiently. The method requires solution of an LP followed               
              by a system of linear equations.  Solution of the LP identifies a              
              canonical structure which possesses the same displacement field as             
              the optimal structure.  This displacement field renders the                    
              equilibrium equations as a linear system in unknown areas, which               
              can be solved to yield the optimum design.  As a consequence,                  
              problems can now be solved of practical interest to civil and                  
              aerospace engineers several orders of magnitude larger than                    
              previously imagined.                                                           
                   The goal of this research is to extend the LP methodology to              
              encompass a more general class of structural design optimization               
              problems.  Initial numerical evidence indicates that the method is             
              extendable to displacement and frequency constraints.  In addition             
              to these constraints, buckling and multiple loads will be                      
              considered, and the researchers will define extensions of the                  
              method to structures discretized by continuum finite elements.                 
                   If successful for this broader class of problem, the LP method            
              will greatly reduce the computational effort required for solving              
              these optimization problems, as a consequence of the need to solve             
              an LP rather than a NLP. Such a significant enhancement of                     
              efficiency will make optimization more attractive to structural                
              designers.
