Title       : Ultrastructure of Patch Clamped Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9009675

Award Number: 9009675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Sachs sachs@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The patch clamp has revolutionized the study of                                
              electrophysiology, but little is currently known about the                     
              structure of patches.  Knowledge of structure is important for                 
              proper interpretation of single channel data, especially data                  
              from mechanosensitive ion channels, where the cytoskeleton plays               
              a major role in activating the channel.  By combining                          
              electrophysiology, light and electron microscopy of patches,                   
              general techniques for understanding patch structure will be                   
              developed.  These techniques will aid in determining the                       
              structural alterations that occur in the preparation of a patch                
              for electron microscopy and the structure of the interface                     
              between the membrane and pipette.  Images of "living" patches                  
              will be made using optical microscopy with high magnification                  
              video.  To observe the ultrastructure, a device will be built to               
              rapidly freeze the patch after light microscopic examination.                  
              After freeze drying, patches will be examined as whole mounts in               
              the high voltage electron microscope.  Comparison of patch images              
              will be made with light and electron microscopy, using two                     
              dimensional projection images, stereo pairs, and complete three                
              dimensional image sets.  Techniques for freeze fracturing,                     
              etching and replicating fragments of pipette tips will be                      
              developed to study the interaction that occurs between the                     
              membrane and the wall of the pipette.  Examination of several                  
              types of cells will aid in determining which structures are                    
              general and which structures represent tissue-specific                         
              differences between patches.  Since the patch clamp and the                    
              electron microscope have the potential for describing single                   
              molecules, cross correlating results from both techniques will                 
              lead to a new level of structure-function relationships.
