Title       : Soft Metal Interactions with Sulfur Containing Biological Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1990      
File        : a9009301

Award Number: 9009301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio A. Garcia tony.garcia@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1402,
Abstract    :
              The sulfur chemistry of proteins and other biological                          
              molecules include the "soft" donor groups thiol,                               
              thioether, and disulfide.  Specific examples of this                           
              group of biological molecules are antibiotics such as                          
              penicillin and cephalosporin, essential cofactors such as                      
              d-biotin, immunoglobins such as IgG and sulfur proteins                        
              such as metallothionein, papain, and liver alcohol                             
              dehydrogenase.  Soft donor groups can complex selectivity                      
              with soft metal ions such as Ag(I), Cu(I), Au(I), Hg(II),                      
              and Pt(II).  This selective Lewis acid-base interaction                        
              provides a basis for a new class of metal affinity                             
              separations named Immobilized Soft Metal (ISM)                                 
              adsorption.  ISM will complement Immobilized Metal                             
              Affinity (IMA) chromatography in that IMA uses                                 
              borderline-hard acceptors such as Cu(II), Zn(II), and                          
              Ni(II) that interact with the exposed histidine residues                       
              of proteins.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Pilot experiments have confirmed the utility of this                           
              technique in purifying d-biotin from a dilute mixture                          
              with its sulfur-deficient, biosynthetic precursor d-                           
              desthiobiotin.  Also, metallothionein is shown to be                           
              removed from solution due to complexation with                                 
              immobilized Ag(I) ions.  It is proposed that ISM be                            
              explored as a new technique with broad applicability to                        
              biochemical separations.  Experiments will provide data                        
              to establish a reactivity model explaining the                                 
              interactions of biochemical functional groups with soft                        
              metal ions.  ISM may also provide a unique tool for                            
              biosensor development through the use of the bioconjugate                      
              of proteins with d-biotin.  Scanning Tunneling Microscopy                      
              (STM) has been used to obtain the first image of an                            
              immunoglobin molecule in aqueous solution.  The                                
              interaction between Ag(I) and biotin conjugated                                
              antibodies in aqueous solution can be used to study                            
              immunoglobin structure and function through STM.
