Title       : Worker Policing in Social Hymenoptera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9009197

Award Number: 9009197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Marcus Getz getz@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Colonies of social ants, bees, and wasps provide fascinating                   
              examples of cooperation in the animal world.  However, modern                  
              evolutionary theory suggests that there should be considerable                 
              conflict over reproduction within an insect colony.  In                        
              particular, there should be conflict between individual workers                
              and the queen over male production.  (Worker ants, bees, and                   
              wasps are females.  In most species, workers cannot mate but can               
              lay unfertilized eggs, which develop into males.)  Theory                      
              suggests that individual workers should prefer to rear their own               
              sons rather than their brothers, the sons of the queen, because                
              they are more genetically related to sons than brothers.  In some              
              species of social insects, for example, bumble bees, workers                   
              produce many of the colony's males, whereas in others, for                     
              example, honey bees and yellowjacket wasps, all the males are                  
              sons of the queen.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The absence of male honey bees produced by workers is thought to               
              result from workers preventing each other from reproducing by                  
              eating each other's eggs.  This "worker policing" has apparently               
              evolved in the honey bee because the queen mates with many males.              
              This leads to workers being more genetically related to the                    
              queen's sons than to the sons of other workers (who are mostly                 
              half-sisters), so that it is in each worker's genetic interest to              
              stop other workers from reproducing.  In contrast, bumble-bee                  
              queens mate with only one male, so that workers are more related               
              to the sons of the workers (who are all full sisters) than to the              
              queen's sons, and should not stop each other from reproducing.                 
                                                                                             
              This research project will examine in more detail the mechanism                
              of worker policing in honey bees, and also look at yellowjacket                
              wasps to see if worker policing by differential egg removal                    
              occurs in these insects as well.  One important area of research               
              will investigate how worker honey bees can distinguish queen-                  
              from worker-laid male eggs, by looking for a queen-produced                    
              chemical (pheromone) that may give their eggs a distinctive odor.              
              In addition, the project will quantify the rate of production of               
              worker-laid eggs in normal bee hives, and will look at the                     
              behavior of worker bees entering cells containing male eggs to                 
              see if some workers are special "police bees."
