Title       : Acquisition of Plant Biotechnolgy Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9009996

Award Number: 9009996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Govind C. Sharma   (Principal Investigator current)
              Val T. Sapra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Caula A. Beyl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Khairy M. Soliman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander M. Diner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alabama A&M University
	      P O BOX 285
	      Normal, AL  357620285    205/859-7011

NSF Program : 1102      BIOLOGICAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1102,
Abstract    :
              Alabama A & M University, a historically black land grant                      
              university, through a systematic and progressive effort has                    
              developed a comprehensive research and training program in plant               
              biology.  This effort was recently recognized by the State granting            
              it approval to offer a Ph.D. program in Plant and Soil Science.                
              This is the only doctoral program of its kind among historically               
              black colleges and universities (HBCUs).                                       
                                                                                             
              This proposal outlines five individual research that are currently             
              underway involving six primary users and numerous research staff               
              scientists, graduate and undergraduate students.  The culture and              
              their cytogenetic evaluation in Triticeae (wheat, barley, rye,                 
              triticale), Pinus (Southern pines) and Cossypium species.  These               
              efforts will utilize the confocal, inverted and stereomicroscopes,             
              cryogenic apparatus and bioreactor requested.  Plant transformation            
              research will strengthen by the nucleic acid sequencer and                     
              synthesizer, laser densitometer, and gel analyzers.  Investigations            
              and manipulation of cold hardiness is a topic that exemplifies                 
              ongoing phytohormone and plant growth regulation studies in the                
              program.  Availability of liquid chromatograph (with diode array               
              HPLC and ion chromatography) and liquid scintillation counters for             
              labeled hormones and substances will aid in strengthening this                 
              research.
