Title       : Hormonal Control of Sex Differences in Brain and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9009378

Award Number: 9009378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest J. Nordeen ernie@bcs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy W. Nordeen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The neural system controlling avian song has proved a                     
              powerful model for elucidating hormonal influence on neural                    
              organization and behavior.  Song is an androgen-dependent                      
              behavior produced predominately in males.  Sex differences in                  
              song behavior are mirrored in the anatomy of brain regions that                
              control song.  Neuron size and number, androgen binding activity,              
              and the projections of song-related brain regions are all much                 
              greater in males than in females.  The striking anatomical                     
              dimorphisms result from differences in exposure to gonadal                     
              steroids during development.  Dr. Nordeen will use sophisticated               
              anatomical techniques to examine how gonadal steroids act on                   
              developing song regions during the first few weeks after                       
              hatching.  He will determine how hormones regulate the                         
              production, migration and/or survival of neurons within these                  
              specific brain nuclei.  These experiments will provide insights                
              into the cellular mechanisms of sexual differentiation.  Possibly              
              the most exciting contribution resulting from work on this model               
              system is the recognition of the plasticity of the brain during                
              development and in adulthood.  A major outcome of these studies                
              will be to increase our understanding of those mechanisms that                 
              permit aspects of neural plasticity and thus, may eventually                   
              prove important in developing treatments for enhancing the                     
              recovery of function in humans that have been incapacitated by                 
              accidents or strokes.
