Title       : Massively Parallel Algorithms for Nonequilibrium Gas Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9009998

Award Number: 9009998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maxine Hynson                           
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle N. Long lnl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In some flow regimes, the Navier-Stokes equations yield poor                   
              approximations to the physics of gas dynamics.  For example,                   
              plasma dynamic flows, low-density flows, flows with large                      
              Knudsen numbers, or within a few mean free paths of a surface.                 
              Basically when the flows involve thermodynamic or chemical                     
              nonequilibrium, one must often resort to the kinetic theory of                 
              gases.  The governing equation for monatomic molecules and binary              
              collisions is the Boltzmann equation.  The Boltzmann equation is               
              at least an order of magnitude more difficult to solve than the                
              full Navier-Stokes equations and has eluded most attempts to                   
              numerically solve it.  When one also considers chemical (in                    
              addition to translational) nonequilibrium, the problem becomes                 
              almost completely intractable.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The most effective algorithm for solving nonequilibrium gas                    
              dynamics is the Direct Simulation Monte Carlo (DMSC) method (1).               
              However, this algorithm uses a number of phenomenological models               
              that must be developed further and carefully compared to                       
              experiment.  This research project will investigate how the DMSC               
              algorithm can be improved and mapped onto a massively parallel                 
              computer (the Connection Machine).  Since the algorithm is very                
              difficult to vectorize, it operates very inefficiently on most                 
              traditional supercomputers.  Consequently it is usually run on                 
              minicomputers for extended periods of time (up to weeks for a                  
              single problem).  However, portions of the method are highly                   
              suited to massively parallel computers due to its                              
              nearest-neighbor characteristics.  In particular, SIMD machines                
              such as the Connection nachine are highly suited to these                      
              problems.
