Title       : Conflict and Cooperation in Honey Bee Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9009325

Award Number: 9009325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28574              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Kirk Visscher visscher@mail.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In a honey bee colony, the workers are physiologically capable of              
              laying eggs that develop into males, but in colonies with a queen              
              nearly all reproduction, both males and females, is through the                
              queen.  This seemingly conflicts with the genetic interest of                  
              individual workers, who are more closely related to their own                  
              sons than to their mother's sons, and might thus gain greater                  
              evolutionary fitness by laying eggs themselves.  Dr. Visscher's                
              research will examine what interactions underlie the lack of                   
              worker reproduction, and will test the hypothesis that this                    
              colony-level cooperation in reproduction is the result of mutual               
              "policing" by sister workers.  "Policing," or bees preventing the              
              reproduction of their sisters in favor of their mother, may raise              
              the costs and lower the potential benefits of attempting personal              
              reproduction, so that the inherently conflicting interests of                  
              workers are realigned.  This "forced cooperation" in turn would                
              facilitate further evolution of cooperative behavior, enhancing                
              selection for workers to increase their inclusive fitness by                   
              increasing colony resources through cooperation, rather than                   
              manipulating colony resources toward their personal reproduction.              
                                                                                             
              Honey bees are of economic importance as producers of honey and                
              especially as pollinators of many agricultural crops.  Dr.                     
              Visscher's research will contribute to knowlege of their                       
              reproductive biology, which may prove useful in bee breeding or                
              in genetic control of honey bees with undesirable traits, such as              
              Africanized honey bees.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research also will contribute to the general theory of                    
              social behavior.  Understanding how genetic conflicts among                    
              individuals in an insect society are resolved will shed light on               
              how highly cooperative social behavior has evolved.
