Title       : The Systematic Study of Senate Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1991       
File        : a9009379

Award Number: 9009379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $491856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren E. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Kinder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Rosenstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              By comparison to our knowledge of U.S. House elections, our                    
              understanding of Senate elections and the institution itself remains           
              impoverished.  We know rather little about how voters choose their             
              Senators, how Senators represent the interests of their constituents,          
              and the kinds of campaigns that Senators and their opponents wage.  The        
              problem is not that Senate elections are of little theoretical                 
              interest:  the study of elections provides an excellent and in some            
              respects optimal entree to fundamental questions for American                  
              democratic politics.  Nor is it a case of indifference on the part of          
              the research community:  there is in fact a considerable and growing           
              interest in the study of Senate elections.  The problem, rather, is the        
              absence of appropriate data:  our comparative ignorance reflects the           
              drastic limitations of the evidence now available.                             
                                                                                             
              This project involves a study of Senate elections to repair this               
              defect, justified by the substantive and theoretical advances that the         
              study will make possible.  Advances will come in concentrated form on          
              four topics, each fundamental to understanding the contemporary                
              American political system:  (1) political representation, of interest          
              not least because, contrary to the intentions of the framers of the            
              Constitution, the contemporary Senate appears to be more responsive to         
              popular sentiment than the House; (2) the "simple act of voting,"              
              Senate elections provide a comparative context for elaborating and             
              testing theories of voter choice that is useful in and of itself but           
              that also throws light on voter choice in other settings; (3) divided          
              government, now the norm in the American system of separated powers,           
              one that appears to menace coherent legislation and erode political            
              accountability; and (4) the nature and consequences of political               
              campaigns, Senate elections provide an opportunity to examine the              
              interplay among candidates, the political institutions governing               
              elections, and voters in a particularly powerful way, one that is              
              simply unavailable in other electoral arenas.                                  
                                                                                             
              With support from the National Science Foundation, the Principal               
              Investigator and National Election Studies Board, initiated in 1988 the        
              first phase of a three-part study of Senate elections.  The present            
              study involves a data collection of the 1990 Senate elections through          
              telephone interviews with a national sample of 3,750 members of the            
              eligible electorate.  The average length of the interviews is 35               
              minutes and will involve a randomly selected set of respondents,               
              divided among all 50 states, interviewed in the period immediately             
              following the November general elections.  Initial analyses of the 1988        
              Senate elections suggest that the study to be conducted here will have         
              the same kind of explosive impact for research on Senate elections             
              that the 1978 National Election Study has had on our understanding of          
              the House.
