Title       : Industrial Restructuring and Changing Labor Market Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9009297

Award Number: 9009297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Bluestone bluestone@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris Tilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary H. Stevenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  A debate has raged for decades over the extent to which                   
              labor market outcomes--labor force participation, unemployment, and            
              personal earnings--are constrained by the particular composition of            
              industrial structures and labor market institutions in individual              
              cities and regions.  Most economists agree that short-term unemployment        
              rates vary from one region to another depending on how the business            
              cycle affects short-term industry demand and therefore industry                
              employment levels.  There is widespread disagreement, however, as to           
              whether persistent differentials in labor force participation rates,           
              group unemployment rates, and group wage rates strictly reflect                
              differences in human capital or whether they are mediated by the               
              industrial environment of various regions.  This project will test             
              hypotheses concerning the origins of the "underclass" in urban areas,          
              and it will assess the extent to which the differential decline in             
              manufacturing industries across metropolitan areas has contributed to          
              the growth of the "underclass."  The project also will examine the             
              extent to which public policy should focus on "demand side" (economic          
              development) versus "supply side" (human capital) interventions.  The          
              investigators will conduct an empirical investigation of changing labor        
              market opportunities facing out-of-school youth.  Using both                   
              descriptive statistics and multiple regression analysis, they will             
              integrate Current Population Survey data and SMSA-specific data to             
              produce a data base for comparing a cohort of young workers in the             
              mid-1960s with one in the mid-1980s.                                           
                                                                                             
                   This project addresses an issue of national importance, and it            
              will also contribute to the resolution of demand- vs. supply-side              
              theoretical issues.  It will fill in some important gaps in our                
              understanding of what has been happening in the labor market during the        
              past 25 years.  The analysis will contribute to the solution of                
              societal problems related to the unemployment and underemployment of           
              less-educated urban residents, and it will serve as a guide to                 
              developing policies to meet human capital and employment needs.
