Title       : Reconstructive Democratic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9009743

Award Number: 9009743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38861              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Dryzek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The subject of democracy has always been of major concern to political         
              science.  Political scientists have conducted research on what                 
              democracy means, how democratic systems are organized, the content and         
              effects of different kinds of democratic institutions, the social and          
              economic preconditions of democracy, and so forth.                             
                                                                                             
              In contemporary society the basic idea of democracy is triumphant              
              throughout the world (even though democratic ideals are frequently             
              violated in practice).  It remains the case, though, that democracy            
              means very different things to different people.  This is as true for          
              political philosophers as it is for political leaders and ordinary             
              citizens.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              In this project the investigator will ascertain and compare the variety        
              of meanings that political activists, political leaders, and ordinary          
              people ascribe to the idea of democracy.  This will be done through            
              intensive examination of the beliefs of selected individuals, chosen on        
              the basis of variety in their orientation toward politics.  A research         
              procedure called "Q methodology" will be used, in which individuals            
              are asked to react to a large number of statements relating to                 
              democracy.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The results of this investigation will be used to do two things.               
              First, they will determine whether particular theories of democracy            
              (e.g., liberal democracy, participatory democracy) find support or             
              rejection in the way people feel.  Second, they will be used to specify        
              the variety of ways in which individuals actually do conceptualize             
              democracy.  It is quite possible that these conceptualizations will            
              arise in ways not accounted for in existing models of democracy.
