Title       : ROW/RPG:Convergence in the Evolution of Veneridae (Bivalvia)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1990    
File        : a9009189

Award Number: 9009189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ellen Harte   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Venerid bivalves are a family of clams found in the world's               
              oceans and in the fossil record.  Their shells are generalized                 
              and uniform in morphology, making it difficult to reconstruct the              
              evolutionary relationships among subfamilies and genera.  Dr.                  
              Mary Ellen Harte proposes to learn a molecular technique called                
              radioimmunoassaying that measures the amount of protein                        
              divergence between living species.  Preliminary data will                      
              establish the appropriateness of this approach for future study                
              of bivalve molluscs at this level of the taxonomic hierarchy.  If              
              successful, the classification based on molecular data will be                 
              compared to that based on morphological characters.                            
                   The results of this study will have impact in three areas.                
              Most immediately, Dr. Harte will add a new and valuable research               
              technique to the capabilities she already possesses.  Second,                  
              this exploratory project may illuminate the evolutionary                       
              relationships among a diverse and long-lived group, thereby                    
              opening up interesting research projects on their ecology,                     
              geographic distribution, and function.  Finally, the genealogy                 
              produced may reveal evolutionary affinities that do not                        
              correspond to morphological characters, indicating that different              
              branches of the group's evolutionary tree have converged on                    
              similar morphologies, presumably for functional reasons.  Such a               
              result would be of great interest to evolutionary biologists and               
              paleontologists.
