Title       : Cryopreparation and Subcellular Localization of Diffusible Substances in Plant
               Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1990     
File        : a9009467

Award Number: 9009467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Klomparens kklompar@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Heckman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Irvin E. Widders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Knowledge of the localization of subcellular, diffusible                       
              substances at the electron microscope level is very important for              
              understanding of cellular physiology.  The technical approaches                
              required to obtain this information, have thus far been applied                
              chiefly to animal cell systems.  The lack of such studies of                   
              plant tissues is due primarily to difficulties in specimen                     
              preparation related to the presence in plant cells and tissues of              
              features such as cell walls, intercellular air spaces, and large               
              vacuoles.  For microanalysis it is critical that subcellular                   
              elements of interest not be altered in any way (addition,                      
              subtraction, movement, masking) by the specimen preparation                    
              procedures.  Thus, a substantial investment of time and effort is              
              required to develop the necessary technology for application to                
              plant systems.  The proposed research will adapt existing animal               
              cell methods and, as necessary, develop additional techniques for              
              the cryofixation, ultrathin sectioning, and analysis of frozen-                
              hydrated plant specimens.                                                      
                                                                                             
              If successful, the development of these techniques will permit                 
              analysis of elemental composition and localization of elements of              
              physiological importance in plant cells.  This fundamental                     
              information will be of great importance to the understanding of                
              plant cell biology.
