Title       : Collaborative Research: A New Generation, User-Friendly Time Scale for the
               Cretaceous Period
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0318584

Award Number: 0318584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Bralower bralower@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	To attempt to constrain the future effects of global warming, geologists are
              increasingly focussing studies on periods of warm climate in the rock record. 
              One of most representative intervals of such warm, "greenhouse" climate
              occurred in the Cretaceous Period from 140 to 65 million years before present. 
               Recent investigations of Cretaceous climate have shown rapid swings that seem
              to have occurred over millennia or less.  These changes had dramatic effects on
              evolution.   One of the major problems facing geologists in constraining the
              exact environmental effects of these warming events is that they took place
              over periods an order of magnitude shorter than that resolvable using
              traditional techniques to date rocks.  Thus we cannot determine the rates of
              important processes such as evolution nor can we constrain the fluxes of
              materials such as CO2 between reservoirs.  
	This collaborative,
              multidisciplinary project involving the University of North Carolina at Chapel
              Hill, Brown University and consulting scientists at other universities seeks to
              improve the precision and accuracy of the Cretaceous time scale by: (1)
              compiling time scales based on the fossil record (biostratigraphy) of
              microscopic marine organisms (foraminifera and nannoplankton) with higher
              resolution than previously attainable; (2) refining the calibration between
              time scales based on biostratigraphy, reversals in the Earth's geomagnetic
              polarity, and fluctuations in the Earth's orbit that are all recorded in rocks,
              (3) improving the correlation between biostratigraphy and recently acquired
              radiometric age dates; (4) calibrating large portions of the Cretaceous time
              scale to elapsed time using the orbital time scale, and (5) correlating and
              scaling the different stratigraphic elements in a logical fashion.
	We also
              propose to publish this time scale and associated data in a user-friendly
              format so that all geologists can estimate ages of samples with the minimum of
              error.  To do this we will make the time scale available to the geologic
              community on the world wide web as downloadable Excel files.  Combined with the
              biostratigraphic work that will be conducted in well-known rock exposures from
              the deep sea and land areas, these Excel files will include macros that
              calculate the ages of samples from their depths.  Thus all a geochemist, for
              example, needs to do to plot data is to download the file and input the depth
              of samples.  All of our data will also be archived on the web providing a ready
              means of future revision.
	 The new generation time scale proposed will
              provide improved precision and resolution that will enable geologists to study
              abrupt changes in the Cretaceous Earth.  Moreover, the mode of communication of
              the time scale will improve accuracy in diverse geologic applications.


