Title       : International Funding, Local Non-Governmental Organizations, and Electoral
               Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0318725

Award Number: 0318725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39895              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Brown dsbrown@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The growth of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) has been explosive over the
              last few decades.  A conservative estimate of international NGOs (groups with
              operations in more than one country) puts the number at 29,000.  The growth of
              local groups is even more pronounced.  The World Watch institute estimates that
              there are two million NGOs in the United States, 70% of which are less than 30
              years old.  In a short four-year period (1990-94), the percentage of European
              Union relief aid channeled through NGOs grew from 47% to 67%.  NGOs now
              disburse more money than the World Bank.  NGOs are involved in a quiet
              revolution:  a revolution that holds important implications for the development
              of civil society and social capital.  Perhaps their most important contribution
              lies in the alternatives that they provide in terms of goods, services, and
              civic engagement.  Despite their growth and importance, we know very little
              about their impact on domestic politics.
	Theories of NGOs, their
              international connections, and their impact on politics can be categorized into
              three perspectives:  liberal, neo-liberal, and Marxist.  Liberals argue that
              the flow of international resources to local NGOs provides the means necessary
              for citizens to overcome or bypass weak and ineffective political institutions
              that fail to provide public goods and services.  With external funding,
              previously excluded segments of society can increase their political influence.
               Neo-liberals see NGOs as efficient providers of goods and services.  They
              argue that NGOs and their foreign benefactors are politically neutral; they
              merely take on responsibilities previously held by a state unable to provide
              the goods and services efficiently.  Marxists argue that resources from abroad
              corrupt local NGOs.  Once local NGOs come to depend more on resources from
              abroad than on achieving political victory, they quickly lose sight of their
              original goals, eventually demobilizing their membership.
	We propose the
              first quantitatively oriented empirical study of NGOs, foreign funding, and
              their impact on politics.  Specifically, we estimate the impact of NGO access
              to foreign funding on voting behavior.  Our proposal requests funds to collect
              financial data and electoral data, and to conduct archival research.  We target
              a natural experiment provided by two massive World Bank projects in two
              Brazilian states:  Rondonia and Mato Grosso.  The two Brazilian states are
              remote and sparsely populated.  Consequently, the two World Bank projects
              represent the vast majority of foreign resources, allowing us to trace
              accurately the distribution of external funds.  There is an additional
              dimension to the experiment:  each project disburses funds to local NGOs as
              well as to the two state governments.  Because resources in each project are
              allocated to government agencies and NGOs, we can test whether the two methods
              of implementation affected electoral outcomes differently.  In addition to
              collecting electoral and financial data, we conduct archival research to
              determine the degree to which each NGO is politicized.  Every NGO that receives
              money is required to submit a brief history and statement of purpose.  From
              that description we can obtain important information on how closely the NGO is
              tied to politics.  By interacting the allocation of funds with the degree of
              politicization, we can distinguish among several hypotheses derived from the
              theoretical literature.  The proposed study is designed not only to determine
              is an empirical connection exists among foreign donors, NGOs, and politics, but
              also to explain why.      

