Title       : SGER: Precision Fabrication of Multi-Component, Multi-Functional Catalytic
               Membranes Using Photolithography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0318712

Award Number: 0318712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64433              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Stagg-Williams smwilliams@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual Merit:

Membrane reactors combine reaction and separation in the
              same unit and shift the equilibrium and increase yield by removing a product as
              it is formed.  Selective oxygen permeable membranes may be used as selective
              catalytic reactors for example to make syngas commercially.  The PI plans to
              use photolithographic techniques to fabricate multi-functional catalytic
              membranes consisting of assembled catalyst clusters on a functioning selective
              oxygen permeable membrane.  The use of photolithography should result in a
              highly reproducible fabrication process that will reduce the intra-batch and
              inter-batch variability that is inherent in current catalytic manufacturing
              techniques.  The fabrication process will reduce membrane fabrication cost by
              producing an automated manufacturing process similar to the wafer fabrication
              technology employed in the semiconductor industry.  The enhancement effects on
              the oxygen flux through the membrane will provide the technology necessary for
              selective oxygen permeable membranes to become industrially attractive.  The
              technique could also influence the study of model catalysts by fabricating
              multi-component, multi-functional heterogeneous catalysts that can be tested
              and characterized to gain fundamental information about the functionality of
              each catalyst component.  In addition, the successful completion of the project
              should result in a membrane reactor that can be studied and modeled at bench
              scale and then scaled-up by making larger membrane wafers or stacks of parallel
              reactors.

Fundamental information about cluster size, uniformity, and
              membrane stability during processing will be obtained, as well as an
              understanding of the reaction mechanism, the role of each component, and the
              direct effect of the catalyst on the oxygen transport through the membrane. 
              The membranes will be characterized using Field Emission Scanning Electron
              Microscopy and Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis.  The oxygen permeation and the
              stability of the membranes will be tested using the partial oxidation of
              methane monitored with an online gas chromatograph and mass
              spectrometer.


Broad Impact:

The potential advances achievable using
              selective oxygen permeable membranes could make them a viable technology for
              applications such as hydrogen production for fuel cells (energy and
              environmental impact), oxygen sensors (homeland security), filtration of
              hazardous components from an oxygen stream (homeland security), and oxygen
              generation systems.

