Title       : The North-American Lectures in Thermodynamics, Interfacial Science and Materials
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0318806

Award Number: 0318806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan J. De Pablo depablo@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              De Pablo, Juan J.
U of Wisconsin - Madison

"The North American Lectures in
              Thermodynamics, Interfacial Science and Materials Design"

A program of
              lectures will continue at universities and research institutions whose goal has
              been that of disseminating recent advances in the area of molecular
              thermodynamics 
and complex-fluid behavior, and that of fostering
              collaborations and exchanges between the US and  Mexico.  The speakers
              represent a broad spectrum of current research activities and new directions
              being pursued at US institutions. While in Mexico, the speakers are hosted by
              scientists and engineers from the National Autonomous University of Mexico
              (UNAM), the Metropolitan University (UAM), the Polytechnic Institute (IPN), and
              the Mexican Petroleum Institute (IMP). The net result of this project will
              continue to be an increased level of interaction and collaboration between US
              scientists and engineers, their Mexican counterparts, and Mexican students. 

              
Broader Impacts: 

In spite of the close proximity between the US and
              Mexico, scientific exchanges between these two countries has been very limited,
              particularly in the field of chemical and materials engineering. The proposed
              lecture series is designed to make Mexican schools of chemical engineering and
              related research institutes a common destination for the North American
              chemical engineering "lecture circuit".  Large numbers of students in Mexico
              will be routinely exposed to state-of-the-art chemical engineering developments
              and outstanding US lecturers. Mexican researchers will have an opportunity to
              meet many of the scientists whose work they read about and whose texts they
              lecture from.  Industry affiliated engineers will be exposed to advanced
              technology. This continued exchange of information will undoubtedly result in
              close collaborations between Mexico and the US, research partnerships with
              academic institutions, and commercial partnerships with Mexican industries.  It
              will also result in a greater willingness of Mexican scientists to exchange
              knowledge and students with their US counterparts. This program marks the
              beginning of what could become a research and cultural partnership comparable
              to that adopted with great success by European countries within the framework
              of the European Union.

ENG/CTS Interfacial, Transport and Thermodynamics
              Program and MPS/DMR Office of Special Programs jointly support this project.

