Title       : Design and Acquisition of a New Generation Research Ice Breaker.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0318149

Award Number: 0318149
Award Instr.: Contract Interagency Agreement               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Sutherland                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : January 15,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Voelker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dpt of Trans-Maritime Adm
	      
	      Washington, DC  20590    /   -

NSF Program : 5140      OPERATIONS SUPPORT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0318149
Voelker
Under this agreement the U.S. Maritime Administration (MARAD)
              will provide technical support services for a feasibility design study of a new
              generation icebreaking research vessel capable of operation in the ice-covered
              waters and open oceans of Antarctica.  The effort will take into consideration
              the design and operational experience gained by existing U.S. and foreign
              vessels engaged in polar research. 

An initial set of science and
              operational requirements currently exist, and they need to be translated into
              vessel design criteria.  Because of the many features desired in the vessel, a
              number of special studies will have to be performed to properly understand the
              full implications of certain requirements on the vessel design and cost. 
              Current science and operational requirements include, among others, the need to
              conduct acoustic profiling and bottom mapping during icebreaking, the towing of
              nets and instruments from the stern during icebreaking and the ability to
              conduct AUV/ROV operations and geotechnical drilling from a moon pool.  In
              addition to these requirements, the vessel should be acoustically quiet, have
              reduced air emissions from diesel engines and incinerator operations, have
              double hull protection, as well as enhanced icebreaking capabilities.    
              

The feasibility design shall incorporate applicable U.S. and international
              regulations, including classification society rules that govern the design and
              construction of vessels for Antarctic operations.  A preliminary cost estimate
              will also be developed.  Deliverables include copies of reports or special
              studies that are to be conducted, vessel plans and characteristics and a design
              history notebook. 

This will be a multi-year effort.  Program recommends
              funding in the amount of $150,000 for FY03.


