Title       : Workshop on Remote Monitoring and Predictive Maintenance of Machine Tool
               Systems- Achieving Near-Zero Downtime Performance; Ann Arbor, Michigan; April
               29, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0318730

Award Number: 0318730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Muammer Koc mkoc@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jun Ni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for a workshop on remote monitoring and maintenance
              of machine tool systems.  Invitees will include machine tool builders, control
              suppliers, users, academicians and representatives of several government
              agencies.  They will discuss the emerging needs and barriers to progress, and
              make recommendations on needed capabilities of manufacturing equipment to
              maintain processing consistency, improved techniques to monitor, diagnose and
              self-adjustment, integration of compensation and diagnostic features into
              legacy machine tools, health monitoring of the machine tool systems, and
              capabilities for prediction of component failures.  Major needs in metrology,
              standards, control systems, monitoring systems and sensors will be outlined and
              reported as a result of the workshop.  

The benefits of this workshop will
              be a roadmap for the machine tool community on strategies to be taken during
              following years,   a launch platform for comprehensive research and development
              programs oriented toward bringing solutions to measure performance, and improve
              the accuracy and reliability of machine tools.  United States machine tool
              builders, users and customers in particular, and manufacturing industry at
              large, will benefit from the results of this workshop by learning more about
              the hidden and vital effects of unexpected downtime, countermeasures including
              remote monitoring, predictive technologies and intelligent maintenance
              practices.  Young engineers as well as students will have an opportunity to
              face the real challenges of the manufacturing industry at the early stages of
              their career for their professional preparation.
