Title       : Identity and Characterization of Genes Fundamental in Speciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0318637

Award Number: 0318637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60771              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Palumbi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1171,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genomic technology makes it possible to understand the role of many different
              genes in the process of species formation. By taking advantage of genome-wide
              research programs on model organisms, the investigators can conduct targeted
              studies on additional species, thereby discovering the genetic footprints of
              key evolutionary processes. They will use emerging genomic data on sea urchins
              to elucidate patterns and processes of molecular evolution acting during rapid
              species formation. They will target genes involved in reproductive success by
              1) sequencing cDNA libraries from testes of the tropic urchin Echinometra
              oblonga, and comparing to the related species Strongylocentrotus purpuratus; 2)
              comparing proteins from the morphologically divergent sperm of two E. oblonga
              sub-species: and 3) screen a genomic library from S. purpuratus to find and
              sequence the chromosomal region surrounding the bindin gene, known to be
              central to reproductive isolation.

The power of genomics is the discovery of
              many genes. The power of the comparative method is the elucidation of gene
              function and evolution through well-chosen examples of divergent species. This
              study applies both approaches to understanding the genes involved in
              reproductive success in a system in which fertilization is extremely well
              understood. The combination of classic knowledge about sea urchin
              fertilization, powerful new evolutionary models, and the burgeoning of genomics
              will provide rapid advances in functional and evolutionary biology. 

