Title       : L-Functions and Automorphic Forms Conference, May 16 - 19, 2002, The Johns
               Hopkins University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0206637

Award Number: 0206637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Zelditch zelditch@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Shalika  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Freydoon Shahidi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dinakar Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zeta and L-functions provide an extremely powerful method for studying difficult
              and fundamental problems in Number theory. Moreover, analogous functions are
              propping up in other parts of Mathematics as well as in
Physics, for example
              to provide regularizations of seemingly divergent data.
The dynamic field of
              Automorphic Forms is an excellent source of important zeta functions, and in
              fact a far-reaching conjecture of Langlands says that all zeta functions
              admitting an Euler product are modular, i.e., associated to automorphic forms
              on GL(n). This conference will review and examine the positive results and
              techniques which have come about in the past few years, with a special eye
              towards the L-function methods leading to various instances of transfer of
              automorphic forms from one group to another.

This award partially supports a
              conference in number theory.  Number theory is that branch of mathematics that
              studies properties of numbers, such as the distribution of prime numbers.  This
              particular conference focuses on certain types of continuous functions, called
              automorphic functions, that encode deep symmetries which occur in nature,
              analogous to waveforms on a small pond.  The discrete tones which occur have
              interesting number theoretic meanings.  Instead of starting with the functions
              and looking for their discrete tones, mathematicians and physicists can start
              with discrete collections of numbers and from which they construct continuous
              functions.  Then the central problem is to know if these functions admit hidden
              symmetries.  When they do, then still more special properties must be present
              as well.  Exploiting this kind of information is a pressing endeavor and there
              are many gold mines yet to be discovered.
