Title       : Milwaukee Public Museum "Science Explorations" After School Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0206007

Award Number: 0206007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosalina V. Hairston                    
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259495             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Borkin sb@mpm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Niki Espy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen M. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Carl Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia J. Coorough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee Public Museum
	      800 West Wells Street
	      Milwaukee, WI  53233    /   -

NSF Program : 1537      ENRICHMENT COURSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Milwaukee Public Museum will provide underrepresented,
              economically-disadvantaged, minority, urban girls in grades 6 to 8 an
              opportunity to participate in hands-on science learning activities and
              mentoring by scientists in botany, geology, zoology and biodiversity studies. 
              The participants will have the opportunity to learn directly from the
              scientists, join them at field studies, conduct mini-research under their
              guidance and find out what inspired their career choices.  In addition to the
              expertise of the scientists, "Science Explorations" program will utilize the
              exhibits, collections, live animals, scientific laboratories and
              computer/distance learning laboratory during a series of 12-week after school
              sessions in the fall and spring semesters.  A total of 141 girls will receive
              96 hours of instruction over three years.  "Science Explorations" activities
              will promote learning of biological and geological forces that have formed the
              present natural environment with a focus on the local area where the
              participants reside.  Parental involvement in the "Families and Friends" event
              and a complimentary museum and Clue Crew membership will sustain, support and
              encourage future visits to the museum.  Participants' change in science
              knowledge and attitudes, performance in science subjects, career planning and
              support system to pursue interest in science will be monitored as part of the
              project evaluation.  The evaluation design could serve as a model for studying
              informal science learning in a museum setting.
