Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution of Outcrossing and Sex Ratio in Caenorhabditis
               elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0206750

Award Number: 0206750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9220               (Estimated)
Investigator: Leticia Aviles laviles@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
This research aims to impart an evolutionary and ecological perspective
              on
the study of a model organism, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.  In
              this
nematode, hermaphrodites--individuals with male/female reproductive
              organs--may
reproduce alone or via fertilization from males. This research
              seeks to elucidate
the role of males in this species and to explore general
              features involved
in the evolution of outcrossing. In particular: what
              proximate and ultimate
forces influence the ability of males to persist, and
              at what frequencies?
 These issues will be addressed by (1) using molecular
              methods to determine
the frequency of males in large lab and natural
              populations, and (2) performing
lab selection experiments to test hypotheses
              for the maintenance of outcrossing.

This work will provide one of the first
              evolutionary ecological perspectives
for C. elegans. This species has been
              subject to intensive study from genetics
(the first animal genome sequenced)
              and developmental biology (all cell fates
are mapped between zygote and
              adult), but disproportionately little information
is available regarding its
              ecology and the processes underlying the evolution
of its unusual breeding
              system. This research will integrate multiple complementary
approaches to
              characterize a more resonant description of ecology and evolution
in this
              model organism, and bear on general issues in the study of evolution
relating
              to the evolution and maintenance of outcrossing.

