Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics, Floral Evolution, and
               Developmental Genetics in Basal Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0206495

Award Number: 0206495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4413               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Soltis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Douglas Soltis of University of Florida and
              Mr.
Michael Zanis of Washington State University to investigate the genes
              governing flower
development in "primitive" flowering plants. Much is known
              about the genetics of
flower development in the higher flowering plants,
              Arabidopsis (thale cress) and
Antirrhinum (snapdragon). In contrast, little is
              known about the genetics of flower
development in primitive flowering plants.
              Dr. Soltis and Mr. Zanis are focusing on
isolating and characterizing MADS-box
              genes, a family of development regulatory genes,
from two primitive flowering
              plants, Nuphar (a member of the waterlily family) and
Illicium (a member of
              the star anise family). They have developed a method for
extracting RNA from
              Nuphar and Illicium flowers, and are using degenerate polymerase
chain raction
              (PCR) to amplify and obtain DNA sequences of MADS-box genes. The
relationships
              of the MADS-box genes isolated from Nuphar and Illicium are compared
              to
MADS-box genes isolated from other flowering plants. Lastly, using RT-PCR
              Dr. Soltis
and Mr. Zanis are characterizing the floral tissues in which the
              MADS-box genes are
expressed.
Understanding the genes involved in flower
              development in primitive flowering
plants, such as Nuphar and Illicium, is
              critical because of the insights they may provide
into the early angiosperm
              flower. Moreover, elucidating the genetics of floral
development in these key
              flowering plants not only will help to answer questions
regarding the origin
              and diversification of the flower, but will also provide the
opportunity to
              link what is known about model flowering plant systems, such as
Antirrhinum
              and Arabidopsis, with other flowering plants, providing a more
comprehensive
              picture of floral development.
