Title       : RUI: Polyphasic Characterization and Phylogenetic Classification of the
               Problematic Form-Genus Leptolyngbya (Cyanobacteria)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0206360

Award Number: 0206360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Johansen johansen@jcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : John Carroll University
	      20700 North Park Blvd
	      Cleveland, OH  441184581    216/397-4284

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jeffrey R. Johansen of John Carroll University
              to study a problematic genus of blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) called
              Leptolyngbya.  This genus is difficult to understand because it has very few
              morphological characters, but occurs in a wide variety of habitat types. 
              Morphologically similar forms have been found to be actually very different in
              terms of their 16S rRNA gene sequence.  Dr. Johansen will use a polyphasic
              approach to characterize over 60 strains of this microbe from collections all
              over the world, including an extensive collection of desert soil forms isolated
              as part of a past NSF-supported project.  Polyphasic characterization means
              that morphological, genetic, ecological, and physiological data will be
              collected on these strains, so that the genus can be revised.  Preliminary
              evidence indicates that there are many new species in the genus, and probably
              even groups of species that merit creation of new genera.  

Unlike all other
              cyanobacterial taxonomic studies and most bacteriological systematic studies,
              this project will test the applicability of three modern species concepts for
              asexual species.  Further precedents will be set in designating a suite of new
              kinds of type materials for new taxa.  Phylogenetic analyses, which determine
              evolutionary relationships of taxa, will be run in ways unique to bacteria and
              uncommon in other groups.  This work will help us to characterize biodiversity
              in the world.  It may serve as an example for others wishing to use modern
              systematic approaches to describe new cyanobacterial species.  Excellent
              systematics and taxonomy are necessary for development of the cyanobacteria for
              biotechnological, pharmacological, and reclamation purposes.

