Title       : The Dark Matter Content of Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0206031

Award Number: 0206031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul Jimenez raulj@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Merritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206031
Jimenez 

The field of Cosmology has had unprecedented
              development in the last 80 years. We now have an extremely successful and
              simple model: the universe was created during the Big Bang, expanded in an
              inflationary phase, and the galaxies were formed via gravitational
              instabilities from tiny initial quantum fluctuations. Furthermore, we now know
              that the universe is made up mostly of a mysterious "dark energy" (70%) with
              the remaining mass consisting of some kind of dark matter (25%) and ordinary
              matter (5%). This model has passed impressive tests at physical scales larger
              than that of galaxy clusters.  However, at galaxy scales, the current paradigm
              is not as successful. There seems to be much less dark matter at the centers of
              galaxies than is predicted by computer simulations. 

This project will study
              an important ingredient, which has been missing from these computer
              simulations: supermassive black holes and other condensed forms of matter.
              Preliminary simulations by Dr Jimenez and his collaborators have shown that
              such objects can displace a significant amount of dark matter from the centers
              of galaxies. These preliminary calculations will be extended and refined with
              the aim of testing whether the standard paradigm can be reconciled with the
              observations. In addition, this project will investigate the nature of the
              elusive dark matter particles.  This will be done by calculating the flux of
              gamma rays expected from the self-annihilation of dark matter particles at the
              galactic center.  This flux depends both on the evolutionary history of the
              galaxy, and on the precise masses of the dark matter particles.
***

