Title       : TICOLICHEN - The Costa Rican Biodiversity Inventory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0206125

Award Number: 0206125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Luecking rlucking@fieldmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5926,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lichens, colorful plant-like beings that commonly grow on rock, bark, and other
              surfaces, are perceived as individual organisms, but in fact comprise a
              symbiotic system, consisting of a fungal and an algal component. The lichen
              symbiosis is thus a particular nutritional association, just as mushrooms form
              underground root connections, called mycorrhizas, with trees, but lichens are
              much more complex in biological features. Most lichenized fungi belong to the
              Ascomycota, a large group that includes many economically important species.
              New scientific evidence shows that the lichenized life style significantly
              contributed to the evolution and diversification of Ascomycota. Some 15,000
              species are currently accepted, but comparatively little is known about
              tropical lichens, which are considered key elements in the evolution of
              lichenized Ascomycota.  TICOLICHEN is a major tropical lichen biodiversity
              inventory, forming part of the Costa Rican Sustainable Biodiversity Development
              Initiative, an international effort to unravel Costa Rica's organismic
              diversity. As a collaborative project between the Field Museum in Chicago, the
              National Institute of Biodiversity in Costa Rica, and the Botanical Museum in
              Berlin, TICOLICHEN combines well-developed local scientific infrastructure with
              international taxonomic expertise. Dr Robert Luecking has assembled a team of
              specialists, local taxonomists, and national and international students, to
              document the lichen flora of this biologically diverse country, suspected to
              comprise some 3000 species. Methods include field work to gather representative
              collections and measure ecologically relevant parameters, museum revisions of
              thousands of type specimens to clarify the names of known species and the
              relationships of the many new species to be expected, electronic databasing and
              image-based documentation, creation of publicly accessible websites, and field
              workshops to train students and local professionals in tropical lichen taxonomy
              and biology.  One final outcome, a printed lichen flora of Costa Rica for
              species description and identification, shall endeavor to match the high
              standards set by floras covering temperate regions, such as the recently
              published Lichens of North America. The results of this project will serve as a
              model for lichenological survey work in other tropical countries, help to
              develop local scientific expertise, and greatly facilitate studies of tropical
              lichens beyond taxonomy and biodiversity, such as their evolution within the
              Ascomycota, their biogeography and ecology, their functional role in tropical
              ecosystems, their use as bioindicators of tropical forest degradation, land use
              change, and conservation, and their potential medical and industrial
              applications based on their rich secondary chemistry.


