Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Neuroendocrine Mechanisms Underlying Rapid Change in
               Social Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0206677

Award Number: 0206677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9680               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Godwin John_Godwin@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying rapid change in social behavior
              (0206677)

Principal Investigator:  John Robert Godwin
Doctoral Student: 
              Katharine Anne Semsar

Both environmental and internal physiological
              influences affect the expression of sexual and aggressive behavior by animals
              including humans.  For species that live in unpredictable environments, the
              appropriateness of displaying sexual and/or aggressive behavior can change
              quickly.  A good deal of research has focused on adaptations to changes in the
              physical environment, but social environments can be equally unpredictable and
              it is therefore important that animals be able to adapt their behavior quickly
              in the face of social change as well.    
A large body of work over the past
              twenty years has documented important roles for neuropeptide hormones in
              mediating social behaviors ranging from mating and parental care to mate
              guarding and territorial defense.  Two neuropeptide hormones found to play
              especially prominent roles are arginine vasotocin (AVT) in non-mammalian
              vertebrates and the very similar arginine vasopressin found in mammals (AVP). 
              These hormones are released in the brain and act to alter neural function in
              areas known to be associated with social behavior.  While many studies have
              shown effects of these hormones on behavior in the laboratory, there are still
              relatively few studies that have examined the detailed mechanisms by which AVT
              or AVP affect sexual and aggressive behavior in the full complexity of the
              natural environment.  
This study would explore mechanisms by which AVT
              affects sexual and aggressive behavior and the social and hormonal conditions
              that determine the nature of the effects of this hormone on these behaviors. 
              The experimental model is the bluehead wrasse (Thalassoma bifasciatum), a well
              studied sex- and role-changing coral reef fish.  Bluehead wrasses exhibit
              socially controlled female-to-male sex change in which females can become
              functional males within approximately ten days of becoming socially dominant. 
              This model species has two principal advantages for the type of study proposed.
               First, the dependence of the sex change process on cues from the social
              environment makes it a very good system for understanding social influences on
              neural function and the interaction of environmental and internal hormonal cues
              in controlling behavior.  Second, because of large populations in shallow,
              protected waters and extraordinary ease of capture for marking and experimental
              manipulations, bluehead wrasses allow the mechanisms underlying neuropeptide
              actions to be studied in nature.  
Previous work by John Godwin has shown that
              AVT expression increases in the hypothalamus as females begin to exhibit male
              behavior and their ovaries become testis during sex change.  Studies by
              Katharine Semsar and John Godwin have shown that AVT can induce territorial
              aggression and courtship behavior in large males who do not hold territories
              while an AVT receptor blocker can reduce these behaviors in territory-holding
              males.  The studies outlined in this proposal would determine: i) whether AVT
              is necessary for females to become males behaviorally and whether augmenting
              AVT can accelerate this process, ii) whether the ability to respond to AVT, as
              measured by receptors for this hormone, changes during sex change, and iii)
              what the effects of a potent androgenic hormone that rises during sex change
              (11-ketotestosterone) are on the expression of AVT and its receptor in the
              brain.  
This work should improve our understanding of behavioral adaptation
              and the role of neuropeptide hormones in these processes.  These mechanisms are
              of strong basic interest, but also important more generally because of the
              societal costs of aggressive behavior.  

