Title       : On the Kaehler-Ricci Flow and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0206847

Award Number: 0206847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Huai-Dong Cao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0206847.

Abstract of the Project

This project is centered
              around the study of the Ricci flow on complete,
non-compact Kaehler manifolds
              of nonnegative holomorphic bisectional
curvature. The main goal is to seek a
              complete understanding of singular
behavior of the maximal solutions to the
              Kaehler-Ricci flow with
nonnegative curvature,  in particular the geometry,
              such as the rates of 
curvature decay and volume growth of geodesic balls, of
              complete Kaehler-Ricci solitons,
which turn out to be the models for Type II
              singularities and can be considered as a
natural extension of Calabi-Yau
              metrics on non-compact complex
manifolds. Progress on the project will lead to
              new understanding of geometry, analysis, 
and complex structure and could have
              important application to solving a
well-known conjecture in complex geometry. 
              The research will be based
on the effort of extending the dimension reduction
              method of Hamilton
for the Ricci flow in the Riemannian case to the Kaehler
              case where one
has weaker curvature assumption. 


The proposed project
              deals with singular behavior of the Kaehler-Ricci
flow, or Parabolic-Einstein
              equations, and studies uniformization type
problems for complete Kaehler
              manifolds. The Kaehler-Ricci flow is an
important type of geometric evolution
              equations, which have profound
importance and applications in science and
              geometry. Some of the examples include 
the motion of a surface by its mean
              curvature, the flow of gas in a porous mechanism,
the motion of a liquid
              crystal, the diffusion of oil in shale, the
reproduction of sparse species,
              and image sharpening. The knowledge
gained in this project would not only 
              have significant implications to
our understanding of complex geometry which
              in turn could be very useful
to the study of mathematical physics, but also
              may lead to new
understanding of singularity formations in other geometric
              evolutions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


