Title       : The Student Developer: Using 360-Degree Multisource Assessment for Student
               Learning and Professional Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0206630

Award Number: 0206630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack McGourty jm723@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janie E. Seat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey J. Wolfe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry J. Shuman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Besterfield-Sacre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A team of multidisciplinary assessment researchers from several universities is
              adapting and enhancing a proven, validated methodology for assessing and
              developing student learning outcomes via feedback solicited from multiple
              sources. The project team is enhancing the Team Developer system to allow
              students the opportunity to select any number of feedback providers in support
              of their own learning and development. This newly enhanced system supports the
              assessment of a broader set of learning outcomes based on the full EC-2000
              criteria (A-K). The resultant system, designated as the Student Developer,
              allows students to build a more comprehensive set of competencies by soliciting
              feedback from multiple sources including peers, faculty, co-op and intern
              supervisors, family members, and others. It allows students to receive periodic
              assessments of their learning and professional development from various
              perspectives -- providing a 360-degree view of how their learning and
              development is being perceived by others within the educational environment .
              In addition, the Student Developer is web-based to facilitate its use. A
              comprehensive evaluation is a major activity throughout the project's life
              cycle. A series of project metrics helps monitor performance and overall impact
              on student learning, faculty, and academic programs. Defined metrics include
              student usage and satisfaction, student improvement actions taken based on
              collected data, and input from various feedback sources. Dissemination is an
              integral activity in this project and these efforts include workshops,
              presentations, and publications in major engineering education forums.
              Additionally, John Wiley Publishers is supportive of publishing the Student
              Developer, using the same model that has been successfully applied to the Team
              Developer. For the Student Developer, the PIs are writing a similar student
              workbook to complement the system being developed through this project. The
              team plans to distribute the Student Developer application to faculty for free
              and students would have the opportunity to learn more about EC2000 related
              skills through an associated workbook published by Wiley.
