Title       : An Online Mathematics Assessment, Placement and Learning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0206801

Award Number: 0206801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry A. Johnson jerryj@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff W. Mortensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Inmaculada B. Aban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematics (21)
Mathematics placement examinations are widely used in higher
              education because adequate preparation is extremely important for student
              success in mathematics courses. However, our survey indicates that most
              placement testing falls short of its potential value for assessment and
              learning due either to the tests themselves or the way in which they are (not)
              used. In this project, we are creating a testing system accessible on the
              Internet that includes placement tests, practice exams, and online explanations
              of concepts and solutions for students who require more assistance. One of the
              main aims of this project is to improve the curriculum through assessment.
              Therefore, we also plan to use this tool to assess the effectiveness of
              selected mathematics courses by administering "exit exams." Such
              "outcomes-based" assessment is currently being encouraged by accreditation
              agencies. Our plan is to do this by linking placement exams in a given course
              to the exit exam in its prerequisite course. We are also making the system
              available to high school students and their advisors in order to assess
              readiness for college level math courses. Such "Early Placement Tests" have
              been given to high school sophomores and juniors in several states across the
              country for years. The integration of an early placement test into our system
              is simply one more piece in a comprehensive system of placement, assessment and
              learning to improve curriculum and instruction.
