Title       : Technoquest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0206403

Award Number: 0206403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1821569            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan P. Dabrowski Jan.Dabrowski@omsi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Mus of Sci & Ind
	      1945 SE Water Ave.
	      Portland, OR  972143354    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI) will design, develop, evaluate
              and install "Technoquest," a permanent 6,000 square foot interactive technology
              exhibition for families, underrepresented groups, school groups and OMSI's
              general audience.  "Technoquest" will fill OMSI's Technology Hall with a suite
              of highly interactive, exciting and engaging hands-on educational exhibits,
              computer simulations, audio and video components, text, graphics and artifacts.
               The exhibition hall will be divided into five thematic areas: industrial
              technology (robotics), medical technology, transportation technology, computer
              technology and communications technology.  Other experiences will include a
              quick-change area for rapidly exhibiting emerging technologies and a Technology
              Lab where activities conveying a deeper understanding of the general principles
              of technology will be presented.  Ancillary educational materials will be
              disseminated to the general public and to educators via print, the exhibition
              website, teacher workshops and professional development workshops for informal
              science educators.   Content of the exhibition and ancillary materials will
              focus on general educational principles established by the International
              Technology Education Association (ITEA) that emphasize the processes common to
              all forms of technology and that align with state and national science
              standards.  Principal concepts include The Nature of Technology, Technology and
              Society, Design, Abilities in a Technological World, and The Designed World. 
              These principles will be reinforced throughout the exhibition.  Each thematic
              area will highlight all five key principles of technology as defined by the
              ITEA.
