Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Comparative Morphology of American and Australian
               Gastrotricha: the Muscular System as a Source of Taxonomic and Phylogenetic
               Characters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0206517

Award Number: 0206517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6513               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianne K. Litvaitis m.litvaitis@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Marianne Litvaitis and Mr. Richard Hochberg of
              the University of New Hampshire to conduct the first comparative anatomical
              analysis of  gastrotrichs from Australia and North America. Gastrotrichs are a
              poorly known group of microscopic worms found throughout the world's oceans.
              Most knowledge of gastrotrich diversity is limited to species from the Northern
              Hemisphere, and much of this is exclusive to Europe. Anatomical knowledge of
              gastrotrichs from the United States and Australia remains in its infancy.
              Consequently, relationships between species from both continents are unknown.
              The principle objectives of this research are (1) to describe several new
              Australian gastrotrichs, (2) use characteristics of the body-wall and muscular
              system to determine relationships between Australian and American species, and
              (3) to place this information in an evolutionary context. Specimens will be
              analyzed using a combination of high-resolution light microscopy, scanning and
              transmission electron microscopy, and fluorescence microscopy.

This research
              will highlight the use of novel characters to measure invertebrate biodiversity
              and determine evolutionary relationships among widely separated populations of
              gastrotrichs. As a study of the muscular system, it will also demonstrate how
              variation in muscle anatomy contributes to dispersal of microscopic fauna.
              Results from this research will provide much-needed taxonomic revisions of
              several new gastrotrichs and will yield insight into the biogeography and
              evolution of the Gastrotricha and the history of the Australian biota. With a
              greater anatomical knowledge of gastrotrichs, we will gain better insights into
              the ecological and evolutionary importance of this poorly known group of
              invertebrates.

