Title       : Digital Mathematics Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0206640

Award Number: 0206640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59436              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah E. Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Poland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Keith Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project a working group of stakeholders are meeting several times over a
              twelve-month period to plan a scalable digitization and digital library project
              aimed at "capturing" the intellectual capital of "Twenty Centuries of
              Mathematics". The Cornell University Library is serving as the coordinator of
              this group. Participants in this activity are considering the key issues and
              challenges and recommending strategies to inform a coordinated effort to
              perform a retrospective digitization of the literature of mathematical
              sciences. The resulting digital collection is to serve as an international
              resource for researchers, scientists, faculty, and students, providing access
              to a large body of historical materials that originally appeared in print form.
              This project facilitates cooperation and coordination among a number of
              currently uncorrelated digitization projects in mathematics that have emerged
              at separate institutions and organizations in the U.S. and several other
              countries. Coordination of these different efforts promises to promote a
              systematic approach to digital preservation of mathematical sciences materials,
              and provide users with an integrated means of accessing them.  Given the deep
              connection of this project to the needs of the research community of
              mathematical scientists, the NSF Division of Mathematical Sciences is providing
              co-funding for this project.

