Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics and Historical Biogeography of the
               Holarctic Fish Genus Cottus (Scorpaeniformes: Cottidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0206676

Award Number: 0206676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7592               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Wood WOOD2@SLU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert Wood and Mr. Andrew Kinziger of Saint
              Louis University to study the genus Cottus; a group of small benthic fishes
              with flattened heads and enlarged pectoral fins.  Cottus is comprised of
              approximately 42 total species inhabiting both freshwater and marine
              environments in North America, Japan, and Eurasia.  The genus is one of the
              most poorly studied components of the North American fish fauna.  Major
              problems preventing a more complete understanding of Cottus evolutionary
              biology include:  (1) lack of a hypothesis of relationships among members of
              the genus; (2) uncertainty concerning the exact number of species in the genus;
              and (3) questions as to whether the members of the genus form a cohesive or
              logical group.  To address these problems the investigators propose to generate
              a hypothesis of relationships among Cottus species using 2619 bases of DNA
              sequence data.

The hypothesis of relationships will provide a foundation to
              address the three major problems discussed above and allow for the evaluation
              of two interesting evolutionary questions.  First, the hypothesis can be used
              to reconstruct the evolutionary history of transitions between marine and
              freshwater environments, a fascinating evolutionary phenomenon because it
              involves modification of several physiological mechanisms that allow organisms
              to cope with extremely different environments.  Second, the phylogenetic
              hypothesis can be used to assess hypotheses responsible for the speciation and
              the distribution of members of the genus: (1) the break up of the
              supercontinent Pangea; (2) connections created by land bridges; and (3)
              dispersal between freshwater and marine environments.  Further, the
              investigators proposed work will provide the framework for future research on
              Cottus evolutionary biology and furnish important information concerning those
              Cottus species of conservation concern.

