Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Opsin Evolution in Mysid Shrimp: A Model for Spectral
               Tuning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0206537

Award Number: 0206537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Crandall keith_crandall@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Keith Crandall and Ms. Megan Porter at Brigham
              Young University to study the visual pigment gene in mysid shrimp
              (Mysidacea:Mysidae).  Visual pigments consist of an opsin protein and
              associated receptors responsible for the detection of light, making vision
              possible.  The wavelengths of light that visual pigments can detect differ
              between species, where differences in wavelength detection are due to changes
              in the opsin gene.  This provides an opportunity for organisms to 'tune' visual
              pigments to the light present in the environment.  Mysid shrimp, where species
              occur in different aquatic habitats with respect to light, are an appropriate
              model system to investigate this spectral tuning.  The goal of this research is
              to evaluate the relationship among environment, the sequences of the opsin
              gene, and the wavelengths of light mysid species from different habitats are
              capable of detecting.  This will be accomplished by constructing the
              phylogenetic relationships among the mysid species being studied, determining
              the sequence of the opsin gene found in each species, and measuring the
              wavelengths of light that each visual pigment absorbs.   
Visual pigments are
              proteins that belong to a large family of receptors that have been identified
              as critical in cellular communication systems, including the detection of
              hormones, neurotransmitters, odorants, and photons.  However, very little is
              understood about invertebrate opsins.  By elucidating the mechanisms
              controlling the tuning of visual pigments to different wavelengths in mysid
              shrimp, this study will provide a framework for testing opsin evolution in
              other organisms.  Additionally, the mysid shrimps are an important crustacean
              group ecologically, providing a large food base for many species in both
              freshwater and marine ecosystems.  Mysid species are also commonly used as
              aquatic bioindicators.  This study will be the first to construct the
              phylogenetic relationships within a large group of mysid species and will
              provide the necessary framework for future studies in ecology, toxicology, and
              evolution.


