Title       : SGER: Strategy for Systematic Identification of Targets for a Novel Splicing
               Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0206374

Award Number: 0206374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne B. Sandmeyer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Greer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on a novel splicing system thought to be common among
              eukaryotic cells but for which only a single example of a defined mRNA
              substrate has thus far been identified.  The primary goal in this work is to
              develop a systematic means for identifying additional substrates for this
              unique splicing system.  This novel splicing mechanism was first identified as
              a component step in a stress-response signaling pathway in the yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  A key step in this pathway, termed the Unfolded
              Protein Response (UPR), is regulated splicing of the mRNA encoding a
              transcriptional activator (termed Hac1p).  The result is to modulate levels of
              the Hac1p activator which, in turn, controls expression of the cognate stress
              response genes.  This splicing event is not mediated by the conventional mRNA
              splicing apparatus.  Instead, two distinct gene products, Ire1p and Trl1p, act
              as splicing endonuclease and RNA ligase, respectively, to carry out the
              splicing reaction.  Remarkably, the Ire1p is a transmembrane receptor that
              responds to changes in ligand binding by modulating its own splicing activity. 
              Thus, splicing is truly a component step in the signaling cascade that
              constitutes this stress response pathway.  Extensive evidence exists for
              conservation of UPR function among eukaryotes including the observations that
              yeast Hac1 mRNA can be accurately spliced in mammalian cells and recombinant
              human Ire1p accurately cleaves yeast Hac1 RNA.  Based on this conservation of
              function, it is hypothesized that: (1) Regulated splicing may be a component
              step in UPR signaling pathways in all eukaryotes.  Thus, Hac1 homologues may be
              found in a wide variety of eukaryotic cells. (2) This splicing system may serve
              a variety of gene regulatory functions other than the UPR response.  Thus,
              regulated splicing of a variety of mRNAs may be mediated by this system.  These
              hypotheses can be tested by the systematic identification and characterization
              of splicing substrates from a variety of organisms.  The use of Trl1p as an
              affinity ligand in a selection/amplification approach will be tested as a means
              for conducting such a systematic analysis.  The experimental goals are as
              follows. First, microarray analyses will be used as a comprehensive means for
              characterizing populations of Saccharomyces mRNAs enriched in a
              selection/amplification procedure.  Second, application of this approach to
              another organism and the utility of homologous versus heterologous Trl1 gene
              products as affinity reagents will be assessed.  Candida albicans has been
              chosen for this purpose based on the availability of appropriate genomic
              resources, its medial phylogenetic relationship to Saccharomyces, and on
              evidence for conservation of the splicing machinery in this organism.  The
              results of this exploratory research will make it possible to evaluate the
              significance of this splicing system as a fundamental stress response mechanism
              among eukaryotic cells and to assess the potential for additional gene
              regulatory functions for this novel splicing pathway. 
