Title       : Dissertation Research: Regulation of Species Diversity by Assembly History in
               Ecological Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0206598

Award Number: 0206598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Drake jdrake@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Simberloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Spatial scale poses a fundamental problem in understanding species diversity
              because
mechanisms creating variation in diversity change with scale.
              Ecological communities are
structured over time as well as patterned across
              space. Community assembly, how species join
communities over time, not only
              poses another problem, but also is responsible for observed
spatial patterns.
              It is not well known how species diversity, community assembly, and
              spatial
scale relate. This project examines three factors that may determine
              the degree to which
assembly contributes to diversity at different spatial
              scales. The number of species in the
regional species pool, the amount of
              nutrients available to communities, and the number of
disturbance types
              imposed on communities may all play important roles. Hypotheses
              addressing
these factors will be developed through computer simulations and
              tested through laboratory
experiments using bacteria, protists, and rotifers.
              These approaches, unlike most field studies,
ensure rigorous control over
              invasion sequence and environmental conditions and monitor
community dynamics
              over many generations. Overall, this project will provide an assembly-
based
              model explaining species diversity. Adding temporal dynamics of community
              assembly to
our perspective will enable ecologists to better understand how
              and when spatial scale is critical
in assessing the regulation of species
              diversity.
