Title       : Understanding Vanishing Endemism: Survey of the Invertebrates and Plants of
               Threatened Montane Habitats in Hispaniola
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0206520

Award Number: 0206520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $553014             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Rawlins rawlinsj@carnegiemuseums.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chen W. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian D. Farrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pedro Acevedo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst
	      4400 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152134080    412/622-3241

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5926,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Understanding Vanishing Endemism: Survey of the Invertebrates
and Plants of
              Threatened Montane Habitats in Hispaniola

This biological survey
              investigates insects, plants, and other organisms from mountain forests on the
              Caribbean island of Hispaniola (Dominican Republic, Haiti), including some of
              the most threatened natural habitats on earth.  A high percentage of animal and
              plant species in these habitats are endemic, found nowhere else.  Destruction
              of montane habitats is occurring at an alarming rate and many species are
              threatened with extinction, including many which provide information essential
              for understanding biological aspects of related species elsewhere in the New
              World, especially circum-Caribbean regions such as the southeastern United
              States, Mexico, Central America, and northern South America.  Plants of
              Hispaniola are the least known of any island in the Antilles.  An estimated 80%
              of invertebrate species in mountainous regions is uncollected and unknown to
              the scientific community.  Project goals are (1) to further an understanding of
              biological diversity in threatened Caribbean habitats, (2) to improve
              infrastructure in Hispaniola for research on biodiversity, (3) to rapidly
              provide recommendations for conservation of endangered Hispaniolan habitats,
              and (4) to foster creative research on diverse and ecologically significant
              groups of Caribbean animals and plants.

The principal project accomplishment
              will be a comprehensive, multi-seasonal biotic inventory of great urgency
              starting Sept. 2002, ending Aug. 2005.  Regions targeted for intensive sampling
              encompass all six fault-delimited mountain systems in Hispaniola (two in Haiti,
              four in DR).  Sampling emphasizes insects and plants from terrestrial and
              freshwater systems, especially megadiverse lineages (Lepidoptera, Coleoptera,
              Diptera, angiosperms).  More than 5,320 plants, 150,000 invertebrate specimens,
              and DNA samples of both will circulate to 170 cooperating specialists worldwide
              for identification, research, and publication on diverse Caribbean lineages. 
              The project will (1) collect, prepare, and circulate specimens for research,
              (2) discover and publish on previously unknown organisms, (3) document spatial
              and temporal occurrence of species and their associates, (4) communicate
              biological information over the World Wide Web, and (5) apply survey findings
              to urgent problems in resource management.  The findings from this project have
              significance for scientific research, including systematics, evolution,
              ecology, and conservation.  This is a multi-institutional and international
              effort based at Carnegie Museum of Natural History (Pittsburgh) with
              collaborating co-PI's from Smithsonian Institution and Harvard University,
              staff from key institutions in DR and Haiti (Jardin Botaico Nacional, Museo
              Nacional de Historia Natural, State University of Haiti), government agencies
              (Direccion General de Vida Silvestre y Biodiversidad (DR), Ministere de
              L'Environnement (Haiti)), and private foundations (Fundacion Moscoso Puello,
              Grupo Jaragua).  The project will provide the most complete biotic
              documentation of Hispaniolan habitats available anywhere, will be essential to
              preservation and management of these endangered montane habitats, and will be a
              model for future multinational, multi-institutional biotic inventories in the
              Caribbean and beyond.

