Title       : Stellar Alpha-Element and CNO Abundances in the Galactic Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0206331

Award Number: 0206331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristen Sellgren sellgren@astronomy.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Solange Ramirez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206331
Sellgren

Stellar abundances have been critical to understanding
              the formation and chemical evolution of the halo, disk, and bulge of the
              Galaxy. With the advent of infrared imaging and spectroscopy on large
              telescopes, it is now possible to explore the stellar population within 100 pc
              of the Galactic center in detail. The Galactic center contains many young,
              luminous, massive stars, which are concentrated in three separate clusters
              within the central 60 parsecs of the Galaxy. These are the Central Cluster, the
              Arches Cluster, and the Quintuplet Cluster, with respective ages for the
              youngest stars of 3-9 Myr, 1-4.5 Myr, and 3-4 Myr. The Central Cluster, located
              at the dynamical center of the Galaxy, has a striking excess of young, luminous
              stars compared to the bulge stellar population in Baade's window. These young
              stars co-exist in the Central Cluster with older stars whose ages range up to a
              few 100 Myr or more. The relatively young ages (1 - 100 Myr) of the brightest
              stars in the Galactic center support the idea that the Galaxy's central bar has
              driven disk gas into the Galactic center to fuel star formation throughout the
              Galaxy's history, continuously or in bursts of star formation. 

Previous
              work by Dr. Kristen Sellgren, at Ohio State University, on differential stellar
              abundance measurements of [Fe/H] within the Central Cluster and the Quintuplet
              Cluster have found that the distribution and mean value of stellar [Fe/H] in
              the central 60 parsec of the Galaxy is indistinguishable from the values they
              derive for stars of similar temperature and luminosity in the solar
              neighborhood. This result is surprising, because gas-phase abundance
              measurements of H II regions show a significant increase in the  alpha-elements
              O and S between the solar neighborhood and the Galactic center. One explanation
              for this is that the alpha-capture elements compared to Fe, [alpha/Fe], are
              enhanced in the Galactic center. The star formation conditions in the Galactic
              center are very different from those in the solar neighborhood, and are
              predicted to result in an initial mass function (IMF) weighted toward massive
              stars. Furthermore, models of supernova enrichment in an environment dominated
              by massive stars predict a high value of [alpha/Fe]. The current project
              directed by Dr. Sellgren will test this hypothesis by obtaining spectra to
              determine [alpha/H] in Galactic center stars for which [Fe/H] has been already
              derived from previous work. A key part of this study will be to perform a
              differential analysis of Galactic center stars compared to solar-neighborhood
              stars with a similar range in effective temperature and surface gravity. The
              observation and analysis of comparison stars in the solar neighborhood is
              critically important in Galactic center abundance studies in order to reduce
              the effects of systematic errors. The abundance analysis itself involves the
              computation of the synthetic spectrum of each star, using the spectral
              synthesis program MOOG and model atmospheres for late type giants and
              supergiants. This project expects to obtain spectra and derive CNO abundances
              of more solar neighborhood M supergiants and more Galactic Center M supergiants
              to determine whether the anomalous CNO abundances in the source IRS 7 are due
              to the unique star-forming environment in the Galactic Center compared to the
              solar neighborhood, the presence of the black hole in the Central Cluster, or
              the initial CNO abundances from which solar neighborhood and Galactic center
              stars formed. The study of alpha-elements in a sample of Galactic center stars
              will answer fundamental questions about the nature of star formation, gas
              infall and outflow, and chemical evolution in the nucleus of the Galaxy.
              
***


