Title       : Dissertation Research: Gulls as Cross-ecosystem Links in New England Coastal
               Communities.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0206609

Award Number: 0206609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8187               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon D. Witman jon_witman@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Some of the most striking examples of community change appear to be driven
              by
changes in the abundance of particular species with cascading effects on
              other members of an
ecosystem. Seabirds exert substantial effects through
              predation and by modifying abiotic
factors, thereby determining species
              richness of assemblages in both marine and terrestrial
habitats. In New
              England, gulls have increased dramatically since the early 1900s, and
              are
likely transforming coastal terrestrial and intertidal communities through
              their activities.
However, their impacts are virtually unknown. The goal of
              this research is to understand the
mechanisms by which nesting gulls impact
              plant (terrestrial herbaceous and intertidal algae)
assemblages. Gulls may
              have top-down effects on algal diversity in the intertidal through
predation
              on secondary consumers (crabs) that forage on algal grazers (littorines).
              Birds
transfer marine-derived nutrients and energy from intertidal to
              terrestrial habitats via guano,
and as a consequence they may impact
              terrestrial plant diversity from the bottom-up. I
propose a combination of
              experimental manipulations and comparative sampling methods to
investigate
              these effects. Policies in aquatic ecosystems (e.g. seabird restoration) can
              affect
both aquatic and terrestrial systems. Understanding gull impacts in
              marine and terrestrial
habitats will contribute to informed management
              practices.
