Title       : A High Dynamic Range Polarimetric Survey of Circumstellar Disks with Adaptive
               Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0206351

Award Number: 0206351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laird M. Close lclose@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Hinz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Potter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206351

PI Close

Currently, the bulk of our understanding of dust in
              circumstellar disks comes indirectly through unresolved observations (i.e.
              observations that spatially confuse light from the disk and the star) where 
              there is little or no information as to the morphological and physical
              processes that the disks are undergoing.  The high contrast between the central
              starlight and the light scattered from the disk poses a difficult technical
              challenge, and, until now, this has prevented the efficient resolved detection
              of large numbers of disks.

 The investigators will take advantage of a novel
              high-dynamic range imaging technique (Adaptive Optics aided Wollaston
              polarimetry), highly sensitive to the polarized light scattered from a disk
              (eliminating the contaminating unpolarized thermal emission from the star), 
              developed by the group, to create a database of 60 high angular resolution,
              high sensitivity polarimetric observations of circumstellar disks around young
              stars from a variety of nearby star forming regions equally sampled over the
              age range of 100,000 -100,000,000 years. This data will be expertly analyzed
              with help from the experienced and knowledgeable star formation group at the
              University of Arizona to extract physical disk parameters from the polarimetric
              data,  such as the disk inclination, scale height, radial extent, density
              estimates, and dust size distribution.  With this new wealth of information,
              questions regarding the relationship between circumstellar disks and their
              environment, for example the parent star mass, the effects of a companion star,
              and the initial conditions for planetary formation, may be answered. This
              project also includes the commissioning of a dual imaging polarimeter in the
              new University of Arizona near-infrared camera, to work in tandem with the
              adoptive optics system currently being developed for the 6.5 meter telescope on
              Mount Hopkins. 
***



