Title       : RUI: The Role of Solvent Density and Solvation on the Enol-Keto Tautomerism in
               Supercritical Fluid Solvents.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0206805

Award Number: 0206805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoonkook Park parky@tuskegee.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of the proposed project is to understand the molecular
              interaction between solute and supercritical fluid (SCFs) solvents. Both
              experimental techniques and a theoretical approach will be applied to
              investigate the role of solvent density and solvation in enol-keto tautomerism.
              

The objectives of this work are:
1) The enol-keto tautomeric equilibrium
              constant in supercritical carbon dioxide and ethane will be estimated by using
              Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy. The density of solvent will be
              adjusted by varying the temperature and pressure to investigate the effect of
              density on enol-keto tautomerism.

2) The role of solvation will also be
              investigated by comparing the tautomeric equilibrium constants in supercritical
              carbon dioxide with those in supercritical ethane. The quadrapole moment for
              carbon dioxide may lead to a chemical interaction with solutes (mono- and
              bicarbonyl compounds).

3) Theoretical tautomeric equilibrium constants in
              SCF solvent will be determined by using the lattice fluid hydrogen bonding
              model. The modeling work will reflect the interactions between solute and
              solvent in a quantitative manner. 

The significance of this proposed
              research is that it is likely to produce an expansion of the potential uses of
              SCFs as a means of reaction and as extraction media. This is based on
              increasing our understanding of the molecular interactions between solute and
              solvent, which is critical for the application of SCF solvents towards
              biotechnology, nano-particle and composite materials, remediation of waste
              materials, and the design and synthesis of multi-functional polymers.

