Title       : Research on Environmental Sustainability of Semi-Arid Coastal Areas (RESSACA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0206259

Award Number: 0206259
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew N. Ernest   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim D. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kuruvilla John  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alvaro I. Martinez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Venkatesh Uddameri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Dr. Andrew Ernest, PI, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
Texas A&M
              University-Kingsville (TAMUK) seeks NSF support for a CREST for Research on
              Environmental Sustainability of Semi-Arid Coastal Areas (RESSACA). The center
              will be organized around three core research subprojects thematically
              integrated: Environmental Systems Modeling (ESM), Environmental Informatics
              (EI), and Living Laboratories for Academics and Research (LLAR). LLAR will
              serve as the principal mechanism for transferring environmental sustainability
              research into other educational domains, both formal and informal, along the
              K-PhD continuum and to the public. The center will be located in Environmental
              Engineering, College of Engineering at TAMUK, for over a decade one of the top
              ten universities nationally in the production of Hispanic engineers at the
              baccalaureate level, graduating 72 in 2000. The department offers the only
              Ph.D. program in environmental engineering in South Texas and one of the few
              serving the 2,000 mile U.S./Mexico border. Dr. Andrew Ernest, Chair, Department
              of Environmental Engineering, and Director, South Texas Environmental
              Institute, will serve as PI. Serving predominately Hispanic South Texas and the
              border region for environmental sustainability research, RESSACA will provide,
              access for Hispanics to MS and PhD programs in environmental engineering,
              research/education integration, and research transfer to the public policy
              decision makers and stakeholders engaged in development of economic, social,
              and physical infrastructures necessitated by the dramatic growth related to
              NAFTA. Partners include Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi, Texas A&M
              International University (Laredo), University of Texas-El Paso, University of
              Texas (UT)-Pan American, and UT-Brownsville.  RESSACA will be a major research
              partner with institutions along both sides of the U.S./Mexico border on
              sustainability research to establish a more integrative and connected research
              enterprise in semi-arid coastal zones along the entire U.S./Mexico border, from
              the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific. Partnerships have been established with
              three major NSF funded initiatives with research capacities aligned with this
              objective: Science and Technology Center for Sustainable Semi-Arid Hydrology
              and Riparian Areas at the University of Arizona (Dr. Soroosh Sorooshian,
              Director); Center for Environmental Analysis of the California State
              University, Los Angeles (Dr. Carlos Robles, Director); and San Diego
              Supercomputer Center, Dr. David Stockwell, Head of The Bioinformatics And
              Biodiversity Program. Dr. Felipe Rubio Castillo, Deputy Director, Consejo
              Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACyT), National Council of Science and
              Technology Research of Mexico, has agreed to serve on the centers External
              Advisory Group to advance binational research partnerships. The research
              subprojects and strategically aligned research partnerships will enable TAMUK
              to achieve national competitiveness in sustainability research and become a top
              producer nationally of Hispanics earning the PhD in environmental engineering.
              NSF support will allow the development of a critical core infrastructure at
              TAMUK and in South Texas that will foster fundamental research and development
              for promoting the concepts of sustainability of ecological and environmental
              systems in the semi-arid coastal areas of South Texas. These border research
              issues of sustainability of systems and the related technology development and
              transfer and knowledge transfer into the intersections of technical, economic,
              and social systems are of national importance. They provide a critical context
              in which NSF funding under CREST can serve as a dynamic catalyst to advance
              both our national research capacity and capacity to address the significant
              underrepresentation of Hispanics at the PhD level in these nationally important
              sustainability disciplines.


