Title       : Development of a Simplistic Method for Processing Intermetallic Sheet Materials
               Using Cold Roll Bonding and Reaction Annealing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0206826

Award Number: 0206826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $554605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Viola L. Acoff vacoff@coe.eng.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project is aimed at developing and optimizing a new process for making
              titanium aluminide sheet materials that find application where structures are
              required to be fabricated using strong and light-weight materials that maintain
              their strengths at elevated temperatures. Intermetallic compounds such as TiAl
              are difficult process using conventional methods and require
              specialized/expensive techniques such as hot isostatic pressing with controlled
              inert atmospheres to minimize contamination. The goal of the project is to
              develop and optimize cold roll bonding process followed by reaction annealing
              of TiAl sheet samples. The study includes experimental investigation to
              determine the influence of surface preparation, rolling pressure, and annealing
              temperature on the microstructures and mechanical properties of the processed
              sheet. In addition to the tensile and hardness measurements, fracture toughness
              will be determined. Along with the experimental study, simulation of the cold
              roll bonding process will made using numerical modeling so that the effects of
              deformation on the rate of reaction during annealing can be assessed. The
              fundamental metallurgical investigations will lead to a better understanding of
              the factors controlling the microstructures and properties of materials
              processed by cold roll bonding. The funding of this research provides an
              opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students including underrepresented
              minorities to develop understanding and experience in the metallurgical and
              process areas of research.
%%%
This research develops a new processing method
              to fabricate intermetallic metals and alloys that find application in several
              technologies with high temperature applications including aerospace. It is
              anticipated that this process on a commercial scale can produce relatively
              large intermetallic sheets measuring several meters. These materials preserve
              their mechanical strength at relatively high temperatures. The proposed
              processing eliminates expensive hot isostatic pressing in inert atmospheres
              making it relatively more cost-effective.



