Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny and Evolution of Host Associations and Fighting
               Behavior in Neotropical Derelomine Weevils (Coleoptera: Curculionidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0206093

Award Number: 0206093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9880               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan N. Danforth bnd1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Bryan Danforth and Mr. Nico Franz of Cornell
              University to study the evolutionary history of derelomine flower weevils and
              their diverse interactions with palms and other related plants in the New World
              tropics. The principal objective of this research is to facilitate an
              understanding of the evolution of highly specialized behaviors in the weevils,
              including host plant use, pollination, and seed predation. It will be achieved
              by synthesizing evidence from a variety of sources in order to reconstruct the
              relationships among the major weevil groups within the association. The complex
              fighting behaviors among the males in one particular group of species will be
              filmed in the field and analyzed in the light of their previously studied
              structural adaptations for fighting.

In addition to establishing the
              necessary framework for tests of various intriguing hypotheses about the
              evolutionary history of this insect-plant interaction, the proposed research
              has several practical implications. Derelomine flower weevils are the primary
              pollinators of hundreds of palms throughout the tropics, including the African
              oil palm and many other economically important species that are cultivated for
              fiber, food, medicine, oil, and ornament. Controlled introductions of
              specialized weevil pollinators have resulted in substantial increments in crop
              production in the past. By providing the first comprehensive classification and
              illustrated identification keys for these weevil groups, the present study
              constitutes the basis for subsequent field work by any researcher interested in
              the biology of their host plants.

