Title       : Dissertation Research: Historical Biogeography of the North American Deserts: A
               Comparative Phylogeographic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0206063

Award Number: 0206063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Mendelson sapo@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Joseph Mendelson and Mr. Daniel Mulcahy at Utah
              State University to conduct a comparative phylogeographic study among three
              reptile species in western North America.  Phylogeographic studies estimate
              within-species relationships, generally based on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
              sequences.  These population-level phylogenies-branching diagrams of
              relatedness-are then overlain on the geographic distribution of the species. 
              Inferences can then be made on the origin, dispersal, and subsequent
              fragmentation of the species, along with estimates of gene flow, population
              level interactions, and genetic diversity.  As a recently developed technique
              in biogeography, phylogeographic studies tend to focus on one species at a
              time.  In this study, the authors compare individual phylogeographies among
              three widespread, distantly related reptile species (Night snake, Side-blotched
              lizard, and Desert Spiny Lizard).  These reptiles occur throughout all the
              deserts and other major biogeographic regions of western North America. 
              Phylogeographic hypotheses for each species are compared and tested for
              congruence across these biogeographic regions, with the hypothesis that the
              formation of these regions themselves influenced gene flow, genetic diversity
              and evolution within each independent group.
	Phylogeographic studies provide
              an evolutionary framework for studying life-history traits.  A wealth of
              literature exists on the comparisons of body size, and clutch sizes in the
              lizard species of this study.  Providing a phylogenetic hypothesis within these
              species allows for an evolutionary perspective of such traits.  Comparative
              phylogeographic studies on widespread-common species also provide a framework
              for assessing patterns of genetic diversity within these species.  The
              geographic range of the species in this study encompasses the entire western
              United States and northern Mexico, including virtually every National Park west
              of Colorado and south of the state of Washington.  This study will provide data
              essential for directing conservation efforts across this region.

