Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics of Cupressus and Chamaecyparis (Cupressaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0206092

Award Number: 0206092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin C. Nixon kcn2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kevin Nixon and Mr. Damon Little at Cornell
              University to study the evolutionary relationships of the genus Cupressus
              (cypress) and closely related species such as arborvitae (Thuja) and junipers
              (Juniperus). These species  are widely cultivated for their attractive
              evergreen foliage and pleasant "cedar" scent. Their wood is of some economic
              importance due to its durability and resistance to rot (used in e.g., pencils,
              cedar chests, siding, decks, and roofing shingles). Due to their narrow
              geographic distributions, one species of cypress is classified by the United
              States government as endangered and another is listed as threatened. DNA
              sequences and morphological characteristics of these species will be used to
              infer the evolutionary history and delimit the species of cypress (there is
              great controversy concerning the number of species). Other questions that will
              be investigated include the evolution specialized adaptations to extreme
              habitat types, evolution of seed dispersal mechanisms, and hybridization
              between cypress species.

The result of this research will highlight
              diagnostic characteristics of these species and provide identification keys and
              other information so specialists and non-specialists (e.g., foresters, plant
              breeders, horticulturists, ecologists, etc.) can easily identify specimens. In
              addition a complete description of all cypress species will be provided. Other
              specialists will be able to the tools developed during the course of this
              research to study evolution in other conifers.

