Title       : RUI: Broken-Symmetry States of Confined Interacting Electrons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0206681

Award Number: 0206681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Hanna hanna@diamond.boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports research and education at an undergraduate institution (RUI)
              and focuses on the novel aspects of the physics of strongly interacting
              electrons that are confined to bilayers or superlattices. A major emphasis is
              placed on mentoring undergraduate students by involving them directly in
              carrying out original research and publishing their work. 
The research is
              organized around three well-defined projects that have been chosen according to
              two criteria: (1) a project should address problems in the physics of confined
              electrons that are intrinsically interesting and novel, and (2) a project
              should make extensive use of undergraduate contributions to the research,
              primarily in carrying out computer-based physics calculations. Two of the
              projects involve calculating properties of interacting electrons in double
              quantum wells. The third project involves calculating the properties of
              broken-symmetry states in superlattices. The work proposed here includes the
              study: of partial pseudospin polarization in quantum Hall bilayers and an
              effective theory of the nT =1/3 bilayer quantum Hall state, of charge-order of
              broken-symmetry states of superlattices, and of the effects of interlayer
              correlation in bilayer hole systems.  Parts of this research will be carried
              out in collaboration with experimentalists. 
Each project has computational
              aspects that are suitable for mentored undergraduates working with the PI.
              Calculations will emphasize experimentally measurable physical properties of
              these multilayer systems.
This RUI award will have an impact on the education
              of undergraduates at Boise State; they will be exposed to problems at the
              frontiers of theoretical condensed matter physics research. Although the nature
              of the subject is technical, the PI has been successful in carrying out and
              publishing condensed-matter-physics research with undergraduate students,
              including students from groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in
              physics.
%%%
This grant supports research and education at an undergraduate
              institution (RUI) and focuses on the novel aspects of the physics of strongly
              interacting electrons that are confined to two or more closely spaced
              two-dimensional layers.  The PI will study new electronic phases in these high
              mobility semiconductor structures that are stabilized by a strong magnetic
              field applied perpendicular to the layers. A major emphasis is placed on
              mentoring and educating undergraduate students by involving them directly in
              carrying out original research and publishing their work. This RUI award will
              expose undergraduates at Boise State to areas of fundamental condensed matter
              physics that are at the forefront of current theoretical research and may shape
              future electronic device technologies. Although the nature of the subject is
              technical, the PI has been successful in carrying out and publishing
              condensed-matter-physics research with undergraduate students, including
              students from groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in
              physics.
***


