Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biomechanical and Life Historical Challenges to
               Performance in Early Juvenile Ascidians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0206026

Award Number: 0206026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10045              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. LaBarbera mlabarbe@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Michael LaBarbara and Kristin Sherrard

	Unlike land animals, many marine
              animals are fully independent from the earliest juvenile stages, a tenth of a
              millimeter long.    At this size there are unique challenges to feeding,
              growth, and survival.  Water behaves like honey and is costly to move through,
              being stepped on by a shrimp is fatal, and the food itself, such as algal
              cells, is much larger in relation to your mouth.  Little is known about how
              marine invertebrate juveniles face these challenges, although mortality rates
              are higher than at any subsequent stage, which suggests that early juvenile
              performance may be a crucial determinant of reproductive success.
	The
              researchers are investigating feeding performance, growth rates, and mortality
              in early juvenile ascidian, or sea squirts.  Sea squirts function much like
              clams, filtering water to feed on microscopic particles.  They have a variety
              of growth forms, and may be colonial, budding off small feeding units, or
              solitary, increasing greatly in size.  Initial juvenile length varies tenfold,
              and some species have adults of up to 10 cm in length, with a thousand-fold
              length change in the course of growth.  
	The researchers will compare
              suspension feeding performance between juvenile and adult sea squirts of the
              same species, and between juveniles of species with different growth patterns. 
              They will determine whether filter feeding at small size is mechanically less
              efficient than at larger size, and evaluate the extent to which performance is
              optimized at different stages in the life cycle.  Comparing feeding performance
              in six distantly related species of sea squirts will reveal whether there are
              multiple strategies to minimize the difficulties of feeding efficiencies and
              growth at small size stages.

