Title       : Dissertation Research: The Systematics and Biogeography of Menodora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0206652

Award Number: 0206652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen rjansen@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert Jansen and Mr. Timothy Chumley at the
              University of Texas at Austin to research the biogeographic and evolutionary
              history of the plant genus Menodora in the olive family. It has an unusual
              distribution in the temperate arid regions of North America, South America and
              southern Africa, and is most closely related to the economically important
              jasmines, a group strictly of the Old World. There have been relatively few
              studies of the biotic connection between Africa and North America, and most of
              these have focused on tropical rather than temperate disjunctions. The small
              number of species and lack of ecological diversity make Menodora an excellent
              system for examining questions of the geographic spread, divergence, and
              radiation of species across continental scales. In attempting to determine the
              origins and geographic history of the genus, it is also necessary to understand
              the historical relationships of its species. This is complicated by the
              possibility that morphological similarity between species may be the result of
              ecological selection rather than shared ancestry. In some cases as well,
              species boundaries are by no means clear. The goals of this study are to: 1)
              examine relationships within Menodora using morphological and DNA sequence
              data, 2) explore hypotheses of its origin and biogeography, and 3) produce a
              new classification of its species and a monograph. 

This study will add
              substantially to the body of knowledge of an economically important plant
              family, and provide a base for future work in that group. The study of
              disjunction in Menodora will provide new insights into the relationship of the
              temperate floras of the New World and Africa. These insights may serve to
              identify biogeographic patterns that are shared with larger, more diverse
              groups or groups at higher taxonomic levels that present less tractable
              problems.

