Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Historical Biogeography of the Antilles: Earth History
               and Phylogenetics of Endemic Chiropteran Taxa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0206336

Award Number: 0206336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9470               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy B. Simmons simmons@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert DeSalle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Nancy Simmons, Rob DeSalle, and Liliana Davalos
              at the American Museum of Natural History to investigate the relationship
              between earth and faunal history in the Caribbean region, focusing on bats. The
              project will generate hypotheses about the evolutionary relationships of 5
              different groups of bats, each containing at least one exclusively Antillean
              species. These evolutionary relationships will then be used to establish the
              timing and pattern of separation among bat species in the Antilles and their
              South and Central American relatives, and will also be compared with similar
              hypotheses about other terrestrial organisms. Drs. Nancy Simmons, Rob DeSalle,
              and Liliana Davalos will use standard methods for obtaining and analyzing
              morphological and molecular data from the study groups. Patterns of
              evolutionary relationships resulting from these data will be compared applying
              at least 5 different approaches. 

This project will be the first to
              explictly test longstanding assumptions about the evolution of the Caribbean
              land fauna. The knowledge generated by this project will be essential for
              future biological studies in ecology, morphology, behavior, and conservation of
              Caribbean bats. By characterizing patterns of species diversification, this
              study constitutes an essential step towards understanding the origin and
              evolution of the fauna of the Caribbean, and ensuring its conservation in
              unique and increasingly threatened Caribbean ecosystems.

