Title       : Computed Tomography and Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0206752

Award Number: 0206752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adel Faridani faridani@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves research in computed tomography, 
advanced Shannon
              sampling theory, and applications of sampling 
theory in tomography. It
              combines theoretical investigations, 
numerical analysis, and computational
              experiments with real world data. 
Computed tomography is a technique which
              produces 
images of the interiors of opaque objects. It is widely used 
in
              applications ranging from diagnostic radiology to research 
in quantum optics.
              Mathematically it requires the reconstruction 
of a certain density function
              from its line integrals. Ordinary 
tomography is not local: reconstruction at
              a point requires integrals 
over lines far from that point. For a number of
              applications it is highly 
desirable if only integrals over lines intersecting
              some  region of interest 
need to be used ("region-of-interest tomography" or
              "local tomography"). 
Shannon sampling theory plays a fundamental role in
              signal processing. 
In tomography sampling theorems are used to identify
              efficient data 
collection schemes allowing for maximum resolution in the
              reconstructed 
image, as well as for error analysis of reconstruction
              algorithms. 

The project's research in tomography involves interdisciplinary
              
collaboration and  is inspired by the question 
"What features of the
              density function can be stably recovered 
from a given collection of its line
              integrals?". Specific goals include 
the identification and analysis of
              optimal sampling schemes in 
three-dimensional tomography; the analysis of
              reconstruction algorithms 
for three-dimensional local tomography with sources
              on a curve; 
further development and  numerical analysis of high-resolution
              reconstruction 
algorithms in two dimensions, and development 
of a software
              package for region-of-interest tomography. 
The research in sampling theory is
              stimulated by applications in 
tomography and involves the development and
              application of new 
sampling theorems for non-equidistant data;
estimates for
              the aliasing error in various settings;  
and further exploration of a
              generalization of the  
sampling concept in the framework of locally compact
              abelian groups which 
provides a unified view of a number of  diverse
              applications.


