Title       : Calibrating Stellar Chromospheric Activity and the Galaxy's Dark Matter Content
               Using White Dwarf Cooling Times
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0206115

Award Number: 0206115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry D. Oswalt oswalt@luyten.astro.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew A. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206115
Oswalt  

Dr. Terry Oswalt, at the Florida Institute of
              Technology, will carry out  a spectroscopic study of wide binary star pairs
              that contain normal cool main sequence stars with distant non-interacting white
              dwarf companions.  White dwarfs are the slowly cooling  remnants  of  all 
              previous  generations  of  stars  in  the Galaxy.    The wide  binary  sample
              contains white dwarfs whose cooling ages span the entire history of the Solar
              neighborhood (~10 billion years).  Some may be members of the Galaxy's halo
              component.   Dr. Oswalt's study has two main objectives: (1) How far beyond the
               Sun's age of ~4.6  billion years does the strong correlation between
              chromospheric activity and age in lower main sequence stars extend?  What
              variables other than age (e.g. mass, metallicity) affect chromospheric
              activity?  (2) What is the space density of cool white dwarfs stars, and how
              much does it contribute to the dark matter content of the Galaxy?  What are the
              ages of the disk and/or halo derived from the white dwarf cooling times?
              

For  several  decades  it  has  been  known  that  stellar  chromospheric 
              activity  strongly 
depends upon stellar age in Solar-type stars.  Recently,
              it has been recognized that this 
relationship breaks down, or at least
              depends on additional variables, in cool M-type stars less massive than about
              one fourth that of the Sun.  However, all this prior work has been calibrated
              using  stars  in  several  nearby  clusters  whose  ages  were  estimated  from
               stellar  evolutionary models.  None are much older than the Sun.  Stellar ages
              are among the most difficult to determine fundamental properties of stars. 
              Cooling  times  for  the  white  dwarfs  in  wide  binaries,  corrected  for 
              their  progenitors'  main sequence lifetimes, provide relatively  robust
              estimates for the ages of their main sequence companions.  In the course of a
              prior investigation Dr. Oswalt has determined cooling ages for several hundred
              white dwarfs in wide binaries.   The uncertainty in age can be as small as
              10-20% in pairs older than about 3-4 billion years, when the white dwarf mass
              is known.  The recent discovery of a few halo white dwarfs has spurred intense
              interest because they are the remnants of the first generation of stars in the
              Solar neighborhood and may be a large component of the Galaxy's dark matter. 
              Wide binaries may help to resolve the current dispute over the population
              membership of the candidates found to date.  A main sequence companion provides
              a unique benchmark for the determination of the mass (via  gravitational
              redshift), kinematics (via radial velocity) and chemical abundance
              (metallicity) that cannot be obtained from the near featureless spectra of
              single white dwarfs. 
***
