Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Proximate Causes and Adaptive Significance of Individual
               Variation in the Behavior of Kangaroo Rats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0206068

Award Number: 0206068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9410               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Jenkins jenkins@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
PROXIMATE CAUSES AND ADAPTIVE SIGNIFICANCE OF INDIVIDUAL VARIATION IN THE
              BEHAVIOR OF KANGAROO RATS

Dr. Stephen H. Jenkins
Amy M.
              Barber

Comparative studies of closely related species or different
              populations of the same species have contributed greatly to our understanding
              of the evolutionary significance of various kinds of behavior. More recently,
              researchers have begun to focus on variation among individuals in the same
              population, especially individuals belonging to the same age and sex class.
              Study of this kind of variation holds as much promise for advancing
              understanding of the evolution of behavior in the future as study of
              interspecific variation and geographic variation within species has contributed
              to such understanding in the past. There are several recent reports of
              intraspecific variation in diverse behavioral traits. Some of this variation is
              organized into syndromes that are correlated with differences in hormone
              levels; these syndromes have been described as different strategies that may be
              important for how individuals interact with one another or their environment.
              However, most of this work has been done in the laboratory and so is unable to
              address how these different behaviors function under natural conditions.
This
              study of Merriam's kangaroo rats (Dipodomys merriami) builds upon the current
              evidence by using an experimental approach in the field. Corticosterone is a
              major stress hormone in kangaroo rats and other animals and is an important
              basis, or proximate mechanism, for a variety of behaviors. Levels of
              corticosterone will be altered within the natural range for kangaroo rats using
              hormone implants of corticosterone to increase levels and metyrapone implants
              to decrease the natural production of corticosterone.  These manipulations will
              be used to examine how individual differences in behavior change in response to
              changes in hormone levels. A newly developed technique for sampling hormones in
              the feces of rodents will be used to non-invasively measure differences in
              hormone profiles among individuals. The foraging behavior, spatial memory
              ability, and response of focal individuals to novel situations will be measured
              to quantify behavioral differences both before and after manipulation of
              hormone levels. In addition, the consistency of behavior will be characterized
              for focal animals. Modification of typical laboratory methods for use in the
              field will allow focal animals to remain in their natural habitat for a
              longer-term study; most importantly, the survival of individuals will be
              monitored in relation to their corticosterone levels and behavior over the
              course of the study. Survival is one key measure of the adaptive significance
              of behavior for kangaroo rats.
This study, using a population of kangaroo rats
              in the field as a model system, provides a unique opportunity to understand in
              detail how individual variation in hormones influences the survival of
              individuals through its effects on a suite of interrelated behaviors. The study
              will also provide both graduate and undergraduate training.


