Title       : Investigation of Diverse Representational Modes in the Learning of Physics and
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0206683

Award Number: 0206683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99949              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Meltzer dem@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Greenbowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to investigate the role played by diverse
              representational modes
in the learning of physics and chemistry concepts. We
              will explore the relationship between the
form of representation of complex
              concepts in physics and chemistry, and students' ability to learn
these
              concepts. We will determine the specific learning difficulties that arise as
              students struggle to
master concepts posed in different representational
              forms, and we will apply our findings
immediately to the development of
              improved curricular materials and instructional methods. We
will then assess
              the effectiveness of these new materials and methods in bringing about
              greater
student mastery of the targeted concepts.  The issues we will
              investigate include the following:
1) What subject-specific learning
              difficulties may be identified with various forms of
representation of
              particular concepts in the introductory physics and chemistry curriculum?
2)
              What generalizations may be possible regarding the relative degree of
              difficulty of various
representational modes when compared with each other, in
              learning of particular concepts?
3) Do individual students do consistently
              well or poorly with particular forms of representation,
with widely varying
              types of subject matter?
4) Are there any consistent correlations among
              students' relative performance with different
representational modes, and
              parameters such as major field, gender, age, learning style, etc.?
5) Does the
              overuse or under-use of certain types of representational
forms in standard
              instruction have any potential impact on members of
              traditionally
underrepresented groups? Test instruments, consisting of sets of
              closely matched problems presented in several different forms of
              representation, will be administered simultaneously to all students in a
              class.
Analysis of students' responses will allow us to determine whether the
              learning difficulties are
concept-related or representation-related, or both.
              We will develop and validate many of these
closely matched problem sets,
              dealing with a wide variety of basic topics in the introductory
curricula.
              These will be administered to students enrolled in both algebra-based and
              calculus-based
courses, at Iowa State University and at other institutions. We
              will also conduct and record many
clinical interviews with individual students
              in order to probe in more depth their understanding of
multiple
              representations. As we identify widespread learning difficulties related to
              representational
mode, we will develop and test curricular materials
              specifically designed to address and remedy
these obstacles to learning.

