Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Functional Significance of Elaborate Plumage Characters
               when Expressed in both Sexes: A Case Study of the Turquoise-Browed Motmot
               (Eumomota superciliosa)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0206584

Award Number: 0206584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Emlen ste1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Functional significance of elaborate plumage characters when expressed in both
              sexes: a case study of the turquoise-browed motmot (Eumomota
              superciliosa)

Stephen T. Emlen - Professor
Troy G. Murphy - Graduate
              Student



Elaborate plumage is generally found in sexually dimorphic
              species of birds and is thought to be the product of sexual selection.  When
              found in both males and females, this presents a paradox because females
              generally do not compete for access to males.  Such elaborate, monomorphic
              characters may be products of natural selection acting equally on the sexes, or
              they may be products of mutual sexual selection acting equally on the sexes. 
              The latter may occur in cases where both males and females compete for access
              to mates.

This project is designed to test the adaptive function of extreme
              avian plumage elaboration when expressed equally in each sex.  The focal
              species is the monomorphic and brilliantly plumed turquoise-browed motmot
              (Coraciiformes: Momotidae: Eumomota superciliosa) which breeds at colonial
              breeding grounds in Northern Yucatan, Mexico.  Both males and females of this
              socially monogamous species have a number of equally exaggerated plumage
              characters, most notably of which is an elongate tail that terminates in large
              oval-shaped rackets that extend far below the body of the bird. This
              investigation will address whether the elaborate racket-tipped tail functions
              as a sexual signal used in competition for mates, or if it functions in a
              utilitarian context driven by natural selection.  

Five hypotheses for the
              function of the elaborate plumage will be tested using behavioral observations
              and experimental manipulations.  Information gathered from this study will
              increase the scientific knowledge on the selective forces that maintain
              elaborate characters in monomorphic species.



