Title       : Neutron Stars, Electron Density Turbulence and Interstellar/Intergalactic Seeing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0206036

Award Number: 0206036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Cordes cordes@astro.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206036
Cordes

Dr. James Cordes of Cornell University will lead a
              multi-faceted project involving neutron stars, pulsar physics and populations,
              and probing of the interstellar and intergalactic media. The main areas of
              investigation are:  
*	Pulsar astrometry using the Very Long Baseline Array
              (VLBA), the Arecibo Telescope, and the Green Bank Telescope (GBT). The intent
              is to obtain new proper motions and parallaxes of a few dozen pulsars. The
              ultimate goal is to use such measurements to understand Galactic structure in
              electron density and magnetic field, and also to use pulsar velocities to
              constrain the physics of core collapse and attendant asymmetries that give
              pulsars `kicks.' 
*	Searches for new pulsars  in the Galactic center and
              searches for individual dispersed pulses from the nearby galaxies M33 (using
              Arecibo) and M31 (using the GBT). Detection of multiple pulsars in these
              galaxies allows probing of the intergalactic medium once contributions to
              line-of-sight measures from our Galaxy and the host galaxy are
              removed.
*	Improving Galactic electron density models and the pulsar distance
              scale is also a major
activity in this project.  Dr. Cordes will build upon an
              earlier model by using new astrometry results and multi-wavelength observations
              that allow more detailed modeling. Fluctuations in electron
density are also
              to be modeled, based on radio scattering measurements and emission measures.
              The combined model for the mean and fluctuating electron density allows
              predictions to be made for a wide range of observables, including those that
              describe interstellar scintillations and scattering. The new models will have
              particular application to interpretations of observations of gamma-ray burst
              afterglows and intra-day variable active galactic nuclear sources.
*	Through
              measurements of pulse broadening of distant pulsars, Dr. Cordes will explore
              detailed aspects of the microstructure in the electron density fluctuations.
              Evidence of `anomalous'
frequency scaling suggest that the microstructure is
              anisotropic and patchy.  
*	Analogous to interstellar scattering, propagation
              effects from the intergalactic medium and
intervening galaxies looking toward
              high redshift active galactic nuclei (AGN) are within reach of VLBI
              observations. Dr. Cordes will model possible effects and test their presence in
              observations. In particular, enhanced scattering during the epoch of
              reionization from HII region shocks may be detectable.
*	Dr. Cordes will study
              giant pulses and possibly other radio transients with both theoretical
and
              observational components. A comprehensive survey of known pulsars for giant
              pulses like
those seen from the Crab pulsar will be made. He will pursue a
              model that ties giant-pulse
emission to the outer magnetospheres of certain
              pulsars where a cyclotron resonance condition
can be satisfied and which links
              giant radio pulses to high energy emission in the X-and--ray
bands.
***



