Title       : UPCLOSE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0206080

Award Number: 0206080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen D. King                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Auntaneshia Garry garry@cositoledo.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : COSI Toledo
	      1 Discovery Way
	      Toledo, OH  436041579    419/244-2674

NSF Program : 1537      ENRICHMENT COURSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "UPCLOSE" is an after-school program designed to engage and develop the interest
              of underserved, inner city, middle school girls in the areas of science,
              engineering and technology.  Working with an early adolescent population, the
              "UPCLOSE" program recognizes the developmental needs of this group and has
              structured its curriculum to provide a holistic approach to learning.  Although
              the focus of the workshop inquiry activities is to increase knowledge and
              understanding of science, engineering and technology, the program goals include
              enhancement of self-esteem and self-confidence, development of teambuilding
              skills, refinement of communication and interpersonal skills, and enhancement
              of critical thinking skills.  Each year 26 girls in grades 7 and 8 will be
              recruited to attend the fall and summer sessions of the three-year program. 
              Fall sessions will be conducted two hours twice each week and one Saturday per
              month; summer sessions will operate five weeks.  Participants will be required
              to make a commitment to attend the program for at least two years.  Girls with
              satisfactory performance during the fall and summer sessions will be invited to
              join the Junior Discovery Leaders to assist in the summer camp.  Six
              inquiry-based workshops that incorporate science, engineering and technology
              with training on workplace skills will be used.  Professionals from the partner
              institutions and older students in the pre-engineering high school will teach
              the workshops.  Partners institutions include the University of Toledo, Bowling
              Green State University, The Family Learning Center and the Toledo Technology
              Academy.
