Title       : Dissertation Research: Nucleotide Variability at G6pd and the Signature of
               Malarial Selection in Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0206756

Award Number: 0206756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10077              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Nachman nachman@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Malaria is a major cause of illness and mortality in humans.  Every year nearly
              500 million people suffer from malaria and upward of 2 million people die from
              this tropical parasitic disease.  Some human populations that have historically
              lived in regions with high levels of malaria infections carry genetic
              resistance factors to the disease.  Among these genetic resistance factors are
              some variants (alleles) of the gene coding for glucose-6-phosphate
              dehydrogenase (G6PD).  Thus G6pd is subject to positive natural selection in
              some human populations in malarious areas.  Few examples of positive natural
              selection are recognized at the molecular level in humans and the effect of
              selection on the genome is not yet well understood.  To understand the effect
              of selection on DNA nucleotide variability and to identify a signature of
              positive natural selection at the molecular level, this research will describe
              patterns of nucleotide variability within and around the gene coding for G6PD
              in humans.  Specifically, this research will describe patterns of nucleotide
              variability within G6pd, and at ten other neighboring genes spanning over 2 Mb
              around G6pd in two distinct human populations from Africa and Iraq that bear
              independently arisen polymorphisms at G6pd that confer resistance to malaria. 
              A random sample of 50 individuals from the Luo of Kenya, and 50 Iraqi Jews will
              be used in the study to (i) characterize the signature of selection on G6pd,
              (ii) characterize variation at loci linked to G6pd, (iii) estimate the age of
              the selected alleles based on patterns of nucleotide variability, and (iv)
              compare G6pd systems in Africa and Iraq to distinguish between deterministic
              factors (e.g. natural selection) and stochastic factors (e.g. genetic drift)
              that are responsible for shaping the observed nucleotide patterns.
Patterns of
              nucleotide variability found in this study at G6pd that are due to selection by
              malaria will shed light on the evolutionary history of the association between
              Plasmodium falciparum (the primary human malaria parasite) and humans, a topic
              that is still not clearly understood.  Furthermore, the ability to recognize
              the signature of positive natural selection in general at the molecular level
              in humans will be useful to possibly identify additional human genes that are
              subject to selection by various infectious diseases and ecological factors.

