Title       : Randomness and Geometric Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0206781

Award Number: 0206781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. Stroock dws@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Balint Virag  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	For the first out of four topics, the main goal is to understand the typical
              sphere, where "sphere" here means a two-dimensional Riemannian manifold that is
              topologically a sphere, and "typical" means chosen according to a canonical
              "uniform" probability measure. The approach is to consider a limit of measures
              on discrete structures, where the concept of uniformity is meaningful. The
              co-investigator intends to construct a limiting measure for the graph metric
              induced by uniformly chosen planar graphs on n vertices. Experimental and
              heuristic evidence suggests that the limiting measure will have the structure
              of a continuum tree. For the second topic, the co-investigator intends to study
              the implications of previous work on the relationship between random walks and
              geometry on graphs in the context of Brownian motion on Riemannian manifolds.
              The third topic concerns the stochastic Loewner evolution, introduced by
              Schramm as a conjectured scaling limit for percolation and loop-erased walk.
              These and several other conjectures concerning this process have been proved
              and yet others remain open. The fourth topic is probability in groups. The
              co-investigator intends to continue to work on automorphism groups of regular
              trees, which are fundamental objects of study in the theory of p-groups.
	All
              four parts of the project involve more than one area of mathematics, increasing
              understanding between fields. The common motivation is to understand better
              fundamental mathematical objects that are often of utilitarian use. In
              particular, the second part concerns random walks on graphs, a topic which has
              been applied in the design of efficient computer algorithms. The fourth part
              concerns randomness in groups, a topic which has been used successfully in the
              telecommunications industry for encryption and error-correction.
