Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Skill Investment and Resource Acquisition
               Among the Maku-Nadeb of Northwest Amazonas, Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0206885

Award Number: 0206885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim Hill kimhill@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The human foraging niche is often interpreted as playing a central role in the
              evolution of human behavior and life history.  This study seeks to
              systematically examine the development and senescence of the strength and skill
              components of specific food production activities in a traditional Amazonian
              society.  Careful documentation of traditional lifeways is crucial for
              examining issues of human origins, especially given the rapid trend of
              acculturation of traditional societies into neighboring state-level societies. 
              This project is the commencement of a long-term research program with
              approximately 287 Maku-Nadeb living in three villages in northwest Amazonas,
              Brazil.   The objective of this research is to evaluate whether returns on high
              investments in foraging skill acquisition are an important selective force in
              the evolution of large brains, long lifespans and extended juvenile periods in
              humans.  This will be accomplished by the following: 1) decomposing
              task-specific production ability into strength and skill components; 2)
              analyzing how these components vary across the lifespan, between the sexes, and
              among individuals; 3) establishing the level of investment, and potentially the
              critical learning period, needed to obtain proficiency in important subsistence
              activities; and 4) evaluating the costs to skill investment versus the benefits
              to elevated production later in life.  

The principal study questions of
              this research are the following: What are the skill components of hunting and
              gathering activities? How do foragers invest in skill acquisition? What are the
              benefits of skill acquisition on food returns later in life? What are the
              differences in investment between males and females, and are the payoffs to
              investments different? To test hypotheses concerning if and why human evolution
              is characterized by increases in skill investment, it will be necessary to
              measure both the costs and benefits of skill investment in the economy.  The
              research will focus on patterns of resource acquisition, children's activities,
              and physical growth and performance. Proposed methods with the Maku-Nadeb are
              to weigh food returns, follow focal individuals, interview informants daily
              concerning their activities, and perform a battery of physical performance,
              skill, and production ability tests on individuals of all ages and both sexes.
              These data can facilitate cross-cultural comparisons with other foraging and/or
              tribal horticultural groups where ages, anthropometrics and resource return
              rate data are available. 

