Title       : RUI: Emission Line Studies of High-Velocity Interstellar Clouds using the WHAM
               Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0206349

Award Number: 0206349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122841             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Tufte tufte@lclark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lewis and Clark College
	      0615 S W Palatine Hill Rd
	      Portland, OR  972197879    503/244-6161

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206349
Tufte

High-Velocity Clouds (HVCs) are an important component of
              the Milky Way's interstellar medium, covering a significant fraction of the sky
              and containing considerable mass and kinetic energy.  HVCs are by definition
              peculiar; they are the material with velocities not explainable by the
              differential rotation of the galaxy.  Despite over thirty-five years of study,
              their origin and nature remain a mystery. 
 
Proposed explanations of HVCs
              span a broad range.  One picture envisions a galactic fountain. In this model,
              powerful supernova explosions in the disk of the galaxy vent hot material into
              regions high above the plane. The gas then cools, condenses into clouds, and
              then rains back down upon the disk.  Another prominent model purports that the
              HVCs are dispersed throughout the Local Group of galaxies, the remnants of its
              creation.  It appears that some of the high-velocity material was tidally torn
              from the Magallenic clouds, and now streams behind them in their orbit around
              our galaxy.  Recent evidence suggests that one major complex of high-velocity
              material has low metallicity and is accreting onto the disk from high in the
              halo.  This is especially interesting because such fresh fuel for star
              formation has long been required by models of the chemical evolution of the
              Galaxy.  Current observational efforts to distinguish between these models will
              enhance present understandings of the formation of the Milky Way galaxy and its
              subsequent chemical evolution, as well as illuminate long debated issues
              concerning the connection of processes in the disk of our Galaxy to the halo.
              
 
The vast majority of previous investigations of HVCs have used radio
              telescopes to study the 21- cm line, and thus only probe the neutral hydrogen
              present in the clouds.  Dr. Stephen Tufte, at Lewis and Clark College, will
              investigate ionized material associated with HVCs by making measurements of
              optical emission lines using the Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper (WHAM) Observatory. 
              WHAM is a Fabry-Perot based spectroscopic instrument that sits atop Kitt Peak
              in Arizona and is completely remote-operable.  The observations will take place
              from the principal investigator's laboratory on the campus of Lewis & Clark
              College, by way of the Internet.   
 
This project will measure the
              intensities of emission lines of hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, and oxygen from
              various HVCs.  The observations will provide information on the locations and
              metal abundances of HVCs, will yield new insights into the nature of compact
              HVCs, and will reveal the physical conditions present in the clouds such as
              their temperature and ionization state. The principal investigator has already
              proven WHAM to be a uniquely powerful instrument for these studies.  The new
              measurements have the ability to distinguish between the vastly different
              models that have been proposed to explain HVCs, and therefore significantly
              advance our understanding of their origin and nature.  This award is made under
              the auspices of the Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program at
              NSF.
***
 


