Title       : Conical Intersections and Nuclear Dynamics: A New Look at an Old Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0206834

Award Number: 0206834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Yarkony yarkony@jhuvms.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Yarkony of Johns Hopkins University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to study electronically nonadiabatic processes,
              in which nuclear motion is not restricted to a single Born-Oppenheimer
              potential energy surface.  The role played by conical intersections in
              nonadiabatic dynamics is a particular focus.  The formal and computational
              tools to develop a fully adiabatic picture of a spin nonconserving,
              electronically nonadiabatic process for a system with an odd number of
              electrons will be developed.  These tools will be extended to locate and
              characterize conical intersections with the spin-orbit interaction included in
              order to treat the most general situation.  For the first time, the locus of
              this type of conical intersection seam will be determined.  The reactions of
              molecular hydrogen with both ground and excited state OH and SH radicals will
              be investigated to address the effect of increasing spin-orbit coupling.  As
              well, the predissociation of electronically excited OClO, OBrO, and ultimately
              OIO will be considered.  A clearer picture of the relation between the local
              topography of a conical intersection and the outcome of the nonadiabatic event
              is expected to emerge from this research. 

Understanding molecular potential
              energy surface crossings is crucially important for describing chemical
              reactions that involve electronically excited states.  The task of describing
              this topic in quantum chemistry its extremely difficult, and likely to be
              advanced significantly in this project.  Successful outcomes will have a major
              impact on the characterization of chemical reactions initiated by light
              absorption.
