Title       : RUI: Homotopy Theory of Commutative Algebras and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0206647

Award Number: 0206647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108409             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Turner jturner@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard A. Venema  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0206647
James M. Turner

An active area of research in commutative
              algebra since the 
1950s has involved the use of homological methods to
              
characterize Noetherian rings and the homomorphisms between 
them. In the
              1960s, simplicial methods were used to enable 
homotopy theory to apply to
              commutative algebras and develop 
richer homological techniques. This project
              seeks to use 
homotopy theory to characterize (simplicial) commutative
              
algebras with a Noetherian property. Part of this effort 
will seek to
              resolve a conjecture of Quillen on the rigidity 
of the homology of
              commutative algebras and draw deeper 
connections between simplicial methods
              and methods from 
differential homological algebra. This project will also
              
study how the cohomology of algebras can serve as host 
for obstructions to
              realizing a topological space from 
given algebraic data that functions as the
              value of a 
suitable homotopy invariant of the putative space. 
Attention
              will be paid to developing methods for computing 
such
              obstructions.

Homotopy theory is a method of studying certain mathematical
              
objects and the relations between them from a global 
perspective. In the
              case of geometric objects, certain 
algebraic invariants can be assigned to
              study and distinguish 
between homotopy types. Understanding the properties of
              these 
algebraic structures and how they relate to the geometric 
objects
              they are associated to are therefore important parts 
of this theory.  This
              project seeks to further the 
understanding of the homotopy theory of
              geometric objects 
from the algebraic perspective. There are two aims to this
              
project. The first is to develop further the homotopy theory 
of algebras
              that parallels that of geometric objects. The 
second aim seeks to make use of
              the homotopy of algebras 
and their various properties to understand the
              homotopy of 
spaces.  This would involve studying the extent to which
              
algebraic structures and properties can be lifted to 
corresponding
              structures and properties for geometric objects. 

