Title       : Dissertation Research: Dynamics of Fertilization: Ecological Consequences of
               Flow on Sperm-egg Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0206775

Award Number: 0206775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8650               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Zimmer z@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dissertation Research:  Dynamics of Fertilizations:  Ecoological Consequences of
              Flow on Sperm-egg Interactions

Dr. Richard K. Zimmer & Jeffrey A.
              Riffell

For marine animals that broadcast spawn, the turbulent nature of the
              ocean environment into which the gametes are released can drastically influence
              successful fertilization. Water motion can transport and mix the gametes
              together, facilitating commingling between sperm and eggs, or it can have a
              detrimental effect by causing rapid dilution and prevention of sperm-egg
              encounters. Although flow has long been recognized as a critical factor
              influencing fertilization, at the scale of the gametes, little is known about
              the influence of sperm behavior and fluid motion on mediating gamete
              encounters. To understand the importance of gamete behavior and fluid motion on
              fertilization, controlled laboratory studies under simulated natural
              environmental conditions are necessary and vital. Using the red abalone
              (Haliotis rufescens) as the model organism for exploring fertilization
              dynamics, this study will establish the influence of gamete behavior,
              concentration, and fluid motion on sperm-egg interactions. This will be
              accomplished through three phases of this project: (i) Subtidal surveys will
              census adult abalone populations and flow measurements will be taken to
              characterize aspects of the hydrodynamic environment within typical abalone
              habitat (subtidal kelp beds), allowing us to scale our laboratory flow-tank
              experiments, (ii) laboratory flow tank experiments will examine the influence
              of turbulence (shear) and gamete concentration on fertilization, and (iii)
              sperm chemosensory-mediated behavior will be examined under simulated natural
              flow conditions. Fertilization has been implicated as an important factor
              regulating population dynamics in many animals, particularly in marine
              organisms that broadcast their sperm and eggs into the sea. Along the western
              coast of the United States, abalones are commercially valuable but ecologically
              endangered resource. By providing new information on physical and behavioral
              mechanisms mediating fertilization success, this study should have significant
              implications for managing and restoring threatened abalone populations.
