Title       : Dissertation Research: Ecological and Evolutionary Effects of Land Use Changes
               on Butterflies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0206709

Award Number: 0206709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8139               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Kendall kendall@bren.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Habitat loss and conversion are major contributors to biodiversity loss. This
              dissertation research project addresses how land use conversions may contribute
              to morphological changes in butterflies, ultimately changing dispersal
              capabilities and influencing evolutionary pathways. The objectives of the
              project are: 1) To evaluate the effectiveness of dispersal proxies for
              butterflies; 2) To determine the effects of urban growth patterns and habitat
              fragmentation on butterfly dispersal; and 3) To evaluate whether dispersal
              morphology in selected California butterfly species has changed in response to
              landscape changes.

Butterflies exhibit a range of dispersal behavior from
              sedentary to mobile. These behavior differences contribute to a species'
              success in spatially structured populations. Within a population there also
              exists a range of dispersal capabilities that are influenced by selective
              pressures from the environment. Thus, changes in the distribution of habitat
              can alter dispersal capability through selection, ultimately reflected in
              morphology. This project will use an urban growth model to analyze different
              landscape patterns using measures of connectivity for different disperser
              types. Museum specimens will be used to investigate morphological changes over
              time in six butterfly species. The results of this research will enhance our
              understanding of how land use changes and landscape patterns influence
              population processes that may lead to evolutionary changes or species
              extinctions.

