Title       : Lichens of the Ozarks: Floristics and Implications for Biodiversity Conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0206023

Award Number: 0206023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Harris bbuck@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin E. Indoe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Ladd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Lichens are organisms that are composed of a fungus and an alga, in a symbiotic
              relationship that allows both to occupy habitats that would be inhospitable to
              the separate components. They include a significant percentage of all fungi.
              Lichens are critical components of many terrestrial ecosystems yet they remain
              largely understudied. There are immense gaps in our knowledge regarding lichen
              diversity, and these gaps impede efforts to devise and implement unified
              strategies for sustainable biodiversity conservation. In North America, the
              only comprehensive regional treatments of lichens are outdated and cover areas
              in the glaciated regions of the northern United States and Canada. It has been
              estimated that 10-20% of the North American lichen biota is unknown to science
              and preliminary work indicates that in the Ozarks alone about 75 species of
              lichens seem to be previously unknown. To help remedy this, Richard Harris (New
              York Botanical Garden) and Doug Ladd (The Nature Conservancy, Missouri Chapter)
              will prepare a comprehensive treatment of the lichens of the Ozark Highlands of
              central North America, known to be a center of biological richness for diverse
              groups of plants and animals. The area is primarily within southern Missouri
              and northern Arkansas, but also includes portions of Oklahoma, Illinois, and
              Kansas. The Ozarks include the oldest continuously exposed rock in North
              America, contain the largest contiguous woodland remaining in the midcontinent,
              and are the subject of increasing conservation interest and activity. Within
              the Ozarks, many  habitats are dominated by lichens, and they have the
              potential to be effective for ecological monitoring and assessment. Building on
              initial work completed during the past 15 years, Harris and Ladd will produce a
              comprehensive, illustrated account of the Ozark lichen biodiversity. 
The
              results of the proposed work will be directly relevant to ongoing conservation
              planning and implementation, and will serve to increase the effectiveness of
              conservation efforts by multiple agencies and organizations. This would include
              updated proposals for rare and endangered lichens within Missouri and Arkansas
              for use by conservation agencies, both private and governmental. Additionally,
              two educational components will help increase the visibility of this very
              diverse, but little-studied group.  These are an educational workshop primarily
              geared toward amateurs, and a graduate student opportunity in lichenology. The
              accessibility of this knowledge on lichens will be available to both academic
              and industrial scientists. Because of the antiquity of the Ozark lichens they
              are often of special interest to academic biologists because they help resolve
              phylogenetic relationships within the lichens as a whole. Because of the large
              and diverse assemblage of chemical compounds produced by lichens, including
              those with antibiotic properties, they are of special interest to industrial
              biologists.

