Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenetically-Based Analysis of Plastid Genome
               Evolution in the Photosynthetically Variable Parasitic Flowering Plant Genus,
               Cuscuta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0206659

Award Number: 0206659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claude W. dePamphilis cwd3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Claude dePamphilis and Mr. Joel McNeal at
              Pennsylvania State University to study how different species of a group of
              parasitic plants known as dodders are related to each other and how genes that
              produce proteins necessary for photosynthesis differ between species in the
              lineage. Dodders, which are vines that possess only tiny, useless leaves and no
              roots whatsoever, attach to the stems of other plants and are dependent on
              these hosts for all of their water, inorganic nutrients, and most, if not all,
              of their carbohydrate needs.  Because of this habit, the parasites have a
              reduced need to photosynthesize for themselves.  Genes located within
              chloroplasts, the photosynthetic compartments of plant cells, are highly
              conserved across flowering plants because most of these genes are necessary for
              carbohydrate production from sunlight and atmospheric carbon dioxide.  However,
              a large degree of variation exists in these genes between different dodders,
              indicating that different species may demonstrate differing abilities to
              photosynthesize.  
By examining which genes are well conserved within
              chloroplasts of different dodder species and related non-parasitic plants, an
              understanding of which genes are most important for photosynthesis and which
              genes are more expendable will be gained.  These data will be verified further
              by comparison with other parasitic plant lineages.  Furthermore, knowledge of
              the relationships between dodder species may eventually prove to be valuable to
              the control of these parasitic weeds, many of which do serious agricultural
              damage and are federally designated noxious weeds.  The transition from being
              nutritionally independent to being parasitic has occurred numerous times within
              plants and also within many other lineages of life.  This parasitic plant group
              will serve as an excellent model to study the genetic changes that accompany
              this transition.  

