Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics and Phylogeography of Salamanders of the
               Eurycea multiplicata / Typhlotriton spelaeus Complex, using Large and Diverse
               Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0206730

Award Number: 0206730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul T. Chippindale paulc@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul Chippindale and Mr. Ronald Bonett  of the
              University of Texas at Arlington to examine phylogenetic relationships, genetic
              variation, and biogeographic and phylogeographic history of aquatic
              plethodontid salamanders of the Eurycea multiplicata/Typhlotriton spelaeus
              complex.  This group occurs only in the Interior Highlands of the south-central
              U.S. (Ouachita Mountains and Ozark Plateau), an area with high faunal diversity
              and many endemic species. Preliminary data indicate that the transforming
              surface-dwellers Eurycea m. multiplicata and E. m. griseogaster, the
              nontransforming species E. tynerensis, and the enigmatic cave-dweller
              Typhlotriton spelaeus share a recent common ancestor and have undergone a major
              radiation in the region. Numerous undescribed species appear to be present. 
              Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences, allozymes, and morphology will be used
              to reconstruct relationships, and the diverse life history strategies and
              morphologies in the group will be examined in a phylogenetic context.  In
              collaboration with the Joint Genome Institute, entire mitochondrial genomes
              will be sequenced for 19 members of the complex plus outgroups to further
              assess relationships and species diversity.
 
This work will provide an
              understanding of the factors that have shaped biodiversity and species
              distributions in the Interior Highlands, and likely will result in recognition
              of several new species.  Such an approach is fundamental for conservation of
              these salamanders and the sensitive stream and cave habitats in which they
              occur.  This research will involve tests of biogeographic hypotheses regarding
              geological and climatic events that have structured the complex, and will
              provide a framework within which to trace life-history and morphological
              change.  This represents one of the first applications of entire mitochondrial
              genome sequences to such problems, will have wide-ranging implications for
              studies of phylogeny and biodiversity, and will identify portions of the
              mitochondrial genome that are most informative at a variety of phylogenetic
              scales.

