Title       : Dissertation Research: The Roles of Edaphic Shifts and Long-Distance Dispersal
               in the Evolution of the American Desert Genus Tiquilia (Boraginaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0206440

Award Number: 0206440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10057              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen rjansen@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert Jansen and Mr. Michael Moore at the
              University of Texas to study how the differing soil tolerances of individual
              plant species have influenced plant evolution.  Plant biologists have long
              known that boundaries between different soil types often promote the evolution
              of new species.  However, they have rarely examined the importance of such
              shifts in soil tolerance on the evolutionary history of whole groups of related
              plant species.  Jansen and Moore will specifically address this larger scale
              evolutionary question by assessing the influence of shifting soil tolerances
              during the evolution of the genus Tiquilia.  The 27 species of small desert
              shrubs in Tiquilia are ideally suited for this study because they differ
              remarkably in soil preference despite occurring in the climatically similar
              deserts of North and South America.  Individual species of Tiquilia grow in one
              of three substrate regimes:  deep sand, gypsum, or both gypsum and limestone. 
              To determine the evolutionary pattern of substrate shifts in this genus, DNA
              sequences of several genes will be collected for all species of Tiquilia. 
              These sequences will be utilized to develop an evolutionary tree detailing the
              relationships among these species.  This tree will then be used as a basis to
              infer the history of soil preference in the genus.
	This project represents
              one of the first studies to assess the significance of substrate shifts in
              patterning the evolutionary history of an entire plant group.  Considering that
              soil type ranks second behind climate in determining the geographic
              distribution of plant species, it is surprising that only a handful of studies
              have addressed the relationship between evolutionary history and soil
              preference among closely related plant species.  This study therefore promises
              to advance substantially our understanding of an underappreciated and
              potentially important influence on the evolution of plant groups.

