Title       : Dissertation Research: Pteromalid Phylogeny and the Diversification of Parasitic
               Chalcid Wasps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0206696

Award Number: 0206696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Mitter cm42@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome C. Regier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Charles Mitter and Mr. Christopher Desjardins of
              the University of Maryland to study the classification and evolutionary history
              of a group of parasitoid wasps known as the pteromalids.  Pteromalids belong to
              a biologically diverse and economically important parasitoid group known as the
              chalcidoids, which include over 20,000 described species.  At present, however,
              evolutionary relationships are very poorly understood for parasitoid wasps
              generally and for pteromalids in particular.  In this study we seek to advance
              the state of parasitoid classification by using both anatomical characteristics
              and DNA sequences to reconstruct evolutionary relationships in pteromalids and
              related chalcidoids.  As previous attempts using other genes have not solved
              the problem, three nuclear genes not previously examined in these wasps, but
              potentially of great utility for wasp classification, will be studied.  In
              addition, a previously enigmatic subset of pteromalids, known as the diparines,
              will be reclassified in more detail, enabling entomologists worldwide to
              identify these wasps.

Parasitoid wasps are minute insects that prey on
              immature stages of other insects, including many pests.  They are a dominant
              feature of terrestrial biodiversity, possibly numbering several hundred
              thousand species.  They are also critical to environmentally sound agriculture,
              often providing control of agricultural pests that reduces or eliminates the
              need for insecticides.  Hundreds of millions of dollars are saved annually by
              parasitoid wasps controlling pests of crops as varied as range grass in Texas
              and cassava in Africa.  A phylogenetic classification of parasitoid wasps, in
              which species are grouped by their degree of evolutionary relatedness, will be
              essential for understanding how the great diversity of parasitoids has arisen;
              for organizing current knowledge of the varied ecology, physiology, and
              behavior of these wasps; and for allowing intelligent prediction of which
              species are the most promising biological control agents for a given pest. 
              

 

