Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Covariation of opsin proteins and coloration in a
               Caribbean goby species complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0206632

Award Number: 0206632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9955               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Hellberg mhellbe@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Michael Hellberg and Mr. Michael Taylor at
              Louisiana State University to study whether the brilliant colors displayed by
              coral reef fishes are important for mate attraction and species recognition. 
              Color perception by most vertebrate animals is conferred by proteins in the
              eyes called opsins.  Color sensitivity of opsins can be altered by genetic
              changes to the genes coding for the proteins.  The surrounding environment also
              affects color perception.  The ecologically important cleaner gobies (genus
              Elacatinus) are brightly colored fishes that remove parasites from other
              fishes. Thus, coloration in cleaner gobies may be important both for mate
              recognition and for recognition by fishes that need cleaning.  The
              investigators will determine whether changes in opsin proteins correspond with
              coloration changes of the cleaner gobies by comparing DNA sequences of opsin
              genes from two differently colored populations of a single species, and between
              two species with different colors.  Additionally, the investigators will use an
              underwater spectroradiometer to quantify the color reflectivity of the corals
              occupied by these gobies to determine whether gobies choose coral colors that
              maximize the apparent intensity of their color display to other
              fishes.

Coral reefs contain some of the greatest biodiversity on earth, and
              gobies are the largest family of marine fishes.  This study will provide
              insight into the processes that lead to such diversity.  Coloration differences
              between similar gobies can allow them to occupy different niches while
              advertising their cleaning services.  An enhanced ability to distinguish
              potential mates by coloration could help to reduce genetic exchange between
              differently colored populations, leading to the formation of new species. 
              Together, these concepts could provide clues about how environment and color
              vision interact to help generate the biodiversity observed on coral reefs.


