Title       : Skyscraper: Achievement and Impact -- A Permanent Exhibition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0206350

Award Number: 0206350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1867622            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne LaBar wlabar@lsc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Liberty Sci Center, Inc.
	      870 Bergen Avenue
	      Jersey City, NJ  073064403    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Liberty Science Center, located across the Hudson River from the former
              World Trade Center, will develop, evaluate and install an 8,000 square foot,
              five-story permanent exhibition about the architectural design and engineering,
              physics, and urban-related environmental science of skyscrapers.  The exhibit
              will use a vertical space that includes a view overlooking southern Manhatten,
              the former World Trade Center, and one of the most famous urban skylines in the
              world.  The exhibition is organized around three basic theme areas and is
              balanced between the advantages and disadvantages of skyscrapers.  Visitors
              enter the exhibit through SKYSCRAPER WORLD, an advance organizer that sets the
              stage for the exhibit and identifies possible wayfinding pathways through other
              areas.  BUILDING THE BUILDING (second and third levels) addresses principles in
              the design and construction of skyscrapers, while HABITAT AND IMPACT (fourth
              level) describes patterns of adaptation in the ecosystems created by
              skyscrapers.  An outdoor observation deck (fifth level) facing the Manhattan
              skyline and the former World Trade Center, provides the opportunity for skyline
              programming.  What is a Rooftop, Rooftop Garden, and Skyline Clock, assisted by
              binocular telescopes for observing detail, are interactive programs that use
              the skyline as a teaching tool.  Taking advantage of the dramatic skyline seen
              from the Science Center, the project will document changing public attitudes
              about skyscrapers and analyze patterns of visitor traffic and wayfinding in a
              five-story exhibition tower.  The exhibit is supported by mediated public
              programs in LSC and by experiences for school audiences, both at LSC and in
              local schools.  Although "Skyscraper" is primarily an informal learning
              experience, it has significant linkages to formal in-school programs.




