Title       : The Compositae in the Flora of North America North of Mexico (CFNA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0206645

Award Number: 0206645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore M. Barkley barkley@brit.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Botanical Rsch Instof TX
	      509 Pecan Street
	      Fort Worth, TX  761024060    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Compositae in the Flora of North America north of Mexico (CFNA) is a project
              to account for all members of the plant family Compositae (also called the
              Asteraceae) that occur outside of cultivation in North America north of Mexico.
              There are some 2,600 species distributed among 425 genera in North America
              north of Mexico, making it by far the largest family of plants in the region. 
              The CFNA incorporates the work of some 70 contributing authors, who are
              recognized as experts in their groups. Their contributions are based on their
              own field studies, plus herbarium, laboratory, and library work. The CFNA is
              associated with the Flora of North America (FNA) program, whose goal is to
              account for all of the vascular plants and the bryophytes that occur in the
              continent north of Mexico.  Curiously, no continent-wide consideration of the
              whole flora has ever been done.  The products of the CFNA are being presented
              in three volumes in a style and format compatible with the FNA.  The work is
              being published in hard copy by the Oxford University Press, but as sections
              are completed they are posted on the FNA website (www.fna.org).  A future goal
              is to make all materials available in electronic format, so that the
              information can be both easily managed and revised, as needed. The CFNA is
              managed at the Botanical Research Institute of Texas (BRIT) in Fort Worth, and
              the work is coordinated by the Compositae Editorial Committee (CompEd)
              consisting of T. Barkley at BRIT, L. Brouillet at the University of Montreal,
              and J. Strother at the Univeristy of California - Berkeley. In addition, there
              is a technical editor and assistants, plus the services of botanical artists. 
              
Members of the family Compositae are both abundant and conspicuous in North
              America, and among them are the sagebrushes, ragweeds, goldenrods, and of
              course, sunflowers.  Many members of the family are serious weeds, some are
              toxic, and some are of positive economic significance.   The family is of great
              concern to environmentalists, ecologists, agronomists, horticulturalists, weed
              scientists, and others, and ultimately to the general public. The traditional
              concepts of the family, i.e., the concepts employed in standard American and
              Canadian regional floristic works (e.g., The Jepson Manual of the Higher Plants
              of California) stem from the middle of the 19th century.  Research of the past
              quarter century has shown that these concepts require extensive revision so as
              to depict natural affinities and lineages. This is not mere ivory-towerism, for
              it has been made abundantly clear that an accurate knowledge of
              interrelationships among organisms is essential to understanding both how to
              manage our environment and what kinds of things may happen in the future. The
              products of these sophisticated studies usually circulate only among other
              botanists, but it is the goal of floristic studies such as the CFNA to
              translate these findings into works that are useful to the consumers of
              botanical information. The contributing authors are obliged to make their
              treatments reflect current understanding.  Respect is given to the 19th century
              botanists who created a useful understanding of the family, and it is hoped
              that the schemes being incorporated into the CFNA will be equally useful for
              years to come.  The treatments include keys, botanical descriptions, and
              considerations of nomenclature for all entities, plus statements of range and
              habitat, small distribution maps, and information on legal status, toxicity,
              usefulness, weediness, etc.  About a quarter of the species are illustrated by
              line drawings prepared for the CFNA.  The goal is to present the three volumes
              treating the Compositae in North America north of Mexico at the end of 2004.
