Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Kin Favoritism and Communal Nesting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0206581

Award Number: 0206581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10048              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren G. Holmes wholmes@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Kin Favoritism and Communal Nesting
Dr. Warren Holmes
Stephanie
              Jesseau

This combined laboratory- and field-research project will
              investigate kin recognition and nepotism in a communally-nesting, South
              American rodent, the degu (Octodon degus).  Field evidence suggests that female
              degus nest communally, which means that two or more females share a burrow in
              which both females rear their litters.  Due to communal nesting and birth
              synchrony, degu mothers encounter and become familiar with pups that are not
              their own offspring.  Similarly, pups interact with both their siblings and
              non-siblings from the time they are born.  In general, if a mother and her
              offspring share an early rearing environment with others, thus contaminating
              the correlation between rearing association and kinship, simple "familiarity"
              is unlikely to explain discriminative maternal care or sibling nepotism.  In
              prior work, captive degu mothers discriminated between the odors of their own
              young and those produced by their co-nesting partner despite having lived with
              both kinds of pups.  Three follow-up laboratories studies are proposed to
              investigate how kinship and being reared together affect maternal care and
              sibling relationships.  First, it will be determined whether co-nesting mothers
              preferentially nurse their own young.  Observations will be made of mothers'
              behavior toward their own vs other offspring.  Differential milk transfer will
              also be determined by injecting mothers with small amounts of radiation (thus
              labeling their milk) and measuring the amount of radiation in the pups' feces. 
              Second, food quality will be manipulated to evaluate how nutrition affects
              nursing preferences.  The same behavioral observations and milk-labeling
              techniques as the previous experiment will be used.  Third, I will examine
              juveniles' social preferences, specifically play-partner preferences, to
              determine how growing up together and kinship affect social development. 
              Several field studies will also be conducted at Quebrada de la Plata, the field
              station of Universidad de Chile. It is not known whether degu mothers in the
              wild share the same natal chamber even though they occupy the same burrow
              system.  Therefore, the first portion of the proposed field work will consist
              of monitoring co-nesting mothers using radio telemetry to determine if they
              share underground burrows before and/or after they give birth.  The genetic
              relationship of co-nesting females in the wild is also not known.  Therefore,
              small tissue samples will be taken from free-living degus to perform genetic
              analyses of DNA to determine the kinship of females sharing the same burrow. 
              Behavioral observations will also be made to examine how agonistic and amicable
              behaviors vary with relatedness in degus.  This study will reveal how kin
              recognition and nepotism are mediated in a group-living species in which
              "simple" familiarity is an inadequate proxy for kinship.

	

