Title       : Center for Systems Science Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0206028

Award Number: 0206028
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leehyun Keel keel@gauss.tsuniv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel A. Eaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yong Xin Tao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sivapragasam Sathananthan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee State University
	      3500 John A. Merritt Blvd.
	      Nashville, TN  372091500    615/320-3131

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

During the last four years, Tennessee State University has established an
              interdisciplinary NSF CREST center, the Center for Systems Science Research
              (CSSR), which consists of components from mathematics, physics/astronomy, and
              electrical/mechanical engineering. Research niches have been firmly established
              in each of these areas and, at present, the existing research base has matured
              enough to permit continued significant contributions to the body of scientific
              knowledge. These science/engineering niches form the four research thrust
              components of this renewal proposal: (1) optimal and robust control (electrical
              engineering), (2) modeling of complex astrophysical systems
              (physics/astronomy), (3) large-scale stochastic dynamic systems (mathematics),
              and (4) modeling of complex flows (mechanical engineering).

These four
              research components from diverse science/engineering disciplines seek to
              understand the behavior of complex physical systems by utilizing mathematical
              models. CSSR researchers in each thrust component have worked independently and
              side by side for the last four years, and fruitful collaborative interactions
              have resulted in cross discipline approaches to problem solving.

The Center
              for Systems Science Research has as its primary goals (1) the establishment of
              a permanent research base at Tennessee State University which produces new
              knowledge and quality, publishable, peer-reviewed research relevant to NSF
              research goals and (2) the enhancement of participation and substantial
              involvement of minority students and faculty in SMET research areas.

In
              reference to Goal 1, the TSU CREST Center has published 171 articles, 139 of
              these in refereed journals or conference proceedings, during its first four
              years. Each thrust area has produced significant new knowledge, e.g. the
              control systems group introduced the concept of controller "fragility" which
              resulted in a special session at the 1999 American Control Conference, the
              astrophysics group confirmed the existence of extra solar planets by
              discovering the first planet in the star system HD 20945,the applied math group
              has expanded the probabilistic analysis and computational methods for
              large-scale stochastic dynamic systems, and the CFD groups collaboration with
              the NSF ERC at Mississippi State University has resulted in a model which
              predicts the effects of icing on the aerodynamics and structural
              characteristics of aircraft.

During the same time period, the pursuit of
              Goal 2 has resulted in the support and participation of 35 undergraduate and 7
              graduate African-American students on average per year. During the past four
              years, support for both graduates and undergraduates has averaged over $200,000
              per year for various combinations of tuition, fees, room and board, and
              stipends, and this same level of support is requested for the renewal period.
              The CREST Student Program Coordinator matches student participants with CREST
              researchers. Students present their work at the TSU University Wide Research
              Symposium and at the NSF/NASA/TSU Student Research Symposium. Students have
              also been co-authors with CREST researchers on journal/conference
              papers.

Thus far eight underrepresented minority students have received
              their MS degrees, five of whom are now pursuing a Ph.D. In the Fall Semester,
              2001 the university began enrollment of students in the newly established Ph.D.
              program in Computer Information Systems Engineering which is housed in the
              College of Engineering, Technology, and Computer Science. The NSF HRD CREST
              program was the catalyst that "fast-tracked" this initiative through the
              university, the Tennessee Board of Regents, and the Tennessee Higher Education
              Commission.

