Title       : Statistical Modeling and Predictability of Nonlinear Dispersive Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0206679

Award Number: 0206679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Cai cai@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0206679
Mathematical Sciences: Statistical modeling
              and predictability of nonlinear dispersive waves

Abstract

0206679
              Cai



The central theme of this research is the statistical predictability
              and the development of effective dynamics for spatially extended, multi-scale
              nonlinear systems in general, and nonlinear dispersive waves in particular.
              Modeling complex behavior exhibited by multi-scale nonlinear dynamics often
              entails an effective description of large scale, coarse-grained dynamics. Their
              resolution requires a precise mathematical characterization of all spatial and
              temporal excitations present in systems. The issue of quantification of
              statistical properties of long-time, large-scale dynamics of spatiotemporal
              chaos will be addressed in a near-integrable setting and in a system in which
              the separation of scales, as well as instability, can be precisely tuned and
              controlled. Once a good statistical characterization is obtained, it can
              provide not only guidance in modeling coarse-grained dynamics but also
              statistical calibrations of these effective models against the original full
              dynamics. With these statistical insights, the research further focuses on the
              study of coarse-grained dynamics and invariant measures for two possible
              situations --- namely, dynamics with and without separation of scales. The
              projects also address important aspects of dispersive wave turbulence:
              clarification of the derivation of kinetic equations and their validation; and
              detailed characterization of resonance conditions, flux dynamics, and spatially
              localized, coherent structures.

A multitude of spatiotemporal scales may
              arise in modeling problems in modern science, ranging from molecular dynamics
              simulation of protein folding to short term climate prediction for coupled
              atmosphere-ocean dynamics --- the study of which has great impact on our daily
              world. This project investigates mathematical methods that can be used to
              understand and predict the complicated behavior of systems of this type.

