Title       : CREST - Center for Tropical Applied Ecology and Conservation at the University
               of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0206200

Award Number: 0206200
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4999999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elvira Cuevas ecuevas@goliath.cnnet.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carla Restrepo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Owen McMillan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elvia J. Melendez-Ackerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The CREST Center for Applied Ecology and Conservation is designed to create a
              research environment where multidisciplinary groups work together to solve the
              complex environmental problems facing the Neotropics. The major goal of the
              Center is to utilize our unique position within the Caribbean and strong
ties
              with Central and South America to become a dominant research center in applied
              tropical ecology and conservation. To achieve this goal, we will promote
              research programs that synthesize multiple levels of biological organization,
              from genes to landscapes. Specifically, the Center will 1) increase the
              research productivity of our faculty in the field in applied ecology and
              conservation, 2) strengthen the participation of our undergraduate and graduate
              students in research activities, 3) expand the research infrastructure of the
              University, 4) foster long-term research collaborations among scientists within
              Puerto Rico and with national and international government and academic
              institutions, and 5) ensure that funding continues after the CREST funding
              period.
The research activities of the Center will focus on four levels of
              biological organization: individuals and their genes, populations, ecosystems,
              and landscapes. Research in Molecular Ecology, Evolution, and Genetics (MEEG)
              group will integrate high-definition molecular markers with field ecological
              research to address key questions about the mating systems, reproductive
              success, and population biology of endangered or fragmented populations. The
              Species Population Management (SPM) group will focus on the impact of exotic
              species on the native flora and fauna of Caribbean islands. Initially the SPM
              group will concentrate research efforts on two key projects that focus on
              biological introductions of global relevance: introduced feral ungulates and
              Africanized bees. Research in the Landscape Ecology Group (LEG) will
              investigate the differential responses of species to landscape variation. The
              group will initially use two animal assemblages, Caribbean frogs and Andean
              birds, to examine how body size reflects spatial and temporal discontinuities
              in ecosystems at large-scales (textural discontinuity hypothesis). Finally,
              critical to the future development of the CREST Center is an Ecosystem
              Processes Group (EPG). This group will be established with the addition of new
              Center faculty members. Their research will initially be funded through
              University of Puerto Rico matching funds but in year 4 and 5 they will receive
              full funding through the CREST Center.
 The Center will take a series of
              concrete steps to foster cross-disciplinary collaborations and ensure research
              productivity. There will be bi-monthly scientific meetings and a yearly Center
              conference with invited and Center speakers. These meetings are designed to
              encourage group member productivity, and stimulate interactions and
              collaborations within the group and with researchers from other institutions.
              In addition, the Center director will create a research environment conducive
              to the production of high quality research and training. The director will hold
              quarterly meetings with the CoPIs, administrative assistant, and system
              administrator to discuss logistic, administrative and financial issues related
              to the Center. Participants are expected to meet project milestones, publish
              one to two peer-reviewed manuscripts per year, and incorporate at least two
              graduate and two undergraduate students during the period of the project.
              Funding for the initial group of CoPIs will be reduced in years 4 and 5, and
              shifted to new faculty members. An external scientific advisory panel will
              monitor progress of all Center
researchers. 
The continuation of the Center,
              after CREST funding expires, is a key goal of this project. To realize this
              goal, the director and CoPIs will apply for external funding that builds on
              research and collaborations established during the initial funding cycle. The
              administration of the University of Puerto Rico has also
demonstrated their
              commitment to the continuation of the Center by returning 18.75% of overhead on
              all grants submitted through the Center. The ultimate goal of the Center is to
              train a new generation of scientists with strong education and research
              experience in applied ecology and conservation, and to better integrate
              university research activities with societal needs.

