Title       : Dissertation Research: Disentangling the Effects of Female Choice, Contest
               Competition and Scramble Competition for Mates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0206473

Award Number: 0206473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9998               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy G. Solomon solomong@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas B. Meikle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dissertation Research:  Disentangeling the Effects of Female Choice, Contest
              Competition and Scamble Competition for Mates

Drs. Nancy G. Solomon &
              Douglas B. Meile; Mark D. Spritzer

Sexual selection is differential mating
              success caused by variation among members of one sex in a trait that influences
              acquisition of mates. Although sexual selection is one of the most intensively
              studied areas in the field of behavioral ecology, surprisingly little is known
              about  the relative importance of the different mechanisms of sexual selection.
              The main goal of the proposed research is to determine the relative importance
              of female choice, contest competition, and scramble competition for mates in
              determining the mating success of males. Female choice involves females
              choosing to mate with a male based on conspicuous ornaments or behaviors.
              Contest competition involves direct aggressive interactions between males and
              scramble competition, in contrast, involves a male's ability to rapidly and
              accurately locate mates. Meadow voles were used as the study species because
              past studies suggest that all three of these mechanisms of sexual selection
              occur among these rodents. Male navigation ability was chosen as a trait
              believed to be favored by scramble competition, and male dominance rank was
              chosen as a trait believed to be favored by contest competition. In addition,
              the influence of female choice upon both of these traits will be tested. The
              specific objectives are to determine: (1) the relationship between male
              navigation ability and male mating success, (2) the relationship between
              dominance and navigation ability among male voles, (3) the relative influence
              of dominance and navigation ability upon male mating success, and (4) female
              mating preferences for males with varying levels of navigation ability and
              dominance. A series of lab and field experiments will be used to achieve these
              objectives. Navigation ability will be measured by scoring each male's ability
              to complete a maze test, and male dominance will be tested by scoring
              aggression between pairs of males in arena trials. Male reproductive success
              will be determined using genetic paternity analyses. The results of this
              project will be an important next step in understanding how sexual selection
              shapes the evolution of a species.
