Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Hybridization in the Evolution and
               Diversification of Heliconius Butterflies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0206613

Award Number: 0206613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Gilbert lgilbert@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus Kronforst  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              One of the primary goals of evolutionary research is to explain the mechanisms
              by which new species originate. One such mechanism that has received relatively
              little attention is the formation of new species due to interbreeding between
              previously established species (or, speciation via interspecific
              hybridization). In an effort to understand how new species originate due to
              hybridization, this project will trace the history of divergence between
              Heliconius pachinus, a tropical butterfly species that recently originated via
              hybridization, and one of its parental species, H. cydno. It is hypothesized
              that since the origin of the H. pachinus form, natural selection has led to the
              evolution of mechanisms by which species integrity is maintained.  This project
              will determine how much overall genetic exchange is occurring between these two
              species by examining these mechanisms and by comparing the genetic makeup of
              both species throughout their range.

Although the role of hybridization in
              animal evolution is receiving more attention than ever, there are few clear
              examples of speciation via hybridization in animals. Once finished, this study
              will provide one of the most complete explanations of speciation via
              hybridization. Furthermore, the mechanism of divergence proposed here is a
              novel and exciting process by which speciation may have occurred many times in
              this genus and others. The incredible correspondence of mimetic Heliconius
              species pairs has long amazed biologists and still lacks a mechanistic
              explanation. The hypothesis put forward here could well be the explanation for
              this entire phenomenon. 

