Title       : Dissertation Research: Limb Loss And Phylogenetic Relationships In Southern
               African Scincine Lizards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0206362

Award Number: 0206362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Sites Jack_Sites@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded from the National Science Foundation to Dr. Jack Sites
              and Mrs. Alison Whiting at Brigham Young University to study the evolutionary
              patterns of limb loss in a group of Southern African lizards.  Limb loss is a
              trend seen in many squamate groups, including snakes and various lizards. The
              lizard family Scincidae (skinks) is arguably the best system in which to study
              patterns and processes of limb loss because limb reduction (to some degree) is
              postulated to have occurred over 30 independent times.  The southern African
              genus Scelotes contains species exhibiting the full range of limb reduction,
              from fully functional pentadactyl limbs (i.e., those with 5 digits) to complete
              lack thereof, with many intermediate forms. However, the evolutionary
              relationship among skinks is unknown.  The objective of this research is to
              establish a robust hypothesis of phylogenetic (i.e., genealogical)
              relationships within southern African scincines, using both DNA sequence and
              skeletal data, and to evaluate the evolutionary pattern of limb loss within
              Scelotes in light of phylogeny.  Preliminary results support multiple
              occurrences as well as reversals of limb loss in this group.
The loss of limbs
              in snakes and multiple lizard groups has long been an area of intense interest.
               This study will lead to a greater understanding of the morphological changes
              associated with, and the ecological pressures that lead to limb loss, and
              indirectly may also help scientists understand details about the origin of
              snakes. In addition, studying limb loss in a group where it has occurred
              multiple times will lay the foundations for understanding the developmental
              genetic mechanisms involved in limb development. 

