Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Pre-Copulatory Reproductive Cannibalism: The Ecology of
               an Extreme Reproductive Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0206237

Award Number: 0206237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9612               (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Westneat   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Sih  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Pre-copulatory reproductive cannibalism: the ecology of
              an extreme reproductive conflict

David F. Westneat
James Chadwick
              Johnson

Reproductive cannibalism, specifically female consumption of the
              male prior to, during, or immediately following copulation, occurs in several
              organisms and is a dramatic example of how ecology can shape behavior.  Of
              particular interest are species exhibiting pre-copulatory reproductive
              cannibalism, or predation of the male by the female during courtship but prior
              to sperm transfer.  In such cases, the costs of the behavior to males (death)
              and females (loss of a mate) are readily apparent.  In contrast, the benefits
              of pre-copulatory reproductive cannibalism remain poorly understood.  This
              research program is designed to uncover the functional significance of
              pre-copulatory reproductive cannibalism in the North American fishing spider
              (Dolomedes triton).  Four hypotheses for pre-copulatory reproductive
              cannibalism will be tested.  First, males may be a source of food for the
              predatory, adult female.  Second, female attacks of males before mating may be
              an extreme form of mate rejection behavior.  Third, pre-copulatory attacks may
              be the incidental by-product of selection for highly voracious predatory
              behavior in a multitude of other contexts.  Finally, pre-copulatory attacks may
              occur because males simulate prey items in order to attract the female's
              attention. If these attacks fail sufficiently often, then such males may mate
              more often than males who court females in a less risky fashion. The study will
              thus enhance our understanding of how ecology influences the evolution of
              extreme behavior between the sexes.



