Title       : Dissertation Research: Multiple Carbon Sources for Isoprene Pproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0206071

Award Number: 0206071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5524               (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel T. Lerdau mlerdau@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Title: Multiple Carbon Sources for Isoprene Production

Investigators: Manuel
              T. Lerdau and Jennifer L. Funk

Isoprene (2-methyl 1,3-butadiene) is the most
              abundant volatile organic compound emitted from many temperate and tropical
              forests. The production of isoprene in plants has important implications for
              both plant metabolism and the chemistry of the lower atmosphere. Predicting
              patterns of isoprene emission from individual plants, forest canopies and
              larger regions involves the integration of regulatory factors operating on both
              short- and long-time scales. While the regulation of isoprene production on
              very short-time scales is dominated by changes in light and temperature, our
              knowledge of the mechanisms by which physiological and environmental factors
              regulate isoprene emission over larger temporal and spatial scales is limited. 
              

It is believed that the carbon used in isoprene production is derived
              primarily from recently assimilated precursors via photosynthesis. However, it
              has been proposed that stored carbon (carbohydrate) can contribute to isoprene
              production when low photosynthetic rates limit the supply of recently
              assimilated precursors. This research will examine the importance of stored
              carbon in isoprene production. This will be accomplished by (1) exploring the
              role of stored carbon in isoprene production and its importance under specific
              environmental conditions and (2) evaluating existing leaf-level models based on
              these findings. Understanding the role of stored carbon in isoprene production
              will help to elucidate the fundamental environmental physiology of isoprene
              production and improve efforts to model emission to the atmosphere.

