Title       : Following the Universe from Dark to Light
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0206299

Award Number: 0206299
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renyue Cen cen@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremiah P. Ostriker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206299
Cen

The formation and evolution of cosmic structures, including
              galaxies, clusters of galaxies and large-scale structure, are fundamental
              problems of modern cosmology. While the Big Bang picture of how the Universe
              began is generally accepted, the details of how and when structures developed
              and formed are in hot debate. On scales larger  than clusters of galaxies (>10
              million light years across)  it is generally believed that gravity is the
              dominant force and structures grow from small initial seeds planted in the very
              early universe (<< 1 second since the Big Bang), because gravity is attractive
              and unstable. However, on smaller scales gas hydrodynamics, microphysics (i.e.,
              forces on atomic scales)  and star formation processes play progressively more
              important roles  in shaping and determining when galaxies form and how they
              evolve;  the picture at these smaller scales is much less clear.  The radiation
              field, especially,  the ultra-violet radiation that is capable of ionizing
              atomic hydrogen  must play a very important role in these processes.  In
              particular, it determines when atomic hydrogen is fully ionized and the
              universe is cleared of hydrogen "fog" and  becomes transparent  to distant
              sources. This epoch has been characterized as the "end of the dark  ages". 
              Since radiation  controls the evolution of the thermodynamic  state of the gas,
              a fraction of which is subsequently incorporated into stars, it is essential to
              include radiation hydrodynamics  in full detail in cosmological computer
              simulations in order to provide  answers to many of the important questions in
              modern cosmology. This is  a formidable task to tackle even with the fastest
              supercomputers today.  Dr. Cen and his collaborators  have developed an
              efficient way to compute this complicated situation and begun to carry out a
              program that should help provide some clues about  how the radiation field and
              the matter evolve with time.
***

