Title       : Assessing Student Transfer and Retention of Learning in Mathematics, Physics,
               and Engineering Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0206943

Award Number: 0206943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Bennett bennett@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              N. Sanjay Rebello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is based on the theme that assessment is most useful when it is
              closest to instruction, in both form and time. Summative assessments at the end
              of a program provide necessary feedback, but are often of limited value in
              guiding improved achievement. Such assessment takes place several years after
              instruction in basic concepts and changes in instructors and instruction during
              the intervening time may make the feedback appear irrelevant. In addition,
              faculty members are often distrustful of reports where the faculty members lack
              first hand knowledge of the assessment procedure. To be most effective in
              improving design and conduct of actual courses, the instructors in the course
              should use the assessment tools themselves, preferably during the conduct of
              the course. Because the main reason for STEM majors taking core engineering
              science courses is to prepare them for future courses, the most important
              aspect of assessment is the ability of students to transfer their learning to
              new contexts in later courses. Assessment should not only serve the purpose of
              the instructor or the institution it should also aid the students in
              recognizing their own achievements and in guiding the students to improve their
              understanding. The goal of this project is to design online assessment tools
              that can be easily integrated into core engineering science courses and that
              are capable of answering the following questions:
 What specific material have
              the students learned in core engineering science courses in mathematics and
              physics?
 What understanding do the students have of the material they have
              learned? Is it just disconnected facts and procedures, a broad conceptual
              picture informed by careful understanding of the details, or something in
              between? If it is something in between, can we describe more exactly what
              understanding they have gained?
 How much (and what type of) knowledge do the
              students retain after specific classes have ended.
 Can the students use the
              material they have learned in new situations in their professional courses? How
              consistently do they use the understanding developed in core engineering
              science courses when encountering these ideas in new contexts? In the best
              case, can we predict in advance whether students have gained the necessary
              understanding to successfully apply their knowledge in new contexts?
Early
              versions of the sought after assessment tools have been developed under an
              earlier grant: "Technology & Model- Based Conceptual Assessment: Research on
              Students Applications of Models in Physics and Mathematics" funded by the NSF
              ROLE program (REC-0087788). Model Analysis is being used to develop and
              validate the tools. These tools are providing great insight into student
              conceptual understanding and learning styles, and this project is expanding
              their use to more core classes, and extending the focus from basic research on
              student learning to assessment of learning and conceptual understanding. The
              assessment tools we are developing are providing real-time feedback to both
              instructors and students, enabling both to adjust the teaching and learning
              process to improve student achievement in terms of conceptual understanding and
              the ability to transfer learning to new contexts.
