Title       : Assessing Implementation of Collaborative Learning Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0206947

Award Number: 0206947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Mazur mazur@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, problems in American science education, from elementary schools
              to universities, have been widely publicized and have aroused great concern. It
              has been repeatedly established that students often fail to master key concepts
              under the lecture approach that is commonly used in high school and
              undergraduate science courses. Some progress has been made in developing
              alternative pedagogies based on more active forms of learning, which are more
              effective in producing student learning. However, such pedagogies are still not
              widespread. A number of strategies have been developed to improve the teaching
              of introductory science courses, several of which can be used in a variety of
              disciplines, and extensive assessment has demonstrated the effectiveness of
              these strategies. Over the past ten years, Peer Instruction has been
              established as one effective way to improve student learning in undergraduate
              science courses by including collaborative exercises within the context of
              traditional lectures. Peer Instruction is presently used by hundreds of
              instructors around the world, and the majority of those instructors testify to
              its effectiveness and ease of implementation.

The goal of this project is to
              assess the effectiveness of Peer Instruction at a variety of institutions and
              to determine the implementation factors that contribute to its success. The
              results will improve understanding of what makes Peer Instruction work and,
              thus, allow for more effective implementation of Peer Instruction. In addition,
              the work serves to increase the body of research on collaborative learning and
              to stimulate additional faculty to begin using collaborative teaching methods
              such as Peer Instruction. Assessment tools are being developed and enhanced to
              efficiently assess student achievement on standard conceptual instruments. The
              project involves a number of collaborating faculty from across the country
              whose courses are participating in the focused study of Peer Instruction. The
              results will enable science faculty around the nation to teach more effectively
              with Peer Instruction. The results thus have the potential to impact not only
              the 50,000 students who are currently taught using Peer Instruction, but also
              the more than 150,000 students of faculty who have expressed interest in using
              Peer Instruction in their classes.
