Title       : Dissertation: Phylogeny of Ephemeroptera:Evolution of the Subimago and Nymphal
               Gills With Implications on the Origin of Flight
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0206505

Award Number: 0206505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9845               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Whiting michael_whiting@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Michael Whiting and Mr. T. Ogden at Brigham
              Young University to study the relationships and specific adaptations of
              mayflies. The Ephemeroptera (mayflies) is a relatively small insect order of
              about 3000 species distributed throughout the world. These insects are
              considered by many to be the first organisms to have taken flight. Despite this
              interesting characteristic, relationships among this group and between other
              insect groups are virtually unknown. The three goals of this research are to
              (1) determine ordinal position with respect to the other insect orders, (2)
              estimate higher-level relationships of mayflies at the familial level, and (3)
              investigate hypotheses concerning adaptation of flight. This will be
              accomplished by: (a) Selecting numerous examples of mayfly and other related
              insects from throughout the world for morphological and molecular analysis; (b)
              Generating informative morphological and molecular characters from five
              independent genes in each these insects; (c) Subjecting these data to a
              rigorous analyses in order to establish a robust estimate of relationships
              (genealogies), which can be used to address questions concerning the adaptation
              of flight.
The genealogical pattern produced through this study could be used
              for a variety of other purposes. For example, the results may also contribute
              to the sport of fly fishing, as mayfly larvae, which are aquatic, are the major
              trout food in river systems . In addition mayflies are one of the most
              important indicators of water quality. Results from this study could be used to
              improve project design and execution. Finally, this information will assist to
              make better and more informed decisions concerning  biological diversity and
              conservation. Knowledge of the relationships of mayflies is important not only
              to science but also may be applied to a number of other areas of concern.

