Title       : Dissertation Research: Fossil History of the Saxifragaceae sensu stricto and
               their Woody Relatives, Cretaceous to Pleistocene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0206185

Award Number: 0206185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Crepet wlc1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. William Crepet and Ms. Elizabeth Hermsen  of
              Cornell University to review the fossil history of the angiosperm (flowering
              plant) family Saxifragaceae (rockfoils and other ornamentals) and the related
              genera Ribes (currants and gooseberries) and Itea (Virginia willow).  Today,
              these plants occur primarily in temperate, arctic, and alpine zones of the
              Northern Hemisphere.  Published reports of fossil saxifrages will be
              reevaluated and new fossil saxifrages from New Jersey will be described.  Some
              of these fossils possess details of floral structure that will allow them to be
              analyzed using cladistics, a mathematical technique for determining
              evolutionary relationships, which is of great significance as it allows for
              more precise analysis of these relationships than many other methods.  This
              will aid in the attainment of the immediate goal of this project, compilation
              of an accurate record of fossil saxifrages.  This record will be used to study
              questions such as when and where saxifrages originated, when they diversified,
              how their reproductive biology has changed over time, and how they have
              acheived their current geographical distribution.  It will also affect our
              present understanding of saxifragoid relationships, especially in light of
              recent DNA evidence that indicates fewer plants are true saxifrages than
              previously thought.
One of the greatest remaining evolutionary mysteries
              concerns the origin, relationships, and success of the angiosperms.  The vital
              importance of this group, demonstrated by their numerical abundance and their
              economic, medicinal, and ecological significance, makes solving this mystery a
              significant priority.  This project is important in the context of the overall
              mystery because 1) many of the processes targeted within can be generalized to
              historical aspects of the angiosperm proliferation and rise to dominance and 2)
              because the saxifrages have been considered by some earlier workers as
              ancestral to many more advanced flowering plant groups.

