Title       : Predicting the Future: The Science and Technology of Weather Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0206221

Award Number: 0206221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2048027            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cary I. Sneider dfrederick@mos.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Barstow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mishelle Michaels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Science
	      
	      Boston, MA  02114    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Building on an institution-wide strategic initiative to interpret the process of
              science for informal learners of all ages, the Museum of Science will work over
              four years to develop, evaluate and implement a project to communicate the
              processes of science through weather forecasting.  The project is based on the
              idea that processes involved in short-term weather forecasting are basic to the
              process of science.   MOS proposes to create a 1,800 square foot exhibit,
              programs for students and teachers, an interactive website, and one-minute
              television spots aimed at helping people understand weather forecasting.  The
              project is grounded in MOS strategic commitment to engaging people in the
              activity of science and the use of new technologies.  The major component of
              the project is an exhibition of weather in which visitors will learn how to
              forecast the weather over the next few hours using different levels of
              technology, including naked eye observations, data from weather maps, and
              real-time images from space satellites and ground radar stations.  Ancillary
              programs include educational materials for over 100 WeatherNet schools in New
              England, an interactive website that will reach several hundred thousand users,
              and television spots on the process of weather forecasting to be aired on
              WBZ-TV Channel 4.  Over the course of its life the project will engage several
              million children and adults in the process of science.


