Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Modulation of Active Learning Behavior in the Context of
               Foraging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0206636

Award Number: 0206636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6520               (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred C. Dyer fcdyer@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Modulation of active learning behavior in the context of foraging

Fred C.
              Dyer, Principal Investigator, Professor of Zoology
Cynthia A. Wei, Doctoral
              Candidate in Zoology

Abstract

	Honeybees possess the remarkable ability
              to repeatedly return to specific flower patches that they have discovered. 
              Essential to this ability is a behavior known as a learning flight.  These
              flights, which are performed upon departure from a food source, allow a bee to
              collect visual information about landmarks nearby the food, which then help the
              bee find her way back.  The performance of these flights is a modulated
              behavior; bees typically perform longer flights during the first few visits,
              and in subsequent visits, the durations of the flights decline.  This raises a
              fundamental question: How do bees determine when and for how long to perform
              these flights?  Answers to this question will provide greater understanding of
              learning as an active decision making process.  The dissertation work of
              Cynthia Wei, under the guidance of Fred Dyer, has so far documented precise
              ways in which various factors influence the modulation of learning flight
              duration.  The work supported by this award will expand upon these prior
              findings by studying the modulation of learning flight duration in a more
              natural foraging context.  The specific goals are 1) to characterize the
              occurrence of learning flights in response to a change in nectar quality
              availability in a natural flower patch, 2) to determine the influence of nectar
              volume and concentration on the induction of learning flights, and 3) to
              determine the effect of observed occurrences of learning flights on subsequent
              spatial patterns of foraging.  This research will further illuminate the
              processes by which animals make decisions to learn in response to changing
              needs for spatial information.  It will also lead to a better understanding of
              how learning affects changes in spatial foraging patterns and the resulting
              implications for foraging success.  Collectively, this work will help develop a
              clearer picture of how mechanisms of learning have been shaped by an animal's
              foraging ecology.


	

