Title       : The Ancestors of Parita: Pre-Columbian Settlement Patterns in the Lower La Villa
               River Valley, Azuero Peninsula, Panama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0206939

Award Number: 0206939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. McAnany tricia@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The legendary chiefdoms of Panama have loomed large in anthropological theories
              of political power within small-scale polities.  First recorded by
              sixteenth-century Spanish conquistadores, Panamanian chiefs were noted for
              their keen, entrepreneurial interest in the acquisition and trade of exotic
              imports, particularly finely crafted gold ornaments.  Despite pronounced
              anthropological interest in the early historical accounts of Spanish
              chroniclers, the physical "on-the-ground" reality of Panamanian chiefdoms, as
              well as their antiquity, has never been established-rendering this political
              form more apparent than real.  Proposed research will remedy this situation by
              conducting archaeological research at one of the historically documented
              chiefly seats of power-Parita or Antatara-in the lower La Villa valley on the
              Azuero Peninsula of Panama.

This research builds on a long-term program of
              investigation sponsored by the Smithsonian Institution and directed by
              archaeologist, Richard Cooke.  Focusing on the hilltop site of Cerro Juan Diaz,
              Cooke has documented that the site was an important regional center from ca.
              200 BC until the period immediately following the Spanish conquest.  Current
              data suggest, however, that the site's function changed through time, from
              settlement, to ritual center, and then back to settlement.  What is not clear
              is the total size of Cerro Juan Diaz, its relationships with other
              Pre-Columbian settlements in La Villa valley, and whether or not it was a seat
              of power within the historically described Parita chiefdom.

In order to
              expand our base of knowledge beyond the hilltop center,  Ms Isaza will conduct
              an archaeological investigation of the lower La Villa valley that will be
              pursued in three stages: (1) survey and surface collection, (2) remote sensing
              of subsurface deposits in selected areas, and (3) limited excavation.  Within
              the first stage of survey, topographic maps and commercial-grade aerial
              photographs will help to guide the survey and to select tracts of land where
              artifacts will be collected.  Archaeological sites, indicated by mounded
              architecture and the presence of artifacts (primarily sherds, lithics, and
              worked shell) will be mapped with a hand-held GPS receiver.  This phase of
              field research will yield data relevant to the relative dating of sites (via
              ceramic style), the presence of site hierarchies (a pattern of one or more
              large sites surrounded by many small villages), and the presence of locales of
              specialized production.  During the second phase, selected locales will be
              subjected to a resistivity and a magnetic survey using a GEOHM 3 Resistivity
              Meter and a Cecium-vapor Gradiometer.  These instruments have the potential to
              detect subsurface anomalies-such as fire hearths, structure walls, and burial
              pits-which will then be targeted for excavation during the third and final
              stage of the investigation.  Overall, these methods will permit the systematic
              documentation of the spatial distribution and temporal depth of archaeological
              remains in the lower La Villa valley.  Preliminary reconnaissance and
              identification of scattered polychrome ceramics, marine shell, and polished
              manos and metates (grinding stones) suggest that most sites in the valley were
              occupied between AD 300 and 1300.  The observation of sites with dramatically
              different artifact inventories also suggests the possibility of specialized
              workshop locales for artisans working within the chiefly realm.

This
              investigation will advance our knowledge of the deep history of Panama in two
              critical ways.  First, this study will establish the first "footprint" of a
              historically known Panamanian chiefdom by providing a body of physical evidence
              to complement Colonial chronicles.  Second, this investigation will provide
              seminal evidence with which to evaluate the antiquity of chiefdoms in Panama. 
              That is, if a site hierarchy similar in structure to contact-period settlement
              patterns can be established for much earlier periods, then it is likely that
              chiefly governance enjoyed great antiquity in the Central American isthmus.  On
              the other hand, if the distribution of earlier sites is one of dispersed small
              villages, then an earlier acephalous political organization is more likely. 
              Either way, this investigation will have a profound impact on both
              anthropological and political theories of the integration of small polities and
              on the cultural heritage of Panama.

