Title       : Stellar Dynamics Around Black Holes in Galactic Nuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0206038

Award Number: 0206038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90839              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jihad R. Touma jt00@aub.edu.lb  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Univ of Beirut
	      
	      Beirut, LE  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206038
Touma

Over the last decade, thanks to high-resolution
              observations of galactic nuclei by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST),
              supermassive black holes (SBHs) have been detected in two dozen or so galaxies
              (including the Milky Way). These detections rely on the measurement of the
              appreciable dynamical effects that a black hole exerts on nearby gas and stars.
              

Dr. Touma will conduct a detailed study of stellar dynamics around SBHs in
              galactic nuclei. This study will bolster detection efforts through careful
              dynamical modeling of kinematic observations. It will also help to clarify the
              role that a SBHs play in shaping features found in the central regions of the
              host galaxy. Finally, it will shed some light on questions relating to the
              origin and evolution of SBHs.  In particular, it will involve a thorough
              analysis of a violent instability that Dr. Touma has recently identified. This
              instability affects stellar disks which are dominated by a SBH in their center,
              and which harbor a small proportion of counter-rotating stars. The instability
              distorts the disk into a lopsided shape and promises to explain the lopsided
              nucleus of the Andromeda Galaxy (M31), which harbors an SBH, and is suspected
              of supporting a small percentage of counter-rotating stars.
***

