Title       : Dissertation Research: Chemical Discrimination of Predator Diets in Amphibians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0206606

Award Number: 0206606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10126              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale M. Madison dmadison@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              CHEMICAL DISCRIMINATION OF PREDATOR DIETS IN AMPHIBIANS

Dr.  Dale M.
              Madison
 Aaron M. Sullivan

Essentially all animals must be wary of
              predators, but usually must perform daily tasks such as obtaining food. In many
              cases, animals measure the threat of a nearby predator, and take evasive action
              (and cease foraging) only when attack seems imminent. Some animals use chemical
              information not only to detect local predators, but also to assess threat by
              determining the diet of the predator. In this case, a diet consisting of other
              individuals of the same species would be most threatening and the most likely
              to evoke evasive action.

Given the importance of predator-prey interactions
              in ecological communities, and the relative neglect of chemical defense
              mechanisms among terrestrial vertebrates, the proposed research focuses on
              chemical defense and assessment in an important prey-predator unit in the
              woodlands of northeastern USA, specifically that between a common salamander
              (Plethodon cinereus) and the predatory garter snake. The researchers have
              documented diet-based threat assessment by the salamander, and in the proposed
              study, will examine the degree to which salamanders use the ecological
              familiarity or genetic relatedness of alternative prey in the snake's diet to
              assess the threat imposed by the snake. Ecological familiarity will be assessed
              by using chemical cues from alternate salamander prey species occupying a
              variety of different niches in the same general P. cinereus habitat. Genetic
              relatedness will be examined by using cues from alternative prey of varying
              genetic relatedness to P. cinereus, ranging from individuals of the same
              subspecies to individuals of different species and higher taxonomic categories.
              These studies should reveal how some animals are able to decipher subtle
              chemical information in their environment that is important to individual
              survival and interpreting community-wide interactions.

