Title       : The Statistical Concepts Inventory (SCI): A Cognitive Achievment Tool in
               Engineering Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0206977

Award Number: 0206977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teri R. Rhoads teri.rhoads@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teri J. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the development of a new assessment instrument,
              applicable to multiple undergraduate engineering programs, to measure students'
              understanding of statistics and its applications. The statistical understanding
              measure developed under this research, called the Statistical Concepts
              Inventory (SCI), provides score profiles that specifically describe students'
              abilities to design and conduct experiments as well as to analyze and interpret
              data.
This project is timely because an increasing number of post-secondary
              engineering programs are endorsing "outcome requirements" that depend on
              statistical thinking and problem-solving skills. Within engineering, these
              requirements are precipitating major changes in engineering education in
              general and engineering statistics education specifically. Engineering
              curricular objectives in many respects are being driven by the ABET EC 2000
              criteria. Of special relevance to the proposed project are:
- Criterion 3,
              Programs Outcomes and Assessment, which states that "Engineering programs must
              demonstrate that their graduates have: (a) an ability to apply knowledge of
              mathematics, science, and engineering, and (b) an ability to design and conduct
              experiments, as well as to analyze and interpret data."
and
- Criterion 8,
              Program Criteria, in which 16 of the 24 listed programs directly indicate the
              need to demonstrate that students have acquired facility with statistics.
              
Industrial Engineering has historically taught statistics as a service course
              to other engineering programs and continues to use statistics as a foundation
              for much of its own curriculum. Recently approved are the Criteria for
              Accrediting Computing Programs (Computing Accreditation Commission, December
              30, 2000), which covers Computer Science programs and states in its curriculum
              standards that "Course work in mathematics must include probability and
              statistics." 
This project is also exploring the links between cognitive and
              attitudinal aspects of introductory statistics courses. In its second phase,
              this project is gathering SCI profile scores from students in combination with
              an existing affective instrument, the Survey of Attitudes Toward Statistics
              (SATS). 

