Title       : Dissertation Research: Exploring the Temporal & Geographical Origins of
               Neotropical Diversity: Comparison of 32 Superspecies Groups in the Avian
               Families Galbulidae and Bucconidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0206722

Award Number: 0206722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Sheldon fsheld@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Frederick Sheldon and Mr. Christopher Witt at
              Louisiana State University to study the evolutionary origins of the
              exceptionally high species diversity of birds found in the Neotropics. Although
              biologists have known for centuries that the global distribution of
              biodiversity is skewed towards the tropics, little is understood about the
              phylogenetic relationships of tropical organisms and the historical events that
              may have led to their extensive diversification. This study will use museum
              collections to make DNA comparisons among every available species and
              population of two families of Neotropical birds, the puffbirds and jacamars.
              Trees of evolutionary lineages will be reconstructed using analyses that
              incorporate models of molecular evolution into measurements of DNA similarity.
              Patterns of new species formation and genetic differentiation will be compared
              among related groups that share common distributions. In this way, evolutionary
              trees will be used to infer the ages of evolutionary lineages and to identify
              the geological and climatic factors that have contributed to modern day
              diversity at all taxonomic levels. The results will have implications for the
              ongoing debate regarding relative contributions of long-term geological
              stability versus recent climatic tumult to the disparity in diversity between
              temperate and tropical bird faunas. 
This study will involve collection of DNA
              data from many related organisms across a broad geographic region. The results
              will have two primary benefits: (1) inference of evolutionary causes of species
              diversification; and (2) identification of conservation priorities. Current
              classifications almost certainly do not adequately represent true genetic
              diversity in tropical organisms. Genetic studies such as this one are needed to
              identify cryptic or overlooked species, to recognize areas that harbor
              significant genetic diversity, and to suggest strategies for protecting both
              the products and the process of evolution. 

