Title       : CREST Center for Mesoscopic Modeling and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0206162

Award Number: 0206162
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Watkins watkins@ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Koplik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Godfrey Gumbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The NSF CREST Center for Mesoscopic Modeling and Simulation"(CMMS) will be
              established at the City College of the City University of New York (CUNY), in
              partnership with Hunter College of CUNY.  The center will be reinforced by the
              active participation of CUNY diversity partners, Alliances for Graduate
              Education and the Professoriate and Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
              Participation, and by key external scientific and educational outreach
              collaborations.  The scientific focus of the proposed center will be devoted to
              physicochemical modeling, simulation and analysis at the mesoscale level of
              several distinct, but physically related, condensed matter and materials
              systems.  The mission of CMMS will be to significantly advance scientific
              knowledge of complex mesoscopic condensed matter and materials systems and the
              capability for their simulation and to increase the numbers of persons from
              underrepresented groups entering research careers in areas related to CMMS's
              scientific focus.

CMMS will bring together researchers from chemistry,
              physics engineering and computer science departments into five highly
              interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs), with each IRG responsible for one of
              the Center's five research subprojects/thrusts.  All five IRGs will focus on
              mesoscale modeling and simulation of complex condensed matter without a crystal
              lattice structure.  IRG I is concerned with polymeric materials interfaces. 
              IRG II investigates soil as an unconsolidated granular material.  IRG III
              concerns biomolecular electron transfer processes.  IRG IV concerns large
              biomolecules in membranes.  IRG V deals with superfluids.  All of the IRG
              topics share the unifying and computationally challenging characteristics of
              multiscale phenomena, highly nonlinear behavior, nonequilibrium with the
              surroundings and complexity.

The educational activities of CMMS for graduate
              students will include: specialized courses in mesoscopic modeling,
              interdisciplinary courses in computational science, seminars, internships and
              training in administration of the Beowulf cluster that will be the Center's
              primary student training machine.

CMMS will also implement a multi-faceted
              diversity recruitment, retention and outreach plan.
