Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of Ant Mutualisms in Piper: Morphological and
               Molecular Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0206254

Award Number: 0206254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8439               (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda E. Watson watsonle@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Vincent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Linda Watson, Mr. Eric Tepe and Dr. Michael
              Vincent at Miami University to study the evolution of symbiotic interactions
              between ants and plants.  This study focuses on several New World tropical
              species of Piper, the genus of black pepper and kava, and explores the
              mutualistically beneficial interactions these plant species have with certain
              ant species.  The ants protect the plants against herbivores and fungal
              infection in exchange for plant-provided nesting space and nutrients.  This
              relationship is important for both organisms because neither the ants nor the
              plants are able to survive in the absence of the other. In addition to
              specialized associations, some species of Piper have resident ants only
              sometimes, and still other species are never found with ants.  An understanding
              of relationships between species in this continuum will allow insights into the
              evolutionary patterns that lead to the highly specialized relationships between
              ants and some species of Piper.  To this end, this study integrates molecular
              phylogenetics with comparative anatomy of the plant structures involved in the
              ant associations.
Mutualistic interactions are important in the evolution of a
              vast majority, if not all organisms, and are responsible for a large part of
              the biodiversity seen today.  Despite this, surprisingly little is known about
              the properties and potential benefits of most tropical plants.  As an example,
              species of Piper are used medicinally by a number of traditional cultures
              throughout the tropics against maladies ranging from tooth decay to internal
              parasites, but the biochemistry behind these benefits remains to be studied. 
              To study the benefits of these plants accurately and effectively, a reliable
              classification is essential.  This study will result in a classification of a
              large and poorly known genus, in addition to a better understanding of the
              evolutionary patterns of these unique organisms.

