Title       : Symposium of New Trends in Nonlinear Dynamics and Control, and their
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0206627

Award Number: 0206627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12300              (Estimated)
Investigator: MingQing Xiao mxiao@math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0206627
Xiao

This grant will support a two-day symposium on "New Trends in
              
Nonlinear Dynamics and Control, and Their Applications," to be 
held at the
              Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California 
from September 19-20, 2002.
              The conference will focus on new 
and innovative developments in nonlinear
              dynamics and its 
applications, such as nonlinear observer design, cooperative
              
control, flow control, and bifurcation control. The symposium will 
include
              several invited 50-minute talks and a series of shorter 
contributed
              presentations of approximately 20 minutes each. The 
organizers plan to
              publish proceedings of this meeting in book 
form. 

The rapid pace of
              change in technology constantly presents new 
challenges and new opportunities
              to researchers in systems and 
control, especially those in nonlinear control.
              Advances in 
materials science, active actuators and sensors, and fluid
              
mechanics challenge the community to develop controllers for 
complex
              nonlinear systems of both finite and infinite dimensions. 
Models of nonlinear
              systems that are especially interesting to 
researchers in nonlinear control
              include fluid dynamics, flow 
control, smart materials, and chemical
              reactions. The nonlinearity 
of these complex systems leads not just to
              instability but also to 
periodic solutions, bifurcations, and chaos. Recent
              research shows 
promise for controlling such systems to achieve stability or
              
instability.  Cooperative control is another research topic of 
nonlinear
              systems that is attracting increasing attention. Recent 
advances in computing
              and communications make it possible to 
operate a large number of autonomous
              or semi-autonomous agents 
simultaneously in a cooperative manner. Such
              systems involve 
nonlinearities that are far more complicated than those
              exhibited 
by a single system. Problems involving cooperative control of
              
multiple nonlinear systems are found to have numerous 
applications. Several
              of the presentations and discussions during 
the symposium will address issues
              related to cooperative control 
and its applications (e.g., control of a
              satellite constellation, 
multiple munitions). The symposium will provide an
              opportunity 
for both well-established and young researchers to exchange ideas
              
on new developments and directions for future research. These 
new
              challenges require a review of major developments in 
nonlinear control theory
              from the past and to discuss new research 
trends to meet the ever-increasing
              needs of industrial applications. 
Major topics to be addressed in the
              symposium include new 
developments in the theory of nonlinear systems and
              control such 
as nonlinear observers, bifurcations and control, and turbulence
              
and control.

