Title       : Jets on the Giant Planets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0206269

Award Number: 0206269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229869             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Showman showman@lpl.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0206269
Showman

Observations from the Pioneer, Voyager, and Galileo
              spacecraft as well as ground-based
measurements beginning in the 1800's
              indicate that the four giant planets in our solar
system, Jupiter, Saturn,
              Uranus, and Neptune, have strong east-west jets in their
atmospheres. The jets
              take different forms on each planet; Jupiter and Saturn have about
twenty jets
              each (ten eastward and ten westward), whereas Uranus and Neptune have
              only
about three jets each. The jets are correlated with spatial variations in
              the temperature
and cloud abundance, suggesting that the full problem is a
              coupled one involving all the
dynamical variables. The question of what causes
              these jets is one of the most important
unsolved problems in planetary
              atmospheres.

Dr. Adam Showman of the University of Arizona will investigate
              the dynamics and formation processes of the giant-planet jets using a fully
              nonlinear numerical model of atmospheric motion. Two distinct, yet related,
              numerical investigations will be conducted. Both are aimed at
elucidating the
              role of small-scale convection in pumping the jets. The first problem
uses a
              realistic parameterization of the convection and will focus predominantly
              on
elucidating the dynamics near the cloud level. The second problem adopts a
              simpler
representation of the convective forcing and investigates whether
              extremely deep jets can
be driven from the upper regions where the moist
              convection is expected to occur. These
studies are the first fully-nonlinear
              numerical simulations of Jupiter's cloud layer that
address the problem of
              Jovian jet formation using a model with many vertical grid points.
As a
              result, they will be groundbreaking in their ability to address the
              vertical
structure that results from plausible jet-formation processes. The
              research will use
established numerical codes that Dr. Showman is experienced
              in using.
***


