Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: New Data from the Integument and Osteoderms for Amniote
               Phylogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0206533

Award Number: 0206533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8723               (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen A. O'Leary moleary@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Maureen O'Leary and Mr. Robert Hill at SUNY at
              Stony Brook to investigate the anatomy of the skin in amniotes, a large group
              of animals including modern birds, reptiles, and mammals.  New information
              about the skin will be used to discover the evolutionary relationships of these
              animals.  Information about the skin is available in both living and extinct
              forms because some amniotes have bones in the skin, called osteoderms, which
              are commonly found as fossils.  The anatomy of different types of amniote skin,
              and all types of osteoderms, will be described and cataloged using digital
              photography, illustrations, and microscopic thin-sections.  The new data will
              be combined with data from existing analyses on the skulls, skeletons, and soft
              tissues of amniotes to provide a more comprehensive picture of the evolution of
              these animals.   
The reconstruction of soft tissue features such as skin in
              dinosaurs and other extinct species depends largely on what is known about
              their genealogical relationships.  It is therefore crucial to resolve any
              competing hypotheses before accurate reconstructions of extinct amniotes can be
              made.  In recent years the evolutionary relationships between major groups of
              amniotes have been a point of considerable debate.  The relationships of
              turtles are particularly controversial; turtles have been hypothesized to be
              the closest relatives of a number of extinct groups, and even modern
              crocodiles.  The most remarkable feature of the turtle - its shell - may be a
              uniquely evolved structure, or may have formed from the fusion of bones in the
              skin of the turtle's ancestor.  This study will be the first in which
              information about the skin is used to unravel the genealogical relationships of
              amniotes, contributing to a broader understanding of amniote evolution in
              general, and the origin of turtles in particular.

