Title       : Communicating About Science: A Project to Improve Scientists' and Engineers'
               Communication Abilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0206980

Award Number: 0206980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherwyn Morreale smorreale@natcom.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat'l Communication Assoc
	      1765 "N" Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  200362801    /   -

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the challenge of educating scientists and engineers in
              the professional and personal communication skills they need to meet career
              demands of the 21st century.  The intention of the project is to address one of
              the nation's central concerns; the ability of scientists to engage in
              policy-critical communication about their work; work that is critical to the
              health and well being of U.S. society.  Experts in communication, the rhetoric
              of science, instructional development, and training will work collaboratively
              with scientists and engineers in two areas of concern previously identified by
              the Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy as well as others in
              the science community (1995);

1.	Scientists and engineers; ability to
              communicate among themselves interpersonally and in teams, and their ability to
              solve problems and work across scientific and other disciplines.
2.	Scientists
              and engineers; ability to communicate about science to larger audiences with an
              emphasis on lay and public constituencies and non-scientists.

The two
              challenges will be addressed by the accomplishment of two short term objectives
              and one long term goal:
	A first short term objective is producing curriculum
              recommendations for the communication training of scientists and engineers;

              	A second short term objective is developing a proposal for the National
              Science Foundation (NSF) Division of Graduate Education to:
1.	articulate a
              new set of priorities and approaches to address the most effective and
              appropriate ways of communicating about science; and,
2.	produce and
              disseminate communication training resources for aspiring (graduate and
              post-doctoral) scientists and engineers.

A long term and perhaps some
              intrinsic goal is forming critical partnerships and building a foundation for
              future relationships between the communication discipline and scientists and
              engineers to work collaboratively on challenges in communicating about
              science

These activities will begin with a briefing meeting to be held in
              November 2001 at the NCA national convention.  A facilitated workshop will
              follow in Winter/Spring 2002 that will produce curriculum recommendations and a
              plan for a full grant proposal to explore possibilities for creating new
              communities of communication colleagues and scientists.  Following the spring
              workshop and within the 2002 calendar year, the full grant proposal will be
              submitted to NSF.  The proposal will focus on furthering the development of
              collaborative relationships between communication and science and developing
              training resources of various sorts to implement the curriculum
              recommendations.  The proposal will also address the dissemination of the
              curriculum recommendations and training resources.

