Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematic Biology of Costaceae(Zingiberales): Using
               Molecular and Morphological Data to Investigate Phylogenetics and Floral
               Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0206501

Award Number: 0206501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8520               (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis W. Stevenson dws@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. John Kress  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Dennis Wm. Stevenson, W. John Kress, and
              Chelsea D. Specht at the New York Botanical Garden to study the systematics and
              evolution of Costaceae, a tropical plant family of approximately 130 species
              closely related to the economically important bananas and gingers as well as
              prominent ornamentals such as Heliconia and Strelitzia (Bird-of-Paradise). 
              Also known for their ornamental appeal, Costaceae have showy flowers and floral
              structures with shapes and colors that are closely linked to the attraction of
              pollinators.  The proposed research is designed to determine evolutionary
              relationships among species within the family and investigate the historical
              context in which Costaceae has achieved its current level of diversity. 
              Approximately 2500kb of DNA sequence data will be generated for 75 species
              chosen to represent floral and biogeographic diversity within the family. 
              These data will be analyzed along with morphological character data using
              contemporary phylogenetic techniques.  In addition, the development of the
              different floral shapes will be studied to determine potential mechanisms
              involved in the evolution of floral form.

Certain species in the genus
              Costus are pollinated by hummingbirds, while others are bee-pollinated.  The
              genus has thus been divided into two groups based on these overall floral
              characteristics, however recent evidence has shown that these groupings are not
              reflective of evolutionary history.  Rather, it seems as though individuals can
              switch back and forth between hummingbird and bee pollination, possibly based
              on environmental conditions such as pollinator availability or efficacy.  Since
              similar floral forms are found in South American and African species, it may be
              concluded that common types of pollination pressures occur in these
              geographically distant forest, yielding similar shapes and colors in distinct
              lineages of plants.  This study will increase our understanding of the forces
              that promote speciation and diversity in tropical plants.  In addition, floral
              development studies may help to indicate how genetic factors are involved in
              the evolution of diverse forms, leading to a clearer understanding of the
              genetic basis for biodiversity. 

