Title       : Biodiversity of Micro-Fungi (yeast) in the South Florida Everglades Watershed
               Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0206521

Award Number: 0206521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Fell jfell@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1195,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
     Working in the South Florida Everglades and Florida Bay, Dr. Jack Fell of
              the University of Miami seeks to: (1) assess the biodiversity of a
              phylogenetically diverse group of heterotrophic eukaryotes (the yeasts) in a
              changing and endangered environment, and (2) evaluate the effects of
              environmental parameters and limiting nutrients (e.g., temperature, salinity,
              nitrogen, phosphorous and dissolved organic carbon) on yeast community
              structure. The South Florida ecosystem initiates at Lake Okeechobee with a
              southward water flow through the Everglades into Florida Bay with an
              interchange that connects the coral reefs.  This interactive system has been
              managed and mis-managed for over 100 years and is being crowded by development.
               Concern over the fate of the region has resulted in on-going multi-agency,
              institutional environmental studies. Dr. Fell's research program concentrates
              on study of phylogenetically diverse fungi sampled over several transects
              through the region, and using modern molecular and genomic techniques to
              characterize the yeasts, in conjunction with ongoing measures of physical and
              chemical features of the environment. The program will coordinate with two
              large environmental studies of the region, the Florida International University
              (FIU) LTER site (Long Term Ecological Research), sponsored by NSF, and NOAA's
              Florida Bay program. 

     Yeasts, which are unicellular organisms,
              represent a phylogenetic diversity of fungi: two phyla, six classes, 29 orders
              or equivalent lineages, 90 genera and 1000 species.  Despite these high
              numbers, the yeasts are an understudied group of organisms; estimates indicate
              that possibly only 1% of the yeasts in nature have been discovered. Yeasts have
              ecological, commercial and medical importance: fungi are primary drivers of the
              global carbon cycle and their use constitutes one of the world's largest
              industries. Consequently, species extinction with habitat loss can have
              considerable economic significance. Estimates indicate that a large number of
              new species will be discovered in the Everglades system.  These new species
              will be evaluated with existing molecular phylogenetic schemes for
              incorporation into a revised monograph of all described yeast species, the
              planned fifth edition of "The Yeasts, A Taxonomic Study". The revision will
              highlight a revolution in yeast systematics: conversion from phenotypic to
              molecular phylogeny. Specific attention in this project is directed to
              electronic availability of data.  The monograph is designed for web based
              access: strain, collection and phenotypic data will be on-line; molecular
              sequence data will be on GenBank; and ecological data will be available on the
              FIU LTER web site, which is linked to the NOAA websites. Important strains of
              yeasts will be available at internationally recognized culture collections (the
              USDA collection in Peoria, Illinois; Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures in
              the Netherlands; and American Type Culture Collection in Maryland). Training
              will include undergraduate students and incorporate interactions with agency
              personnel and resource managers. 


