Title       : Observations and Analysis of Exotic Gravitational Microlensing Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0206189

Award Number: 0206189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Bennett bennett@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206189
Bennett

This award supports  the investigations of Dr. David
              Bennett and Dr. Sun Hong Rhie, at Notre Dame University, into "exotic"
              gravitational microlensing events. Exotic events deviate from the standard
              gravitational microlensing light curve which assumes a point source, and single
              point lens, and constant velocities for the source, lens, and observer. These
              exotic events are particularly useful because they yield much more information
              about the distance and mass of the lens object than standard microlensing light
              curves. The study of these exotic microlensing events will address such issues
              as the possibility that a substantial fraction of the Milky Way's dark matter
              is composed of very old and cool white dwarfs, the abundance of isolated
              stellar mass black holes in the Milky Way disk, mass measurements of single
              stars at distances of kiloparsecs   from Earth, and the abundance of low-mass
              giant planets in Jupiter-like orbits about stars in the Galactic disk and
              bulge. The work will have a significant impact on our understanding of the
              structure and composition of our Galaxy, the fundamental properties of stars
              and stellar remnants, and the basic mechanism of planet formation. 

This
              project will involve observations, data analysis, and some theoretical work.
              The observational effort will focus primarily on microlensing follow-up
              observations that will take advantage of the tremendous increase in real-time
              microlensing event discoveries expected from the OGLE-III and Super-MACHO
              projects which have just begun taking data. The observations will be done with
              the Boyden Observatory 1.5m telescope in South Africa, which has recently been
              refurbished for this observing program, as well as with the Mt. Stromlo 1.9m
              telescope, in Australia that has been used previously. The follow-up program
              will be done in cooperation with an Ohio State University group which will make
              a substantial contribution to the Mt. Stromlo 1.9m observations, and has near
              dedicated access to the CTIO 1.5m telescope in Chile. The combined resources of
              the Notre Dame and Ohio State groups will yield 24-hour coverage of
              microlensing events. This is necessary in order to mount a microlensing planet
              search program that will be sensitive to planets down to the mass of Neptune in
              Jupiter-like orbits. The observations will enable a stringent test of the "core
              accretion" model for planet formation. This microlensing follow-up program will
              also focus on the study of microlensing parallax events which can reveal
              isolated black holes. Follow-up observations of Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC)
              microlensing events discovered primarily by the Super-MACHO Project will yield
              "exotic" microlensing event features which will allow the determination of the
              lens distances for a statistically significant subset of events. This will
              determine if most of the LMC microlensing events are due to a part of the Milky
              Way's dark matter, or whether they are due to lensing by ordinary stars in the
              LMC. This award will also support a theoretical effort to evaluate potential
              future microlensing programs which might study dark matter in distance galaxies
              or terrestrial planets in our own Galaxy. 
***

