Title       : Survey of Small Coccoid Eukaryotic Algae in Open Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0206590

Award Number: 0206590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The open oceans cover 66% of the earth's surface, and the primary producers are
              primarily tiny coccoid organisms that are very abundant.  At any one instant in
              time, these cells are so numerous that if they were arranged as a packed mass
              in the shape of a standard 1 x 12 board, this plank would stretch from the
              earth to the moon.  Furthermore, these cells divide approximately once per day,
              thereby producing a new plank each day.  Unlike forests, where dividing cells
              accumulate in the tree for 100 or more years, these tiny plants of the ocean
              are quickly eaten.  That is, the phytoplankters directly or indirectly feed the
              fishes, shrimp, whales, etc., so that this amazing "plank to the moon" is
              produced and eaten daily.  Consequently, the ocean waters appear transparent
              and no forest-like biomass accumulates.  Of these tiny organisms, the
              eukaryotic algae are an important component.  However, they have a very simple
              morphology and are nearly impossible to identify using either light or electron
              microscopy.  Although very similar in appearance (little spherical cells), from
              DNA studies it is obvious that these organisms represent several very different
              evolutionary groups.  It has only recently become apparent that molecular
              studies involving gene sequence analysis are needed to understand this
              biodiversity.  Culture collections, especially the Provasoli-Guillard National
              Center for Culture of Marine Phytoplankton (CCMP) at the Bigelow Laboratory,
              hold numerous strains of unidentified tiny coccoid oceanic algae from the blue
              water regions of the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans.  In this study by Dr.
              Robert Andersen, these cultures and additional samples will be examined to
              assess oceanic biodiversity.  The proposed research will utilize nuclear
              ribosomal gene sequences to identify and classify these diverse organisms. 
              Cryptic species complexes will be studied using additional gene sequences (for
              example, genes of photosynthetic enzymes). 
The species composition in
              different oceans, as well as for different regions of the same ocean, will be
              compared.  At present, it is unknown whether the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian
              Oceans have similar or different species of these abundant tiny eukaryotic
              coccoid algae.  The results of this study will contribute to our knowledge of
              ocean ecosystems and their productivity.  Furthermore, preliminary studies have
              shown that some of these tiny algae produce compounds that are beneficial for
              human health.  For example, the newly discovered oceanic pinguiophytes produce
              huge amounts of polyunsaturated fatty acids, which from medical research is
              known to reduce heart disease.

