Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanical Properties and Functional Morphology of
               Mammalian Footpads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0206456

Award Number: 0206456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9996               (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia L. Roth vlroth@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Vogel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Schmitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Virginia L. Roth & Kai-Jung Chi

Footpads are found universally in
              terrestrial mammals; however, how footpads function during locomotion is poorly
              understood.  At each step, footpads are believed to cushion impact, stabilize
              the foot, and return elastic energy.  To perform all these roles, the pad must
              have the paradoxical properties of being compliant and stiff, resilient and
              damped.  This study proposes a solution to this apparent paradox- the footpad
              has mechanical anisotropy.  This hypothesis has been supported by results on
              plantigrade footpads in the context of locomotion, and will be tested on two
              lineages that evolved digitigrady separately: cats and dogs.  Furthermore, this
              study also proposes to identify the morphological determinants that explain
              footpads' mechanical variation observed both intra- and interspecifically. 
              Mechanical and morphological parameters measured on each species will be
              compared to examine whether footpad properties reflect locomotor habits as
              suggested in previous studies.  The goals of this study will be achieved by
              three approaches: (1) Investigation of foot kinematics and mechanical roles of
              footpads in moving digitigrade mammals, (2) Measurement of compressive and
              shear properties of isolated footpads both statically and dynamically, and (3)
              Examination of the compositional and structural morphology of footpads.  This
              study will provide the first experimental and comparative analysis of
              mechanisms of footpad function, especially in the context of locomotion.  Such
              an integrative study will lay the framework for future work focused on
              structure and function of pads in animals less tolerant of laboratory
              conditions, and on scaling, adaptation, diversity, and evolution of mammalian
              feet and footpads.
