Title       : Year of Algebra at the University of Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0206201

Award Number: 0206201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helmut Voelklein helmut@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chat-Yin Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandre Turull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Year of Algebra 2002- 2003 at the University of Florida 
is highlighted by
              the celebration of the 70th birthday of John
G. Thompson.  The general theme
              of the Year of Algebra is provided 
by the wider context of Thompson's
              monumental contributions: the 
beauty and power of group theory, and how it
              applies to problems of
arithmetic via the basic principle of Galois. The Year
              of Algebra 
features a conference in Galois Theory (Nov. 3--9, 2002), a
              conference
in Group Theory (March 9--16, 2003) and a workshop on
              Computational
Aspects of Algebraic Curves, and Cryptography (March 9--15,
              2003).
The Galois conference centers around the Inverse Problem of
              Galois
Theory, one of the major open problems of mathematics. The
              conference
on Finite Group Theory has speakers involved in the
              completion/
revision of the Classification, as well as speakers in
              Representation
Theory, and applications of Finite Groups to Finite Geometries
              and
other areas. The workshop deals with interactions between modern
              
computational tools/questions and the theory of algebraic
              curves,
emphasizing the application to public key cryptography. It has a
              
strong instructional component (mini-courses).

Group Theory is the
              abstract study of symmetry patterns (of any
object), and Galois Theory
              provides tools for applying Group Theory
to algebra and arithmetic. Recent
              applications to data security
(public key cryptography) are the topic of the
              workshop. Galois 
Theory and Group Theory have further applications to
              physics, 
chemistry and coding theory. The Year of Algebra provides
              an
opportunity for young mathematicians, women and minorities to 
learn the
              latest advances.  It was John G. Thompson who shaped 
finite group theory like
              no-one else, leading the way towards a 
major milestone of 20th century
              mathematics, the classification
of finite simple groups.  After the
              classification, it was again
J. Thompson who led the way in exploring its
              implications for
Galois Theory.  For these contributions, Thompson has
              recently
been awarded the National Medal of Science. He also won the
              Fields
Medal, the highest honor in mathematics. For the Year of
              Algebra,
University of Florida Graduate Research Professor John G.
              Thompson
acts as an advisor. His powerful ideas continue to inspire the
              young.
We want to use this opportunity in a special effort to
              integrate
research and education during the Year of Algebra. While the
              two
conferences emphasize latest advances in research, the workshop 
has a
              strong instructional component.
