Title       : Microscopic Mechanism of Cation Exchange Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0206792

Award Number: 0206792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Z. Wu jwu@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the microscopic mechanism of a cation-exchange process
              for synthesis of highly volatile compounds, such as Hg-based high-Tc
              superconductors. These materials have desirable features for superconducting
              device technologies: Tc~130K and large current-carrying capability at
              temperatures above 77 K. Their highly volatile nature, however, limits the
              conven-tional thermal-reaction process since a delicate control of phase
              equilibrium required for synthesis of high-purity samples is difficult to
              achieve. The approach employs a cation-exchange proc-ess in an unconventional
              growth mechanism. A less-volatile precursor matrix is selected with a related
              crystalline structure and chemical composition to a desired volatile compound.
              Volatile compounds can then be formed by perturbing one or more cations on the
              precursor matrix and replacing them with volatile cations. Although the cation
              exchange process has been applied suc-cessfully to synthesis of high- quality
              Hg-HTS films and bulks, the mechanism of cation exchange is barely understood
              at the microscopic level. Understanding this mechanism is a central goal of
              this research as it is crucial not only to the ability to develop Hg-HTS
              electronic/electrical devices, but also to generalization of the process for
              synthesizing other technological important materials that may not be achievable
              in conventional processes. The effect of growth defects, grain boundaries, and
              chemical doping on the cation exchange behavior at the microscopic level will
              be studied so as to achieve a thorough understanding of the macroscopic
              behavior of the ca-tion exchange as a function of processing parameters.
              Theoretical modeling of the cation ex-change process will also be carried out
              to gain a more thorough understanding of the fundamental physics involved.
              
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental synthesis and processing research
              issues in a topical area of materials science having technological relevance.
              The project is collaborative with interactions among researchers at U. Kansas,
              U. WI, Stanford U., U. IL at Chicago, several government labo-ratories (AFRL,
              ORNL, Sandia, LANL, and ANL), and an industrial organization, Supercon-ducting
              Technologies, Inc. Graduate and undergraduate students play a primary role in
              the project and are exposed to research opportunities across several
              disciplines with access to a broad range of research equipment and
              facilities.
***  

