Title       : The Brain: The Final Frontier (Production Proposal)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0206046

Award Number: 0206046
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2836683            (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnna Baldwin-Mallory jbaldwinmallory@partners.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Massachusetts General Hospital, representing Partners HealthCare System, Inc.,
              is producing a large format film on the brain that is designed to increase the
              popular understanding of brain biology and recent advances in neuroscience. 
              Framed within the larger question of the unique abilities of the human mind,
              the project will take an interdisciplinary look at brain science and raise
              questions about the nature and biological basis of diverse aspects of human
              experience including consciousness.  By following a rider in the Tour de
              France, the film will illustrate how the brain functions in both normal and
              stressful situations.  Major sequences will explore vision, memory and emotion.
               Slightly shorter sequences will delve into imagination and creativity,
              language, dreams and pain.  Brief "interludes" will allow the film to reflect
              on the brain as it is represented in a range of human capabilities.  Finally,
              the film turns it attention to consciousness, self-awareness and the totality
              of experiencing life as a human.  

Outreach components of the project
              include:

A weeklong national symposium for museum educators, teachers, and
              community organizations from all regions of the country.

Follow up regional
              "Brain Workshops" designed to provide more focused project support. 

"The
              Brain:  Exploratory Trips Into the Final Frontier" -- An Educator/Student
              Activity Guide

Fun Facts Family Guide to "The Brain" 

An Educational
              Lobby Kiosk

"Head Trip:  A Voyage Through the Young Human Mind" -- An
              illustrated instructional brochure

A Brain Website

The film will be
              directed by Bayley Silleck whose prior large format films include "Cosmic
              Voyage" and "Lost Worlds:  Life in the Balance."  The lead scientific advisors
              are Dr. Dennis Selkow, Professor of Neurology and Neuroscience at Harvard
              Medical School, and Dr. Anne Young, Julieanne Dorn Professor of Neurology at
              Harvard Medical School.  There also will be a seven-member advisory committee
              composed of neuroscientists, psychologists and philosophers.


