Title       : Dissertation Research: Comparative Anatomy and Morphogenesis in the Cephalobinae
               (Nematoda:Rhabditida)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0206569

Award Number: 0206569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8925               (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Baldwin james.baldwin@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. James Baldwin and Mr. Daniel Bumbarger at
              University of California, Riverside to study the structure and evolution of
              extracellular feeding appendages in the Cephalobinae, a group of microbial
              feeding nematodes. The project will describe the ultrastructural anatomy of
              these structures, classify processes responsible for their assembly and explore
              patterns in developmental character evolution that are relevant to
              understanding heterochrony and the evolution of novelty. As these structures
              are extremely complex on a sub-micrometer spatial scale, a unique application
              of electron tomography, a three dimensional electron microscopy method, will be
              utilized to describe the anatomy. Morphogenesis of these structures will be
              studied with more traditional light microscopy. Comparative work, based
              primarily on scanning electron micrographs of adult and juvenile morphologies,
              will be done in collaboration with a molecular phylogenetic lab.
It is
              expected that this project will provide a foundation upon which to ask
              taxonomic, developmental and evolutionary questions of broad interest. This
              project will contribute to monographic work already in progress by providing
              strong hypotheses of character homology with which to re-define taxonomic
              groupings in a manner that reflects phylogenetic relationships. The proposed
              research represents novel application of electron tomography that may prove
              useful for assessing homology in other groups of small invertebrates. Nematodes
              make excellent models for understanding the evolution of development,
              particularly where a link between genotypic and phenotypic changes must be
              understood. Patterns in the complexity and diversity of anterior morphology
              suggest the presence of developmental modules that could evolve relatively
              independently from one another. Many mutations in these feeding appendages will
              likely be viable, which will facilitate identification of developmental
              regulatory genes responsible for evolutionary changes.

