Title       : RUI: Formation and Evolution of Galactic Disks in a Cosmological Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0206251

Award Number: 0206251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clayton H. Heller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Isaac Shlosman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga. Southern Univ. R&S Fdn
	      4 College Plaza
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206251
Heller

Dr. Heller and his collaborator will conduct a broad
              based study of galactic disk formation and evolution, examining the role of
              non-axisymmetric instabilities in driving the formation and evolution of all
              components of disk galaxies, including the gaseous and stellar disk, bulge, and
              halo in a cosmologically relevant setting. Galaxy disks are believed to form
              over an extended period of time, growing from the inside out. Star formation in
              the disk will convert gas to stars, perhaps also forming a bulge. However, this
              simple picture will not be non- axisymmetric instabilities.  Since even mild
              oval distortions can be efficient engines of structural change, these
              instabilities can drive gas toward the center of a forming galaxy produce
              profound changes in the structure and stability of all the galactic components.
              This mechanism can produce a rich assortment of possible evolutionary paths for
              a galaxy.

This study will focus on the following aspects of the problem: 1)
              Disk formation in  triaxial halos. 2) Analysis of the effects of star formation
              on the long-term stability of the disk and  flow rates. 3) Analysis of the
              secular evolution of stellar bars, and their role in disk-halo coupling. 4)
              Analyses of the broader question of how the different cosmological parameters
              affect the formation and evolution of disk galaxies.. 5) Determination of the
              effects of a background UV radiation field on the formation and evolution of
              low mass disk galaxies. These analyses will be done using numerical
              simulations. The project will involve the active participation of a professor
              and his students at an undergraduate institution and will include the
              establishment of a state-of-the-art Linux computer at that institution,
              providing the undergraduates with hands-on computer systems experience.
              Technical support for this development will be provided by personnel at the
              University of Kentucky. This award is made under the auspices of the Research
              at Undergraduate Institutions program. 
***

