Title       : C-TOOLS: Concept-Connector Tools for Online Learning in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0206924

Award Number: 0206924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356686             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Luckie luckie@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Ebert-May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet M. Batzli  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project, an interdisciplinary team of faculty from the College of
              Natural Science and the Lyman Briggs School at Michigan State University are
              working to develop and validate a new assessment tool for courses in biology,
              chemistry, physics and geology. The idea is for students to construct concept
              maps of their own. The Concept Connector, consists of a web-based, concept
              mapping Java applet with automatic scoring and feedback functionality. The tool
              enables students in large introductory science classes to visualize their
              thinking online and receive immediate formative feedback. The assessment tool
              and the methods of its application in the classroom are being designed to
              motivate students to reflect, revise and share their thinking with peers as an
              extension of the learning process. We predict (i) faculty becomes better able
              to identify their students ' areas of incomplete, vague or misunderstanding of
              science, and (ii) students confront their misconceptions and become better able
              to reflect on, organize, and integrate their learning. Three primary goals of
              this project are to: (1) develop and validate an online concept mapping tool
              that can be used to provide immediate feedback (computer automated) to both
              students and instructors about student understanding of conceptual
              relationships, (2) detect and document students ' misconceptions regarding
              relationships between concepts (e.g., interdisciplinary; relation between
              ecology and quantum physics, or discipline specific; structure and function of
              DNA), and (3) implement and sustain faculty development workshops to help
              faculty design curricula and instruction that can better assess student
              learning and enable students to use visual models to represent their
              understanding.

