Title       : Constraining Bias via Clustering in Galaxy Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0206243

Award Number: 0206243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258791             (Estimated)
Investigator: Istvan Szapudi szapudi@ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206243
Szapudi

Current cosmological theories imply that the stars,
              galaxies and clusters of galaxies that we can see represent only a relatively
              small fraction of the matter content of the universe. Most of the matter is in
              a form unknown to us, and can be detected only through its gravitational pull.
              The nature of this ``Dark Matter'' is the single most interesting problem in
              contemporary theoretical physics, and its study involves the amalgamation of
              information from different disciplines, such as particle physics, astronomy,
              and cosmology. The present project aims to constrain the properties of this
              elusive dark matter by looking at ``bias'', the difference between the
              statistical properties of visible and dark matter.

According to current
              theories of structure formation, small initial fluctuations in the early
              Universe grew under the influence of gravity until the large-scale structures
              which, we see at the present day, formed. It appears that galaxies formed where
              the underlying dark matter concentrated in clumps (called halos). Thus, the
              present distribution of galaxies depends both on the distribution of dark
              matter and on the efficiency with which dark matter halos turn into galaxies.
              Novel statistical measures developed by Dr. Szapudi and his collaborators will
              be used to characterize the present-day distribution of galaxies using data
              from on-going wide field surveys (e.g., the Sloan Digital Sky Survey) which
              encompass up to a million objects. Then the theory of bias will be applied to
              these measured distributions to constrain the distribution of the underlying
              dark matter. This distribution, in turn can be used to test predictions from
              the various phenomenological and fundamental theories which have been developed
              to describe the "Dark Matter".
***

