Title       : Globular Cluster Sub-Populations: Understanding Galaxy Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0206139

Award Number: 0206139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean P. Brodie brodie@ucolick.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Huchra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0206139
Brodie

Globular clusters (GCs) are relatively simple stellar
              populations consisting of 10,000 to 1,000,000 stars and characterized, to first
              order, by a single age and chemical composition (metallicity). They are thought
              to be the oldest radiant objects in the universe, and they orbit, usually in
              large numbers,
around galaxies of all morphological types. As fossil remnants
              of the early environments out of
which galaxies formed they are powerful
              probes of the processes of galaxy formation and evolution.
GCs appear to be
              good tracers of the major star forming episodes in their host galaxies and,
              unlike
single stars, they can be observed far beyond our Local Group of
              galaxies, providing clues about the
early histories of different types of
              galaxies. Because they are relatively simple stellar populations,
GCs are more
              easily modeled and understood than the unknown mix of stars of different ages
              and
metallicities that make up the diffuse stellar population of galaxies.
              

In the last decade two results have had a major impact on the field of
              extragalactic GC research.
First, young massive clusters (YMCs), perhaps GCs
              caught in the very process of forming, have
been detected in interacting
              galaxies (two galaxies in the throes of merging together). This suggests
that
              major galaxy interactions induce the formation of new star clusters. If these
              objects are really "protoglobulars", two populations of GCs should be present
              after a merger event; the old population from the progenitor galaxies and the
              new population actually formed in the galaxy-galaxy interaction. Second,
              optical colors have revealed evidence for blue and red sub-populations in the
              GC systems of most, but not all galaxies. The color differences are due to
              metallicity and probably age differences, in combinations still to be
              determined. It is not yet clear whether one of the sub-populations was produced
              in a merger event or whether the sub-populations might be due to multiple
              epochs or mechanisms of formation. However, answering these questions is
              pivotal to
understanding the formation history of galaxies. 

Building on a
              very successful current program,  the objectives of this project, lead by Dr.
              Jean Brodie at the University of California at Santa Cruz, are now to
              understand GC sub-populations by determining exact properties such as ages,
              element abundances and kinematics for large samples of extragalactic GCs. These
              properties are the key to discriminating between various GC and galaxy
              formation scenarios. Observations of young clusters in star-forming galaxies
              offer an intriguing opportunity to gain first-hand insight into the processes
              by which GCs formed in the early universe but it is first necessary to
              establish whether YMCs will survive for long periods of time and can thus be
              rightly regarded as "young globulars". Specifically, high signal-to-noise
              spectra of  ~50 GCs in each of 12 to18 galaxies will yield accurate individual
              ages and metallicities. The sample covers a wide range of galaxy masses,
              morphologies and environments. Kinematic information will be obtained for
              larger numbers (> 100) of clusters and near-infrared (NIR) photometry will
              provide somewhat cruder, but essentially age-independent, metallicity estimates
              for up to 1000 GCs in each galaxy. High-dispersion spectroscopy for 10 to 15
              YMCs in nearby star-forming galaxies will be used to determine their virial
              masses and explore the universality of the stellar initial mass function. A NIR
              imaging survey in 4 to 6 spirals will detect hundreds of YMCs in their earliest
              stages of formation. The data will be obtained from several ground-based
              facilities, including the Keck 10m telescopes equipped with new, powerful
              multiplexing spectrographs, and high-resolution optical and NIR spectrographs,
              and the MMT and Magellan telescopes with their wide-field NIR imagers. The data
              volumes will be large and students and post-docs will play a major role in all
              stages of the research from observations, data reduction and analysis, to
              publication.
***

