Title       : Prokaryotic Diversity of Biological Soil Crusts in Aridlands of North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0206711

Award Number: 0206711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ferran Garcia-Pichel ferran@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean M. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Ferran Garcia-Pichel and Jean M. Schmidt at
              Arizona State University, in collaboration with Dr. Richard M. Keller at NASA
              Ames Research Center to conduct a survey of the microbial diversity present in
              biological soil crusts of North America. In arid lands, where plant cover is
              restricted, a half-inch thick live mantle of microbes develops in the topsoil
              that traps soil particles together and enriches the soils with organic carbon
              and nitrogen.  Known as biological desert crusts, they cover spaces between
              plants, stabilizing the soil against wind erosion and preventing formation of
              blow-sands.  There is presently a lack of knowledge regarding the microbial
              species inhabiting these important and widespread topsoil habitats.  In a
              variety of sites of North American deserts and semi-deserts, the investigators
              will embark in an effort to detect and document local bacteria important in
              terms of abundance or novelty. For this, they will use modern DNA technology.
              They will also attempt to cultivate those microbes in the laboratory. Two
              repositories will be established. A DNA database will enable the future
              recognition of crust microbes by other investigators.  Cultivated bacteria will
              be characterized with respect to their ecological role and properties, and will
              be deposited in public culture collections for the benefit of the scientific
              and biotechnology community at large.  

It is expected that these
              documentation and repositories will constitute the base for improved knowledge
              of desert bacterial communities, complementing our understanding of desert
              ecology, facilitating sound rangeland management, and enabling bioremediation
              attempts in heavily impacted arid areas. 

