Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Social and Ecological Influences on the Anti-Predator
               Defenses of Black-Tailed Prairie Dogs: A Role for Behavior in Conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0206753

Award Number: 0206753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9950               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Owings dhowings@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Social and ecological influences on the anti-predator defenses of black-tailed
              prairie dogs: a role for behavior in conservation

Donald H. Owings, Ph.D.
              and Debra M. Shier

This project integrates the study of animal behavior and
              conservation biology by investigating how black-tailed prairie dogs become
              skillful at dealing with danger from predators. It has long been hypothesized
              that animals reared in captivity and released into the wild suffer
              exceptionally high mortality from predation, but to date little organized
              research has addressed this topic.  If this hypothesis receives support, then
              the conditions that support development of skillful response to predators need
              to be provided to prairie dogs and other threatened species who are reared in
              captivity for release and re-establishment of wild populations. Research will
              test the hypothesis that experience with predators is needed for prairie dogs
              to learn to be effective in evading predation, and that other family members
              are an especially important source of that learning in this highly social
              species. Though an animal's social environment has been shown to affect the
              development of behaviors such as novel foraging strategies, the impact of
              social inputs on the development of defensive behavior has received little
              attention.  Over the course of four field seasons, three experiments will be
              conducted to examine 1) whether animals trapped and moved in family groups show
              a higher survival rate following release to a new site than animals trapped and
              moved without regard to family composition; 2) if repeated exposure to
              predators during the first few weeks of life affects the development of
              effective antipredator behavior; and 3) how the presence of the mother, other
              experienced relatives, and/or inexperienced siblings affect the development of
              defensive behavior.

