Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evolutionary Success in Marine Invertebrates: Testing
               the Relationships between Eurytopy, Longevity, and Geographic Range in
               Carboniferous Crinoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0206307

Award Number: 0206307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82837              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Kammer tkammer@wvu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Evolutionary Success in Marine Invertebrates:  Testing
              the Relationships between Eurytopy, Longevity, and Geographic Range in
              Carboniferous Crinoids

This study will focus on the role of environmental
              and biogeographic factors in the evolutionary success of crinoids
              (echinoderms), one the most diverse and abundant groups of marine invertebrates
              during the Paleozoic.  Lower Carboniferous (354 to 314 m.y. ago) rocks record
              the peak of crinoid generic diversity during their evolutionary history. 
              Evolutionary success is measured by taxonomic longevity in the fossil record. 
              Current understanding of reasons for evolutionary success is incomplete, but
              available evidence indicates a positive correlation with environmental breadth
              (eurytopy) and geographic range.  Data supporting this correlation are limited
              for Paleozoic marine invertebrates.  Thus, analysis of Early Carboniferous
              crinoids, where preliminary work supports such a correlation, will more
              rigorously test the correlation and broaden our understanding of the
              relationships between eurytopy, longevity, and geographic range in marine
              invertebrates.  The research will compare the average stratigraphic
              (longevity), environmental (eurytopy), and geographic ranges of genera within
              crinoid groups (suborders) between North America and Europe, the two regions
              with the best fossil record.  The study will include the Kinderhookian to early
              Meramecian epochs of the Mississippian Period (Early Carboniferous) of North
              America and the equivalent Tournaisian to middle Visean epochs of the Early
              Carboniferous of western Europe.  Stratigraphic and geographic ranges of genera
              will be determined by evaluating all known species for correct generic
              assignment.  Simultaneously, data on environmental distribution will be
              tabulated for genera on both continents to calculate a eurytopy index value for
              each genus, both intracontinental and intercontinental.  Results of this
              investigation will bear directly on evolutionary theory as it endeavors to
              explain the history of life on Earth.  The extensive data set derived from this
              study will help elucidate the roles of environment and geography in determining
              generic longevity and, ultimately, group longevity in defining evolutionary
              success. 


