Title       : RUI: HII Region Evolution in Extreme Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0206103

Award Number: 0206103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher G. De Pree cdepree@agnesscott.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agnes Scott College
	      
	      Decatur, GA  30030    404/373-2571

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0206103
De Pree

HII regions have revealed their nature slowly as
              observational techniques have improved and as subarcsecond radio frequency
              observations have become possible. Yet, these volumes of ionized gas that exist
              around the most massive young stars, at least in the early stages of their
              formation and evolution, are some of the least understood objects in the
              Galaxy. The diminutive cousins of HII regions called ultracompact (UC) HII
              regions are very different from the parsec-scale, optically-thin HII regions
              described in classic textbooks.  The evidence is clear: UC HII regions are not
              simply small HII regions, they represent a unique class of object. The goal of
              Dr. Christopher De Pree's research project is to compare recent and proposed
              observations with hydrodynamic simulations to move toward a more complete
              understanding of the nature of UC HII regions and what their morphologies,
              temperatures, kinematics and evolution tell us about the earliest stages of
              massive star formation. 

UC HII regions have never been imaged and mapped
              spectroscopically on these small spatial 
scales. The sources to be studied
              are optically unobservable, and these will be the best data available until the
              Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) is dedicated in the coming decade. These
              new data provide the best comparison data to constrain hydrodynamic simulations
              of UC HII region evolution. The Agnes Scott College program has a proven record
              of success in involving undergraduate women in astronomical research and
              preparing them for graduate work, and this project would continue and
              strengthen that effort by providing research involvement and exposure to
              scientists at two premiere national graduate programs (North Carolina State
              University and Harvard University). Early data from related projects have been
              shared informally with a number of investigators, and this project would make
              existing data and new data freely available.   This award is made under the
              auspices of the Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program at
              NSF.
***



