Title       : Quantitative Modeling of Infiltration in Layered Intrusions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0206905

Award Number: 0206905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan E. Boudreau boudreau@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Boudreau
EAR-0206905

Igneous intrusions such as the Bushveld Complex of
              South Africa and the Stillwater Complex of Montana host much of the world's
              reserves of economically valuable elements such as chromium and the
              platinum-group elements.  Although subject to numerous studies, there is still
              surprisingly little agreement on how they crystallized and differentiated. A
              significant part of the proposed study involves extending a numerical model
              that links an equilibrium crystallization routine (based on the MELTS algorithm
              of Ghiorso and coworkers) with one-dimensional heat and mass transport
              equations that include compaction equations of McKenzie. Examples of areas the
              work would be extended include the addition of spinels to the program and
              investigation of the formation of economically important chromite-rich layers
              that occur in layered intrusions.
         
On a parallel track, we will look
              at details of mineral-mineral trace element partitioning to test if
              concentrations of temperature-dependent trace elements are affected by
              compaction-driven recrystallization.  Specifically, laser ablation-ICP-MS and
              electron microprobe mineral mapping and bulk mineral analysis will test if
              mineral-mineral partitioning is correlated textural and/or modal
              variations.

Finally, we wish to test if one can infer concealed intrusion
              geometry from crystal size distribution (CSD) data.  This will be tested by
              comparing existing data with new Lower and Critical zone samples to be
              collected where the Lower is both unusually thick over footwall embayments
              (i.e., the "Burgersfort Bugle") and where the Lower and Critical zone onlap the
              floor rocks in the eastern Bushveld.  If successful, this will further
              demonstrate that texture is locally evolved and not necessarily a function of
              minerals transported from elsewhere.


