Title       : The Web-based ARTIST Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0206571

Award Number: 0206571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501218             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan B. Garfield jbg@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth L. Chance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. delMas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project develops Web-based resources for first courses in statistics,
              called the Assessment Resource Tools for Improving Statistical Thinking
              (ARTIST). The Web ARTIST project produces the following products:
+	A
              collection of high quality assessment items and tasks, coded according to
              content (e.g., normal distribution, measures of center, bivariate data) and
              type of cognitive outcome (e.g., statistical literacy, reasoning, or
              thinking).
+	A Website that contains the assessment items and tasks, provides
              online testing, offers guidelines for using the assessment items/tasks in
              various ways, and allows for the collection and compilation of data for
              research and evaluation purposes.
+	Faculty development workshops and
              mini-courses to encourage and assist statistics instructors in how to use the
              assessment resources to improve student learning, improve their courses, and
              evaluate course outcomes.
+	A comprehensive test that measures desired
              outcomes of a first course in statistics.

The ARTIST Web site includes a
              variety of item formats and types of performance assessments. Instructors have
              a centralized resource to help them better evaluate student attainment of
              particular outcomes, rather than global measures of achievement.
Specifically,
              outcomes to evaluate include statistical literacy (e.g., understanding words
              and symbols, being able to read and interpret graphs and terms), statistical
              reasoning (e.g., reasoning with statistical information, using statistics to
              make predictions or judgment), and statistical thinking (e.g., the type of
              thinking that statisticians use when solving problems that involve data, such
              as choosing appropriate procedures and checking assumptions).

