Title       : Multiwavelength and Multidimensional Studies of the Nova Outburst and Related
               Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0206003

Award Number: 0206003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sumner Starrfield starrfield@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206003

PI Starrfield

An improved understanding of nova explosions
              holds important implications for the creation of many chemical elements in the
              galaxy, the secular evolution of close binary systems, the sources of pre-solar
              grains,  the distance scale of the universe, the  nature of the progenitors of
              Type Ia Supernovae, and for gamma-ray sources.  Thermonuclear runaways in 
              hydrogen-rich envelopes on white dwarf stars in close binary stellar systems
              constitute the outburst mechanisms for classical and recurrent novae.   Ongoing
              studies of the general characteristics of these explosions are informing us
              about binary stellar evolution, while studies of the evolution of nova binary
              systems are constraining models for the (unidentified) progenitors of the Type
              Ia supernovae.  Further, the empirical relation between the peak luminosity of
              a nova and the rate of decline, not understood theoretically, allows novae to
              be utilized as standard candles for distance determinations as far away as some
              galaxy clusters. Extensive abundance determinations of nova ejecta have
              revealed the existence of massive oxygen-neon-magnesium white dwarfs in some
              systems and less massive carbon-oxygen white dwarfs in other systems.  The high
              levels of enrichment of novae ejecta in elements ranging from carbon to sulfur
              confirm that there is significant dredge-up of matter from the core of the
              underlying white dwarf.  Classical novae, therefore, must participate in the
              cycle of  chemical  enrichment of heavy elements in interstellar gas and dust. 
              Once in the diffuse gas, this material is cycled through molecular clouds
              before being incorporated into young stars and planetary systems during star
              formation.  It seems likely that grains from novae were injected into the
              pre-solar nebula and can be identified with some of the pre-solar grains found
              in meteorites.  This research will help us (1)  to understand and to reliably
              predict the observed behaviors described above, and (2) to understand the
              complicated interplay between nuclear physics and convection  during  the 
              final  stages  of  the  thermonuclear runaway.  
***

