Title       : A Microbial Inventory of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem Thermal Features
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0206773

Award Number: 0206773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristina D. Takacs-Vesbach cvesbach@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna-Louise Reysenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Cristina Takacs-Vesbach (University of New
              Mexico) and Anna-Louise Reysenbach (Portland State University) to inventory the
              microbial diversity and geochemistry associated with the major geothermal
              features of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem (GYE: Wyoming, Montana, and
              Idaho).  The GYE comprises the largest and most varied geothermal basin in the
              world, yet diversity assessments have been limited to only a handful of these
              thermal springs.  The phylogenetic and physiological diversity of 100 thermal
              sites will be determined using molecular genetic techniques that identify DNA
              sequences of genes that are molecular signatures for microbial species and
              metabolic processes.  These data, along with geochemical measurements, will be
              compiled into an Internet accessible database and will be used to develop DNA
              microarrays, a tool that will enable researchers and managers to rapidly assess
              the diversity of other thermal sites.  The research community will have access
              to the DNA isolated by this study through the University of New Mexico Museum.
              The investigators will work with National Park Service personnel to develop
              on-site educational displays for the general public, in addition to training
              students, managers, and National Park Service interpretive rangers in microbial
              ecology through a field course and workshop.
 
As the thermal microbiota of
              the GYE represents a wealth of untapped genetic potential, developing an
              inventory linked to an environmental database offers a means of accessing this
              diversity and will aid in the identification of organisms of potential
              technological and industrial importance. Furthermore, although the thermal
              sites occur within Yellowstone National Park and are thus protected, geological
              (earthquakes), climatological (low aquifer recharge), and anthropomorphic
              (intensive sampling or regional mining) perturbations have the potential to
              alter these ecosystems.  Until an inventory of these resources is taken, some
              novel organisms will have incomplete protection simply because their existence
              is not known; the project will provide a baseline of microbial diversity in the
              GYE essential to monitoring and managing microbial resources.

