Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effect of Body Size and Development on Gas Exchange
               Mechanisms in Insects: Diffusion vs. Convection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0206678

Award Number: 0206678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9952               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon F. Harrison j.harrison@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DISSERTATION RESEAERCH:  Effect of Body Size and Development on Gas Exchange
              Mechanisms in Insects:  Diffusion vs. Convection

Jon F. Harrison
Kendra J.
              Greenlee

Delivery of oxygen in organisms occurs by two basic mechanisms,
              convection and diffusion.  Determining the relative importance of these
              mechanisms is fundamental to understanding gas exchange in any organism. 
              Convection occurs when pressure generated by respiratory muscles causes bulk
              movement of air.  Diffusion occurs by passive movement of oxygen molecules from
              areas of high concentration to areas of lower concentration.  For insects, the
              relative role of convection and diffusion in gas exchange is highly
              controversial.  Past evidence supports the notion that some insects can sustain
              their energy demands through diffusion of oxygen alone.  However, many insects
              exhibit pressure-generating behaviors, such as abdominal pumping in
              grasshoppers.  In particular, it is thought that the relative importance of
              convection may increase with insect body size.  In this study, the relative
              importance of diffusion and convection to insect gas exchange will be
              quantified by manipulating the ability of oxygen to diffuse using different
              carrier gases.  Generally, air contains 21% oxygen and 79% nitrogen. 
              Substituting helium or sulfur hexaflouride for nitrogen alters the oxygen
              diffusion coefficient, making it easier or more difficult, respectively, for
              oxygen to move by diffusion.  The grasshoppers' metabolic response to lowered
              oxygen levels will be measured in all three carrier gases.  If grasshoppers are
              breathing by diffusion, their metabolic responses should be strongly affected
              by these manipulations.  Conversely, if grasshoppers breathe by convection,
              their metabolic responses to hypoxia will not be affected by variations in
              carrier gas.  To test whether the relative importance of diffusion and
              convection varies with size, these experiments will be performed with juvenile
              (small) and adult (large) grasshoppers.  To further test the importance of
              diffusion and convection in insects, grasshoppers will be anesthetized with
              ketamine to prevent abdominal pumping movements.  If convection does become
              increasingly important in larger insects, ketamine is predicted to have a much
              stronger effect on metabolic responses to hypoxia in larger grasshoppers. 
              Together, these experiments will provide the first empirical tests of the
              relative importance of diffusion and convection in insects of different sizes. 
                  

