Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics of the Neotropical Plant Genus Alloplectus
               (Gesneriaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0206512

Award Number: 0206512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9062               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick S. Herendeen herenden@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0206512
Herendeen and Clark
	The genus Alloplectus, a common shrub from the
              northwestern Andes, has flowers that may be viewed as an upside down version of
              those of the Florists' Gloxinia.  Alloplectus and the Florists' Gloxinia both
              belong to the same group, but the flowers are resupinate (inverted) in some
              species of Alloplectus.  This project will look at the pattern of
              diversification in Alloplectus and related members of the family Gesneriaceae
              and the evolution of flower resupination in this group.  The Neotropical
              members of Gesneriaceae are problematic because morphological details are
              poorly documented, closely related taxa exhibit a wide range of flower forms,
              pollinators are poorly known, and molecular phylogenies have insufficient
              species sampling to clarify the wide range of morphological variation. One of
              the least understood groups of Neotropical gesneriads is the genus Alloplectus.
               This project will generate phylogenetic hypotheses to test competing theories
              of gesneriad evolution, to resolve phylogenetic relationships within the tribe
              Episcieae, and to complete a taxonomic revision of the genus.  Field
              expeditions will be carried out in Bolivia and Panama to study the plants and
              their pollinators and collect material for study in the laboratory and
              herbarium.  Visits to European herbaria will be conducted to study historical
              and recent plant collections.  Molecular sequence data will be collected for
              the nuclear ITS region and the chloroplast trnL intron and spacer. 
              Morphological characters will be studied and scored for phylogenetic analyses. 
              
Although tropical ecosystems are attracting increasing attention from
              biologists and conservationists interested in understanding and managing the
              earth's biological resources, there is much that is not understood about the
              diversity of plants and other organisms that make up these ecosystems.  For
              example, there are at least five species of Alloplectus that are new to science
              and many members of this group are geographically restricted and live in
              forests that are threatened by logging and agricultural conversion.  Results
              from this project will provide a robust phylogenetic hypothesis and data that
              may be used to address questions about plant diversity and conservation,
              morphological evolution, and pollination biology in this poorly known group of
              tropical plants.


