Title       : Sampled Data Stabilization and Tracking for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0206951

Award Number: 0206951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75176              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Rebarber rrebarbe@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0206951
Rebarber

This project will focus on developing techniques for
              sampled-data 
feedback for infinite dimensional systems.  A discrete time
              controller can 
operator with only limited frequency response, and infinite
              dimensional 
systems often have high frequency effects which cannot be
              ignored, so 
there is not only interest in what can be done with sampled-data
              control 
design, but also in its limitations.  The following question is
              basic: can a 
given continuous-time controller be replaced by a related
              sampled-data 
controller, while maintaining the desired response of the
              closed-loop 
system?  Both idealized and generalized sample-and-hold will be
              
considered. Generalized hold can be used as a design parameter, and
              
generalized sampling can be used when the output is not sufficiently 
smooth
              to accommodate point evaluations in time.  The PI will 
characterize as
              completely as possible those continuous-time feedback 
systems which do not
              lose their closed-loop stability when a sampled data 
scheme (with
              sufficiently small sampling time) is applied to the feedback, 
and will
              determine whether the performance of the sampled-data system 
can approximate
              the continuous time performance.  The performance 
measures considered are
              closed-loop growth rate and stability radius. 
Tracking techniques for
              infinite dimensional systems will also be studied 
and developed.  Suppose a
              system has an external disturbance term which 
is to be rejected, or an
              external reference term to be tracked.  One common 
approach to doing this is
              by a low-gain controller suggested by the internal 
model principle.  The
              effectiveness of such a controller for a wide class of 
systems will be
              studied, as well as its sensitivity to frequency variations in 
the external
              signal. Sampled-data versions of tracking controllers will also 
be
              considered.  These sampled-data and tracking results will be applied to 
PDEs
              in more than one space variable, especially coupled PDE models 
with at least
              one hyperbolic component.  Due to the fact that these models 
involve two
              different of PDEs, coupled via highly unbounded operators, 
the analysis has
              features which are distinct from the analysis for 
uncoupled systems.  For
              this problem a central concern for output 
feedback design is the analysis of
              the input-output map, i.e. the map from 
the control to the
              observation.

Advances in digital technology have led to an emphasis on
              sampled-data 
design in control engineering, but the development of sampled
              data 
control for infinite-dimensional systems such as PDEs has been limited. 
              
In many applications output data is available in discrete time rather than
              
continuous time, and a feedback controller for such a system should be
              
designed to take discrete data as its input, but act in continuous time. 
              
Since there is already an enormous literature on continuous time
              
stabilization of PDEs, the project will involve the investigation of how to
              
modify continuous time controllers to obtain sampled data controllers,
              
while maintaining system performance.  Also of interest are techniques for
              
designing effective sampled-data controllers without reference to
              
continuous time design.  Another topic to be considered is the design of
              
active feedback control tracking external signals and rejecting noise. As an
              
application, these methods will be used to design a controller to reject
              
noise in a PDE model which describes the interaction between sound 
waves in
              a cavity (for instance, an airplane cockpit) and the motion of a 
flexible
              wall of the cavity.  Suppose that there is an external noise source, 
such as
              engine noise, which is to be rejected, and active feedback control 
is to be
              applied to smart material actuators on the cavity walls.  Then a 
properly
              designed low-gain controller (either continuous time feedback or
              
sampled-data) will attenuate the sound pressure at and near finitely many
              
points of the cavity.

