Title       : High-Resolution Simulations of Galaxy and Cluster Formation: Towards a
               Self-Consistent Modelling of Stellar Feedback
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0206216

Award Number: 0206216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrey V. Kravtsov andrey@oddjob.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anatoly A. Klypin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0206216
Kravtsov

One of the greatest challenges of modern astrophysics
              is understanding how galaxies such as our own Milky Way form within the
              framework of the Big Bang cosmology. The current theory of structure formation
              (called the Cold Dark Matter (CDM) scenario)  predicts  that massive  galaxies 
              were  built from  smaller galaxies that  collided and  merged, inducing bursts 
              of star formation and resulting in the different  types of galaxies observed
              today.  This entire sequence  of  events  is  thought  to  be  seeded  by 
              quantum fluctuations in the very  early Universe  and governed  by mysterious
              "dark  matter"  which constitutes  about  85%  of  all matter  in  the
              universe.   While the CDM theory is successful in explaining many observations,
              it faces an increasing number of problems which may lead us to revise or even
              abandon this paradigm.

One of the fundamental, unanswered questions is
              whether realistic galaxies with properties similar to those of observed
              galaxies can be formed in the CDM model. This project will specifically  focus
              on  stellar feedback  and heavy element enrichment and their role in the
              evolution of galaxies. Dr. Kravtsov and his collaborators will address this
              question by using very high-resolution, state-of-the-art computer simulations
              which include all the main processes thought  to  be important in  galaxy. In
              particular, the simulations will account for the release of enormous amounts of
              energy and heavy elements into the surrounding gas by the explosions of young,
              massive stars. This energy release, or "feedback", is thought to play a
              critical role in controlling the rate at which interstellar gas is turned into
              stars and in shaping the overall properties of galaxies. 
***

