Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Breathing Mechanisms in the Archosauria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0206169

Award Number: 0206169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9986               (Estimated)
Investigator: Farish A. Jenkins fjenkins@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dissertation Research:  Evolutions of Breathing Mechanisms in the Archosauria
              

Dr. Farish Jenkins & Leon Claessens

An understanding of the origin of
              vertebrate respiratory systems- how very different lung structures and
              breathing mechanisms evolved- has been constrained by the rarity of soft-tissue
              preservation in the fossil record.  The problem may be circumvented by taking
              an integrative approach that employs both observations on living animals and a
              survey of hard tissue structures preserved in extinct forms.  The project will
              focus on the evolution of lung ventilation in the Archosauria, a group of
              animals that includes dinosaurs, crocodilians and birds.  The two living
              archosaurian groups, birds and crocodilians, exhibit distinct and seemingly
              unique respiratory mechanisms.  Bird lungs are interconnected with
              non-respiratory air sacs, and air 'circulates' unidirectionally through lungs
              of fixed size; crocodilians have two-way flow and an accessory muscle that
              moves the lungs.  The skeletal movements of the respiratory cycle (inhalation
              and exhalation) in birds and crocodilians have not been studied in detail. 
              This work will represent the first attempt to correlate the mechanics of
              respiration with a detailed analysis of bony features, especially those that
              are indicators of specific movements and those that constrain movement.  This
              combined approach represents the most promising basis on which to trace the
              evolution of diverse respiratory systems that is represented with the
              Archosauria.
	Specifically, this investigation will:
	1. Analyze the
              respiratory kinematics of the trunk skeleton of birds and crocodilians through
              cineradiography (x-ray recording of living animals);
	2. Identify and trace
              osteological (bony) characters and their functional implications within the
              archosaurian fossil record;
	3. Assess the functional and structural data in a
              phylogenetic context (that is, in terms of evolutionary relationships inferred
              from other evidence) to understand evolutionary patterns.  

