Title       : Scalar Curvature, Geometric Flow, and the General Penrose Conjecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0206483

Award Number: 0206483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hubert L. Bray bray@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Scalar Curvature, Geometric Flows, and the General Penrose Conjecture
         
                        
                          DMS - 0206483  Hubert Bray, MIT

      
                                                                
The primary goal of this
              research is to prove the full Penrose 
conjecture in general relativity about
              the mass of black holes in 
a spacetime.  In 3+1 dimensions, this conjecture
              states that the 
total mass of a spacetime with nonnegative energy density
              
everywhere is greater than or equal to the square root of the 
total area of
              the event horizons of all of the black holes in the 
spacetime divided by 16
              pi.  This conjecture can be thought of as 
stating that the mass contributed
              by a collection of black holes 
is at least the square root of their surface
              areas divided 16 pi, 
so that nonnegative energy density everywhere else in
              the 
universe forces the total mass of the spacetime to be at least 
this
              amount.  The Penrose conjecture is best thought of as a 
conjecture on
              arbitrary three dimensional space-like slices of 
the spacetime.  In the
              special case that the space-like slice is 
assumed to have zero second
              fundamental form, the conjecture is 
known as the Riemannian Penrose
              conjecture.  This conjecture was 
first proved for a single black hole by
              Huisken and Ilmanen in 
1997 and then for any number of black holes by the
              author in 
1999.  The author would also like to prove the Riemannian Penrose
              
Conjecture in dimensions higher than three and is close to 
announcing this
              result for dimensions less than eight.  
Dimensions eight and higher present
              additional geometric and 
analytical challenges arising from the fact that the
              apparent 
horizons of black holes manifest themselves as minimal
              
hypersurfaces which can have co-dimension seven singularities.  
The
              positive mass theorem is also still open in these dimensions 
for similar
              reasons, and is another very interesting related 
problem.


The motivation
              for the above problems is to gain a better 
understanding of General
              Relativity.  While Einstein's theory of
General Relativity is experimentally
              the best known theory of 
gravity, their are many theoretical questions about
              the theory 
which are not well understood at all.  For example, given
              the
universe at some initial time, do the Einstein equations have 
unique
              well-behaved solutions in the future as one would hope, or
do singularities
              typically occur which might radiate or consume
energy for example?  The theory
              also predicts the existence of
black holes, and astronomers believe that they
              have been able to 
detect the location of many black holes including one which
              is 
3 million times the mass of the sun at the center of our galaxy.  
Since
              doing experiments with black holes is currently not 
feasible, it makes since
              to understand this potentially very 
important phenomenon on a theoretical
              level for now.  This 
research project hopes to lead to a better understanding
              of black
holes as well as energy and mass in General Relativity.    




