Title       : Thermochronologic Constraints on the Formation of the Transantarctic Mountains,
               Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9316720

Award Number: 9316720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286183             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Fitzgerald   (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne L. Baldwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9315831  Fitzgerald  This award supports a study of the thermal evolution of the
               Shackleton Glacier region of the Transantarctic Mountains using  fission track
              and 40Ar/39Ar thermochronology.  The goal is to use the  thermal history of the
              rocks (temperature-time data that dates the  time of cooling) to infer the
              timing and rate of uplift and  denudation of the region.  This information
              will, in turn, allow  constraints on mechanistic models for uplift of the range
              on the  southwestern edge of the Ross Embayment.  The first year of the  award
              will be used to analyze rocks from existing collections and  to prepare for
              field work in the second year.  The Shackleton  Glacier region is the focus of
              new field work because it represents  a substantial crustal block that is
              between two segments of the  Transantarctic Mountains which have already been
              extensively  studied.  The sampling strategy is to collect vertical profiles 
              from basement rocks at regular intervals across, and along the  length of, the
              Transantarctic Mountains.  This strategy minimizes  the potential for
              complications and ambiguities which can result  from unmapped faults in the
              region and maximizes the potential for  a good estimate of the cooling history.
               This new field work will  test the hypothesis that the Transantarctic
              Mountains is segmented,  with each segment having a distinct uplift history. 
              The data on  the time of cooling at each of several vertical profiles is basic 
              information on the geologic development of the region.  These data  will be
              used to infer the uplift and denudation history for each  locality.  The
              geographic patterns that emerge will help to  constrain the tectonic evolution
              of the central Transantarctic  Mountains and they will place constraints on a
              diversity of  geologic problems from Gondwana breakup and development of the
              Ross  Embayment to development of the Cenozoic ice sheets of Antarctica.  ***
