Title       : Probing the nfrastructure of T4 Deoxycytidylate Deaminase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9316321

Award Number: 9316321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gladys F. Maley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Maley  9316321  Deoxycytidylate deaminase provides a product which is essential
              as  a substrate for thymidylate synthase and thus DNA synthesis.  Any 
              interference with the expression of either enzyme can result in a  severe
              imbalance (toxicity) of nucleotide synthesis in the cell.   An ultimate goal is
              to optimize toxicity in tumor cells and  minimize the effect on normal cells. 
              By understanding the  properties and structure of these critical enzymes it may
              be  possible to rationally design compounds which can achieve the above  stated
              goal.  Now, for the first time two sources (T4 and human) of  deoxycytidylate
              deaminase are available and have been expressed in  large enough quantities to
              begin x-ray crystallographic studies on  their structure.  Since
              deoxycytidylate deaminase is an allosteric  enzyme very finely regulated within
              the cell and in vitro by its  positive effector, dCTP, and its negative
              effector, dTTP, it  provides the opportunity to clarify the mechanism of
              allosteric  regulation.  From the crystallographic data it may be possible to 
              design better inhibitors of deoxcytidylate deaminase than those  already
              available such as tetrohydrodeoxyuridylate and pyrimidine-  2-one
              deoxyribosemonophosphate.  In any case better inhibitors  could complement or
              synergize the action of thymidylate synthase  inhibitors as well. 
              Deoxycytidylate deaminase is a metalloprotein  with 2 mols of zinc per subunit
              of the T4 enzyme and 1 mol of zinc  per subunit of the human enzyme. 
              Mutational studies will determine  the binding sites for zinc in the two
              enzymes as well as the ligand  binding sites.  The crystallographic data will
              also contribute to  location of the zinc atoms and different ligands within the
               sequence of the protein.  An additional aspect of the current study  involves
              the possible role of deoxycytidylate deaminase in  stabilizing the T4
              multienzyme aggregate, dNTP synthetase complex.  %%%  Deoxycytidylate diaminase
              catalyzes the conversion of dCMP to dUMP  and thus provides an esse ntial
              substrate for thymidylate synthetase  to produce dTMP.  Since dTMP is
              absolutely required for DNA  synthesis, its regulation is essential to cell
              growth and survival.   In diverse organisms, deoxycytidylate deaminase is
              allosterically  regulated by its end products, dCTP and dTTP, and plays a
              central  role in determining the cellular balance of the nucleotides.  ***
