Title       : Electronic Structure Studies of Molybdenum Oxotransferases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1993      
File        : a9316557

Award Number: 9316557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karolyn K. Eisenstein                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Kirk mkirk@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9106,9179,
Abstract    :
              9316557  Kirk  This award is the starter grant increment of Dr. Kirk's 
              Postdoctoral Reseaerch Fellowship in Chemistry. The main thrust  of the
              research is a combined experimental and theoretical  study of oxygen transfer
              by Group VI metals in both biological  and inorganic systems. A combined
              spectroscopic approach  utilizing variable-temperature, variable-field magnetic
               circular dichroism, single crystal polarized absorption, and  resonance Raman
              spectroscopies will probe the Mo(V) state of  xanthine oxidase catalytic
              intermediates. These enzyme studies  will be complemented by parallel
              investigations of relevant  model compounds which display structural features
              believed to  be present at the enzyme active site. Excited state spectral 
              studies will be used in order to evaluate the results of  detailed bonding
              calculations including self-consistent field  scattered wave calculations,
              transition-state calculations, and  density functional methods incorporating
              Slater or  Gaussian-type basis functions.  %%%  Group VI metals, specifically
              molybdenum and tungsten are  catalytically active towards oxygen transfer in
              both enzymatic  and inorganic systems. These studies will provide a wealth of 
              information concerning the mode of substrate binding to the  metal and will
              directly probe the initial steps in oxo transfer  from metal to substrate.  ***
