Title       : A Thermodynamic Scale for the B-sheet Forming Tendencies of the Amino Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9316863

Award Number: 9316863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne J. Regan lynne.reagan@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Regan  9316863  Amino acids have distinct conformational preferences that
              influence  the stabilities of protein secondary and tertiary structure.  The 
              degree to which different amino acids favor the formation of a  particular
              secondary structure is important in understanding the  relationship between
              protein sequence and structure.  In the case  of a-helices, a number of studies
              have determined a thermodynamic  scale of the helix-forming tendencies of the
              amino acids.  There is  reasonable agreement among these studies and between
              these  experimentally determined preferences and the statistically  observed
              preferences in proteins of known structure.  The study of  B-sheets, on the
              other hand, has not been similarly successful  because of aggregation and
              solubility problems with the model  systems used to date.  As a result, there
              has been only one  published attempt to generate an analogous scale for the
              B-sheet  forming tendencies of all the amino acids.  The experiments proposed
              here will avoid the difficulties of  aggregation that other groups have
              encountered by using a small,  soluble, naturally occurring protein composed
              mostly of B-sheet as  the model system.  The protein of choice for these
              studies is the  56 residue IgG-binding binding domain of Streptococcal protein
              G  ("B1").  This protein displays an ideal, reversible two-state  denaturation
              transition and its structure is known at high  resolution.  To quantify the
              B-sheet forming tendency of the amino acids, each  of the amino acids will be
              substituted into an idealized "guest"  position in this protein.  Thermal and
              chemical denaturation  measurements will be made to determine the free energy
              difference  between each variant and a standard B1 with Gly at the guest 
              position and it is this difference that is considered to be a  measure of the
              guest's capacity for the B-sheet formation.  These  experiments will provide
              both workable system for analyzing the  factors involved in B-sheet stability
              and a comprehensive  quantitative sc ale of the B-sheet forming ability of the
              amino  acids.  %%%  Proteins are large molecules that perform many important
              functions  within a living cell. They are formed from 20 different types of 
              building blocks, called amino acids, the linear sequences of which  dictates
              the shape of the protein and what its function will be.   The amino acids are
              not strung together randomly, but rather they  first form sub-assemblies, known
              as secondary structures, that then  associate to give the folded protein. 
              There are two types of  secondary structure:  alpha-helices and beta-sheets. 
              This proposal  aims to determine a quantitative scale for how likely it is for 
              each amino acid to be found in beta-sheet secondary structure.   This knowledge
              is of key importance to the understanding of protein  structure and the
              rational modification and design of potentially  useful, new proteins.  ***
