Title       : Molecular Genetics of Drosophila Projectin: A Third Filament Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9316975

Award Number: 9316975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Agnes J. Ayme-Southgate   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316975  Ayme-Southgate    Projectin is a giant protein present in Drosophila
              muscle,  which has been shown to share structural homologies with two  other
              giant muscle proteins, titin (from vertebrates) and  twitchin (from a nematode,
              C. elegans).  Their similarity is  found at the level of two amino acid domains
              present in all  three proteins and repeated many times in a regular pattern. 
              The functions of these proteins are under intense  investigation and titin is,
              at this time, the best  understood.  The different isoforms of projectin have
              been  implicated in several possible functions which are related  to the
              functions proposed for either titin or twitchin.  However, no specific role has
              been definitely demonstrated.  Partial information is available on the
              structure of  projectin but the complete amino acid sequence is still to  be
              determined.  The long term objective of this project is  to understand the
              structure and functions of projectin and  how projectin participates in the
              assembly and maintenance  of the myofibrils.  The specific aims are to: 1,
              determine  the projectin gene structure and splicing pattern for the  indirect
              flight muscle (IFM) isoform; 2, determine exons  specific for the IFM isoform;
              3, determine the orientation  of the IFM isoform in the sarcomere (i.e.,
              whether the N-  terminus is towards the Z band or the A/I junction).  To 
              achieve this last aim, two monoclonal antibodies will be  exploited which, by
              immunoelectron microscopy, have been  shown to specifically recognize epitopes
              at either the Z  band or the A/I junction.  %%%  Muscle cells possess a
              highly-organized subcellular  structure, with cytoskeletal elements and
              "motors"  exquisitely arranged to subserve the specific function of 
              contraction, and internal membranes arranged to subserve the  function of
              regulation of the contractile activity.  Although a great deal is already known
              about the  organization and structure of muscle cells, some unsolved  problems
              remain.  One of these unsolved problems conce rns  the role(s) of certain very
              large proteins (600,000 to  2,000,000 daltons), recently discovered, which are
              situated  within the A and I bands of the sarcomeres.  These large  proteins
              are arranged in periodic arrays in conjunction with  periodic arrays of
              proteins whose roles have been well  characterized in muscle function,  myosin
              (the "motor") and  alpha actinin.  Circumstantial evidence suggests that, for 
              one or another of these very large proteins, they may confer  elasticity to the
              muscle cell, or be involved in regulation  of contraction, or be involved in
              the general assembly of  myofibrils (the subcellular units of cytoskeletal 
              organization in muscle cells).  In the model insect,  Drosophila, there are at
              least two isoforms of projectin,  one found in synchronous  muscle and the
              other found in  asynchronous muscle.   These muscle types have significantly 
              different contractile properties: synchronous muscle is  "regular" muscle, and
              contracts once per nerve impulse,  whereas asynchronous muscle (also known as
              "indirect flight  muscle") contracts several times per nerve impulse, allowing 
              for the high frequency wing beat necessary for insect  flight.    The two
              different projectin isoforms are  distinguished by different molecular sizes
              and they have  somewhat different subcellular localizations in their 
              respective muscle tissues.  The experiments to be carried  out in this project
              will address key aspects of the  structure and function of these very large
              muscle proteins.  The information obtained from these studies should be 
              helpful in understanding the functions of these large muscle  proteins, not
              only in the very interesting case of insect  flight vs. regular muscles, but in
              all animals, including  humans.  ***
