Title       : Identification of the Phosphorylated Sugar Transiently Present on Acrosomal
               Glycoproteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1993      
File        : a9316140

Award Number: 9316140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48606              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie F. Maylie-Pfenninger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9237,
Abstract    :
              9316140  Maylie-Pfenninger    This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research. 
              The developing  acrosome of mouse and guinea pig spermatids contains
              glycoproteins  phosphorylated on complex N-linked oligosaccharides. 
              Preliminary  results have ruled out mannose-6-phosphate, as well as several 
              other possible 6-phospho- monosaccharides, as the phosphorylated  residue.  The
              nature of the phosphorylated substituent is thus  unknown.  The phosphorylation
              itself has been shown to be  transient during the transit of the acrosomal
              proteins to the  acrosome, with a half-time of approximately one hour.  These
              and  other preliminary results suggest that the phosphorylation is  involved in
              a function important for the biosynthetic pathway of  acrosomal glycoproteins,
              and may be involved in targetting of the  proteins to the acrosome.  The goal
              of this project is to identify  the specific site on the oligosaccharide which
              is phosphorylated.   This will be done by 1H-NMR analysis of purified
              phosphorylated  oligosaccharides, followed by permethylation analysis.  The
              results  will provide novel insights into oligosaccharide biochemistry, and 
              will set the stage for determining the function of this novel  phosphorylated
              sugar.  %%%  This laboratory has made a novel preliminary finding, that there
              is  an unusual and as-yet unidentified biochemical alteration of  proteins
              destined for incorporation into the acrosomes of mammalian  developing sperm. 
              The goal of the project is to use state-of-the-  art techniques to identify
              this biochemical alteration. Such  identification is a necessary prerequisite
              to studying the  significance of the alteration with respect to sperm
              development.   This is a "high risk, high reward" pilot study, well suited to
              the  Small Grants for Exploratory Research program.  ***
