Title       : Dynamical Diagnoses of the Observed 'Asian Summer-Monsoon Rainfall - El Nino'
               Relationship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1998  
File        : a9316278

Award Number: 9316278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sumant Nigam nigam@atmos.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9316278  Nigam, Sumant  University of Maryland - College Park 
              Title:    Dynamical Diagnoses of the Observed 'Asian Summer-Monsoon           
              Rainfall - El Nino' Relationship    The project seeks to establish the
              dynamical basis for an empirical  linkage between interannual fluctuations in
              the Asian summer-  monsoon rainfall and the El Nino/La Nina episodes through 
              diagnostic modeling of the observed monthly/ seasonal tropospheric  circulation
              anomalies over the Asian continent (and global tropics  and extratropics)
              during both the northern summer and the   pre-'monsoon-onset' (March-May)
              seasons.  An understanding of the  forcing of the lower-tropospheric and
              near-surface circulation  anomalies will be emphasized as these are critical
              both to the  generation of monsoon-rainfall anomalies and tropical oceanic- 
              circulation anomalies.    The project objectives also include diagnostic
              modeling/analysis of  A) the forcing of the northern-autumn (Sept. - Oct.) 
              circulation  anomalies over the Pacific in order to reveal potential feedback
              of  the anomalous Asian summer-monsoon rainfall on the subsequent El  Nino/La
              Nina development, and B) of the potential extratropical  forcing of
              interannual-variability of the Asian summer-monsoons by  Eurasian springtime
              snow-cover anomalies.  The research-tasks  include:         1) Estimation of
              the 3-dimensional diabatic heating field (and  transient eddy-flux convergence)
              from the global ECWMWF-analyses  data sets for this diagnostic project is based
              on operational-  analyses rather than GCM simulation of anomalous monsoons.    
                  2) Linear simulations with a multi-layer global steady  primitive-equation
              model linearized about a zonally-varying  climatological flow -- a necessary
              first-step in such dynamical-  diagnostic analysis.  (Meeting this prerequisite
              will also allow  identification of the most consistent diabatic-heating
              estimate.)   A 'direct-access' adaptation of an LU decomposition method should 
              permit higher linear-model resolution  than previously possible.         3)
              Identification of the characteristic structure of the El  Nino-related heating
              anomalies over the tropical Pacific and Indian  oceans during March - May and
              June - August periods, and a  computation of their remote response over Asia. 
              The remote impact  of just the Pacific-basin heating anomalies will also be
              assessed.         4) Calculation of the 'Himalayan-Tibetan orography' - forced 
              anomalous circulation during all recent summers, and an examination  of its
              phase in the Asian lower troposphere vis-a-vis that of the  remotely-forced
              anomalous thermal response.  This aspect of the  proposed research may help
              explain the basis for the perplexing  threshold-dependence in the Monsoon-El
              Nino linkage.    Results of a pilot study are indicative of the potential
              insight  that such dynamical-diagnostic analysis can provide in improving  our
              understanding of the interactions (and potential feedback)  between anomalous
              Asian summer-monsoons and El Nino/La Nina  episodes--the two global-scale
              climate anomalies whose  understanding, simulations and ultimately prediction
              will be  central to the success of the TOGA/GOALS missions.
