Title       : The D2 Protein of Photosystem II Studied in Systems without Photosystem I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1996  
File        : a9316857

Award Number: 9316857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem F. Vermaas WIM@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1305,9104,9109,9197,BIOT,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Vermass   9316857  The D2 protein is one of the two reaction center proteins of
              photosystem II, a pigment protein complex in the thylakoid membrane of plants
              and cyanobacteria.  This photosystem utilizes light energy to oxidize water
              (resulting in oxygen) and to produce reducing equivalents to be used in
              subsequent steps of photosynthesis.  The D2 protein binds a number of cofactors
              and prosthetic groups, which are involved in photosynthetic electron transport.
               In addition, it contains a redox-active tryosyl residue, which is stable in
              its oxidized (radical) form for up to several hours.  The protein environment
              provides cofactors and prosthetic groups with the appropriate orientation,
              localization, and redox properties to make light-induced electron-transfer
              reactions fast and efficient.  Targeted mutagenesis of the D2 protein is
              applied to identify the domains and residues in D2 that interact with cofactors
              and affect their functional characteristics.  Targeted mutations are introduced
              into the transformable (photo)heterotrophic cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp.
              PCC 6803, which incorporates foreign DNA into its genome by homologous
              recombination.  This allows a deletion of the wild-type genes coding for the D2
              protein, followed by an introduction of a gene copy (at its native position in
              the genome) carrying a mutation.  To avoid complications in the functional
              analysis stemming from the presence of photosystem I (a chlorophyll-binding
              protein complex, which also shows light-induced electron transport), a
              light-tolerant photosystem I-less strain of Synechocystis 6803 has been
              constructed, which can be genetically tai lored as a convenient receptor strain
              to introduce D2 mutations. On the basis of existing data, a number of highly
              interesting D2 residues have been identified, and mutations will be introduced
              in these residues in a photosystem I-less background.  The resulting mutants
              will be analyzed, either in vivo or in thylakoid preparations, by a number of
              methods, including fluorescence induction and emission, electron paramagnetic
              resonance spectroscopy, and flash-induced oxygen evolution.  This experimental
              system provides an excellent opportunity for detailed analysis of cofactor
              properties as modulated by the protein environment.  The photosystem  II
              complex from cyanobacteria has proven to be a suitable model system to study
              protein/cofactor interactions, and the development of a light-tolerant
              photosystem I-less strain now allows such studies to be carried out in
              relatively intact systems.  In addition, the light-tolerant photosystem I-less
              Synechocystis  strain provides a very good system for random mutagenesis of the
              D2 protein, because it allows for positive selection of mutants with impaired
              photosystem II activity.  Photosystem I-less mutants retaining the peripheral
              antenna system propagate well at 10% of the light intensity used for wild type,
               but not a full light intensity; this appears to be caused by an inability of
              the cell to cope with too many photosystem II-generated electrons in the
              absence of photosystem I.  This property can be take advantage of to select
              randomly generated D2 mutants with impaired electron transport.  After
              introduction of random mutations in a plasmid carrying the D2 gene in
              Escherichia coli, this plasmid can be used for transformation of a photosystem
              I-less and D2-less strain of Synechocystis.   After selection for
              transformants, cells with impaired electron flow (resulting from a D2 mutation)
              easily can be picked out by a light-resistant phenotype.  Subsequently, the
              site of the mutation and its structural and functional effects can be
              determined.  The  propo sed project on the D2 protein studied in a photosystem
              I-less background will result in detailed insight in the role various residues
              and domains play in facilitating  efficient and rapid electron transfer.  The
              research not only will enhance the understanding of  photosystem II, but also
              will be applicable in a broader perspective of cofactor/protein interactions in
              protein folding and stability, and will be informative regarding rather unusual
              protein redox chemistry, such as tyrosyl oxidation leading to a stable radical,
              as is found in the D2 protein.  this work involves molecular biology,
              microbiology, biochemistry, and certain biophysical aspects, and is very well
              suited for a broad and interdisciplinary graduate and postdoctoral training. 
              %%%   Photosynthesis is the process in which light is utilized to fuel carbon
              fixation and oxygen evolution.  Essentially all organic material and oxygen on
              earth originates from photosynthesis.  The question addressed in this project
              is how one of the fundamental steps in photosynthesis works.  Such
              understanding is important from both a biochemical and biophysical point of
              view , and has general implications for structure, function, and assembly of
              protein complexes in biological membranes.  The step that will be addressed is
              made possible by a pigment-binding protein complex, and involves a very
              efficient conversion of light energy to chemical energy that can be used by
              living organisms, with a concomitant conversion of water to oxygen.  We will
              use genetic manipulation in a cyanobacterium (blue-green alga) to specifically
              change pigment-binding proteins involved in this process.  Genetic manipulation
              also will be utilized to delete selected other pigment-binding proteins from
              the organism, so that functional analysis of the steps being studied is greatly
              facilitated.  This project will result in (a) enhanced understanding of the
              interplay between pigments and proteins that is crucial for photosynthesis, and
              (b) improved insight in the role specific r esidues of proteins play in
              catalysis (enhancement) of particular biochemical reactions.  ***              
                              u    ~                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            R   b           C   E   S                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    s           ?   $   -   /   1   3   C   E         ?      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             $         $           $           $           $ 
                     ! $           $             $                F                          
                      E                       e               S         E     2    Times New
              Roman    Symbol  & Arial  & France                             p-  "           
               h  
