Title       : The Role of Snow in Antarctic Sea Ice Development and Ocean-Atmosphere Energy
               Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1996      
File        : a9316767

Award Number: 9316767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin O. Jeffries   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this investigation is to understand the role of  snow in sea ice
              development processes and air-ice-ocean heat  exchange interactions in the
              seasonal and perennial sea ice zones  of the Ross Sea, the Amundsen Sea, and
              the Bellingshausen Sea.   Observations and measurements of the characteristics
              of sea ice and  snow will be combined with numerical models of sea-ice flooding
              and  the entrainment of snow into the ice cover in order to gain an 
              understanding of the sea-ice heat and mass balance, and to quantify  the energy
              exchange within the antarctic sea-ice cover.    The snow measurement program,
              using the RVIB Nathaniel B.  Palmer, will include depth, grain size and
              morphology, density,  temperature, thermal conductivity, water content, and
              stable  isotope ratio.  The ice measurement program will include thickness, 
              salinity, temperature, density, brine content, and included gas  volume, as
              well as such structural properties as the fraction of  frazil, platelet, and
              congelation ice in the seasonal antarctic  pack ice.  Differences in ice types
              are the result of differences  in the environment in which the ice forms:
              frazil ice is formed in  supercooled sea water, normally through wind or
              wave-induced  turbulence, while platelet and congelation ice is formed under 
              quiescent conditions.  The fraction of frazil ice is an important  variable in
              the energy budget of the upper ocean, and contributes  significantly to the
              stabilization of the surface layers.    The numerical models will involve the
              thermodynamics of phase  changes from liquid water to ice, along with the
              resulting energy  transfer, brine expulsion, and the modulating effect of a
              snow  cover.  The results are expected to have broad relevance and  application
              to understanding the effects of sea-ice processes in  global change, and
              atmospheric, oceanographic, and remote sensing  investigations of the Southern
              Ocean.
