Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Cellular Modeling and Dynamical- Systems Analysis of
               Spatial Patterns in Sedimentary Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1994      
File        : a9316078

Award Number: 9316078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68504              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Paola cpaola@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Moeckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316078  Paola       Researchers in various fields have shown that cellular 
              computational ("lattice gas") models can be of great utility in  the study of
              complex, spatially extended systems that resist  conventional forms of
              analysis.  In such models the cells of a  lattice interact according to rules
              based on abstractions of the  physics governing a system.  This approach
              examines the  interactions between the parts of a system--interactions that 
              lead to the behavior of the system as a whole--and allows  evaluation of what
              aspects of the underlying detailed physics are  most import to the overall
              dynamics.  One main goal of the  proposed research is the development of a
              cellular-computational  model of braided streams that incorporates the basic
              physics of  free-surface flow over a movable bead.       To date such models
              have usually been evaluated only  qualitatively due to a lack of a quantitative
              method of  comparison between the models and data from real systems.  The 
              second main goal of this project is to develop new data-analysis  techniques
              base=d on recent advances in dynamical-systems  mathematics that will
              facilitate quantitative testing of  cellular-computational methods.  Our
              approach is to treat  downstream series of measurements in spatially extended
              systems  like the time series of dynamical systems.  Graphs of spatial 
              "attractors" that characterize the downstream development of  various
              geometrical variables, and discrete iterative plots that  show how the value of
              these variables influence the values  further downstream, both quantify the
              interactions between the  parts of a spatially extended system and characterize
              the  behavior of a system as a whole.  Analyses such as these, applied  to data
              from natural systems, laboratory experiments, and  computational models, will
              provide a more effective quantitative  test of the models that existing
              techniques.  In the proposed  projects such tests will be applied to the
              braided-stream model  mentioned above and to existing models  of aeolian and
              subaqueous  bedforms, using data collected form laboratory and field examples 
              of all three systems.  ***
