Title       : The ACC Synthase Genes and Polypeptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9316475

Award Number: 9316475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Athanasios Theologis theo@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316475  Theologis  The specific aims of the proposal are : 1) To isolate and 
              structurally characterize the rest of the tomato ACC synthase  genes.  To
              characterize the expression characteristics of each  tomato gene during growth
              and development and to define the type of  inducer(s) responsible for their
              induction. To characterize the  expression characteristics of the Arabidopsis
              ACS4 and ACS5 genes  in the presence of indoleacetic acid (IAA) and Li+,
              respectively.   To define the cisacting elements for IAA inducibility of the 
              Arabidopsis ACS4 and Li+ responsive elements of the ACS5 gene.  The  elements
              will be defined by ExoIII deletion analysis of the  promoter regions.  Promoter
              constructs with the CAT reporter gene  will be transiently assayed in
              Arabidopsis protoplasts.  The  functionally of the elements will be verified by
              stable  transformation experiments.  To inhibit growth of rice under  hypoxia
              using antisense OS-ACs1 RNA and to define the cell types  that express two rice
              genes OS-ACS1 and 3 under low O2 tension.  To  define the critical residues
              required for enzymatic activity of ACC  synthase by in vitro mutagenesis and
              expression experiments in E.  coli.  To perform intermolecular complementation
              experiments in E.  coli for determining whether ACC synthase is a dimer with
              two  active sites.  To inhibit ethylene dependent developmental  processes by
              overexpression of dominant negative mutations of  specific isoenzymes.   To
              biochemically characterize the  Arabidopsis ACC synthase isoenzymesfor defining
              their biochemical  diversity.  %%%  Ethylene is an unique plant signaling
              molecule.  The hydrocarbon  gas, known as the fruit ripening hormone, controls
              many aspects of  plant growth and development, and its synthesis is highly 
              regulated. Recent experimental evidence indicates that the key  enzyme in the
              ethylene biosynthetic pathway, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-  carboxylic acid (ACC)
              synthase is encoded by a highly divergent  multigene family in various mono-and
              dicotyledonous plant s.  The  members of each family are differentially
              regulated by various  inducers and developmental stages.  Studies on the
              structure and  regulation of the ACC synthase genes in tomato (Lycopersicon 
              esculentum), rice (Oryza sativa) and Arabidopsis thaliana are  proposed here to
              gain insight into the details of the biochemical  mechanisms that regulate
              their expression by various hormones and  stress conditions as well as their
              role in regulating plant growth.   Furthermore, in vitro mutagenesis studies
              are proposed to obtain  fundamental knowledge about the structure and function
              of the ACC  synthase protein.    ***
