Title       : Unimolecular Reaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9316640

Award Number: 9316640
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1042200            (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Bradley Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this work is to understand the unimolecular reaction dynamics   of
              the ground electronic states of small molecules and hence of their   thermal
              unimolecular reactions.  Three kinds of experiments will be   conducted: 1)
              infrared spectroscopy of molecules activated with   sufficient vibrational
              energy to dissociate, 2) direct measurement of   dissociation rates in the
              range from 1 million to 100 billion per second,   and 3) measurement of product
              energy state and  angular momentum   distributions and their scalar and vector
              correlations as a function of   the initial quantum state of the activated
              molecule.  Special emphasis   will be given to two qualitatively different,
              prototype molecules- formyl   fluoride and ketene.    The dynamics of chemical
              reactions stands at the forefront of    investigations in contemporary physical
              chemistry.  The primary purpose   of these investigations is to obtain a
              detailed, molecular level   understanding of the energetics and dynamics of
              reaction processes.     This involves the preparation of a molecule in defined
              electronic,   vibrational, and rotational quantum states and  observing not
              only the   products of a reaction, but also how the total energy and angular  
              momentum redistribute themselves among the various possible reaction   channels
              followed by the parent molecule as it dissociates into   fragments. In contrast
              to conventional methods in which chemical   reactions can be only crudely
              controlled through variations of   temperature and pressure, and in which all
              possible reaction channels are   followed, a detailed, molecular level
              understanding of the reaction   dynamics offers the possibility of close
              control of a reaction and   thereby maximizing  the efficiency of producing the
              desired reaction   products.  The present research will provide critical data
              which will   allow the testing and further development of state-of-the-art
              theoretical   models for various aspects of chemical reaction kinetics and
              dynamics.
