Title       : Iterative Reweighted Least Squares Design of Digital Filters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9316588

Award Number: 9316588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261108             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Sidney Burrus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is developing a new and significantly better method  for the
              design of a wide variety of digital filters.  The new  method is based on a
              successive approximation algorithm called  Iteratively Reweighted Least Squares
              (IRLS).  One form of IRLS,  Lawson's algorithm, has been used before but not
              extensively  because of slow and inconsistent convergence.  Initial results
              with  the new method using a second order IRLS with a form of path-  following
              or homotopy modification have produced a robust,  quadratically converging,
              efficient, versatile filter design  technique.  The method finds general L^p
              approximations with 1<=p.   It also allows different criteria in different
              bands for the design  of mixed criteria optimal filters.  The new method
              solves, not only  the standard filter design problems, but many that the Parks-
               McClellan Remez algorithm or windowed least wquares will not.   Initial
              results on designing with constrained L^p criteria, complex  approximation, and
              two dimensions show great promise.    Robust convergence is crucial for the
              practical success of any  iterative algorithm.  We feel that we have a
              potential breakthrough  on that issue.  This research is doing a theoretical
              analysis of  the convergence for the more general optimization criteria, 
              developing a practical adaptive filter design program, and  presenting it in a
              form accessible to the practicing engineer.    The algorithm will be applied to
              three filter design problems: a)  the constrained least-squares and, more
              generally, the constrained  L^p approximation problem.  This is often what
              people really want  when they use a straight Chebyshev or window design.  b)
              The  important problems of complex approximation which is important in 
              equalization adaptive filter design.  c) The multidimensional  filter design
              and image processing problems.  This new approach  shows excellent promise and
              a possible great improvement over  present techniques.
