Title       : High Resolution Studies of Solar Flares, Active Regions, Prominences and the
               Quiet Sun at Centimeter and Millimeter Wavelengths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9316972

Award Number: 9316972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mukul R. Kundu kundu@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              N. Gopalswamy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9316972  Kundu       This effort continues research at the University of
              Maryland  centered around the study of solar flares using radiowave 
              techniques.  The investigators will use observations made by the  Very Large
              Array (VLA) of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory,  and the
              Berkeley-Illinois-Maryland Millimeter Array (BIMA) at Hat  Creek.  The
              investigators will compare the observed magnetic  structure of
              sunspot-associated microwave sources with model  computations and determine the
              vertical and horizontal components  of the magnetic field at specific locations
              in the low corona.  The  study will also make use of X-ray and EUV data
              obtained by the  Yohkoh satellite.  The combined data will be used to estimate
              the  electron temperature and magnetic field in coronal loops, and the 
              temperature and density structure of the active region in three  dimensions. 
              VLA observations of flares at multiple centimeter  wavelengths will be used to
              study the structure and cause of  flaring.  The BIMA observations will provide
              high spatial  resolution measurements of flares at millimeter wavelengths.  In 
              particular, the millimeter imaging observations of MeV electrons  will be used
              to study gamma ray sources sizes, structures and  locations.  The similarity of
              time profiles of impulsive emission  by MeV electrons will permit us to analyze
              the fundamental  characteristics of the acceleration mechanism responsible for
              MeV  electrons.  The delay of millimeter emission relative to cm, hard  X-rays
              and gamma rays will provide important information on  electron and proton
              acceleration.  Additionally, the investigators  will search for nanoflares and
              acoustic waves in the Sun's  chromosphere and study chromospheric and coronal
              heating.***
