Title       : Quantitative Assessment of Soil Genesis Using a Controlled Decade-Scale
               Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1994    
File        : a9316378

Award Number: 9316378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178559             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Graham graham@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9316378  Graham       The use of soils for detailed geomorphic and environmental
               interpretations is limited by lack of precise knowledge of  pedogenic rates
              and trends as a function of various environmental  factors.  This research will
              quantify decade-scale soil genesis  processes by analyzing a unique on-going
              experiment started =50  years ago at the San Dimas Experimental Forest in
              Southern  California.  Large (5.3m x 5.3m x 2.1m deep) earthen-walled pits 
              were filled with homogenized soil material and planted with  monocultures
              constituting an imposed biosequence of four native  plant species (chamise,
              ceanothus, scrub oak, and Coulter pine).   A chronosequential record of the
              initial stages of soil formation  is provided by archived samples from each 7.5
              cm layer of original  fill material and soil samples taken at incremental
              depths in 1958,  1975, and 1987 under each type of vegetation.  The objective
              of  this research is to quantify the biotic, atmospheric, and pedogenic 
              influences on the initial homogeneous fill material as a function  of time for
              each of the soil-vegetation systems.  A mass balance  approach will be used to
              quantify gains, losses, and  redistributions of constituents in the soils
              developed after 12,  29, and 41 years under the four different plant species.  
              Constituents to be analyzed include major rock-forming elements,  clay, silt,
              pedogenic Fe oxides, exchangeable cations, C, N, and  heavy metals. 
              Calculations will be based on the archived original  parent material samples
              corresponding to soil horizons that  developed and were sampled in subsequent
              years.  Biomass quantity  and composition will be measured and included in the
              mass balance.   Long-term measurements of atmospheric wet- and dry-fall exist
              for  the site and will also be included.  Radiogenic isotopes will be  used to
              distinguish the origin and disposition of various soil  constituents. 
              Distinctive Sr, Nd, and Pb isotopic rations in soils  and tree rings will serve
              as tracers to indicate atmospheri c and  mineral weathering sources of
              elements.  The combination of mass  balance and radiogenic isotope tracer
              methods will yield a detailed  accounting of processes responsible for
              additions, losses,  transfers, and transformations in the soil-vegetation
              systems.   Precise quantification and interpretation is warranted because the 
              San Dimas soil-vegetation plots are likely the most closely  constrained and
              well documented soil genesis experiments in  existence.  They fill a critical
              gap between experimental studies  that operate over several years and
              traditional soil chronosequence  studies that address time scales of 102 to 106
              years.  Results of  this research will yield a much more precise understanding
              of the  initial stages of soil evolution than currently exists.  This 
              knowledge can be used to improve interpretations of fault movement  histories
              from soils and to predict sources and sinks of elements,  including heavy metal
              contaminants and plant nutrients, on a time  scale commensurate with
              human-induced effects on atmospheric  chemistry.
