Title       : Biophysics and Genetics of Viral DNA Packaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9316660

Award Number: 9316660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Serwer Serwer@uthscsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC San Antonio
	      7703 Floyd Curl Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782293900    210/567-2333

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Serwer  9316660  By use of a model system that has several advantageous
              properties,  we purpose to investigate the changes in structure that occur when
               multimolecular nucleoprotein complexes accomplish a biological  task.  The
              model system consists of the components required during  the packaging of
              double-standard DNA in the DNA-free procapsid of  bacteriophage T7.  The
              advantageous properties include  accessibility to two of our recently-developed
              procedures of  analysis:  isolation of capsids that have incompletely packaged
              DNA  and high performance production of mutants that have an altered DNA 
              packaging pathway.  The long-range objective is to obtain a  complete physical
              description of a biologically-evolved process;  that is, we are exploring the
              interface of biology and physical  chemistry.  The short-range objectives are
              the following:  (a)  Characterization will be performed of both the DNA and
              capsid  components of capsids that have incompletely packaged DNA.   Structural
              analysis will be performed by use of the following:   chemical probes for
              structure, ultraviolet light-induced DNA-DNA  and DNA-protein cross-linking,
              one-oligonucleotide probes,  analytical ultracentrifiguration, electron
              microscopy and Raman  scattering.  (b) To assist in accomplishing the first
              short-range  objective, isolation will be performed of T7 mutants that have an 
              altered studies of static viral structure for developing both a  fundamental
              understanding of structural dynamics and a new approach  to antiviral
              strategies.  Our studies of genetics will provide a  state of the art analysis
              of the control of morphogenesis by genes.   This proposal is interdisciplinary.
               %%%  Biological processes have always been too complex to describe  completely
              in terms of the concepts of physics and chemistry.  By  use of a model
              biological system that has several advantageous  properties, we propose to
              obtain a relatively complete chemical and  physical description of a biological
              process.  The biological  process is the  packaging of a double-stranded DNA
              molecule in the  outer shell of a bacterial virus; the DNA is packaged in a
              space  that has a volume twice that of the DNA.  By use of our newly- 
              developed technique for both determination of structure and  isolation of
              capsids with incompletely packaged DNA, we will  determine the structural
              changes that occur during DNA packaging.   This approach complements studies in
              which only the structure of  the completed virus is studied.  The product of
              work is both  improved understanding of changes in structure during formation
              of  viruses and new approaches to developing antiviral strategies.  ***
