Title       : Analysis of G Protein Functions in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9316048

Award Number: 9316048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Ma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316048  Ma  G-proteins play important roles in the receptor-mediated  signaling
              processes in eukaryotic organisms.  Little is  known about the molecular
              mechanisms of signal transduction  processes in plants, where a variety of
              hormonal and  environmental signals affect development, maturation and 
              senescence.  Biochemical analyses suggested that G-proteins  are also involved
              in the signal transduction processes in  plants.  During the previous granting
              period the GPA1 gene  (the alpha subunit encoding gene of  the heterotrimeric G
               protein) was isolated from Arabidopsis thaliana, sequenced  and its expression
              investigated.  since the gene was  expressed in most organs during development,
              and its level  of expression was high in rapidly dividing cells, in cells  of
              young organs and nutrient transmitting cells, it was  suggested that the
              product of this gene is required for cell  division.  Investigations with
              transgenic plants further  suggested the role of the alpha subunit of the
              G-protein in  the regulation of differentiation during development.  In  the
              present proposal experiments are described to further  test the role of the
              G-protein in cellular regulation with  transgenic plants, on identification and
              characterization of  proteins that interact with the GPA1 gene, end of the 
              isolation of the genes encoding these proteins.  These  experiments are the
              logical continuation of the work, and if  successful, will provide detailed
              information about the  function of GPA1 in plant cells.  %%%  Dr. Ma's
              laboratory has successfully studied in the past the  role of G-protein in the
              development of plant cells,  including the spatial and temporal expression of
              the GPA1  gene in developing plants, in transgenic plants containing  various
              constructs of the GPA1 gene, immunolocalization of  the gene product in cells
              and mapping of the GPA1 gene.  In  the present study he will focus on the
              analysis of GPA1 gene  function in transgenic plants and in tissue cultures, on
              the  in vitro analysis of the GPA1  function and interacting  proteins, and
              will isolate the genes which encode components  of the GPA1 mediated signaling
              pathway.  He will carry out  some of these experiments in collaboration with
              others.  These studies will add enormously to our understanding of  plant
              signaling responses.  The PI's laboratory is very good  at producing the
              genetic materials and tools that are needed  for success in this work.  Dr. Ma
              is clearly an emerging  leader in the signal transduction area.  ***
