Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Composites Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9316155

Award Number: 9316155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Tsai stsai@structure.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0207000   Transportation                          
              0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
              52        Engineering-Astronautical               
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,5761,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316155  Tsai    The use of composite material in complex engineering structure
              has  generally been limited to high-cost and handmade traditional 
              multidirectional laminates substructure.  The design and  manufacturing
              processes of structured composites have also been  dominated by try-and-error
              approach.  For civilian applications,  cost estimation and durability of design
              must be emphasized.    Today, industry is lack of innovative design and
              construction  methodology for design and manufacturing of composite structure
              for  low-cost civilian applications.  Nearly all manufacturing methods  used
              today are by batch rather than continuous process.  An  Industry/University
              Cooperative Research Center for Composites  Design at Stanford University could
              provide a better mechanism to  achieve efficiency and economy in design and
              manufacturing in terms  of energy consumption, dual-use technologies, and
              friendliness to  the environment.  The Center will focus on the integrated
              composite  design and manufacturing technology such as grid structure of 
              thermoplastic composites and continuous manufacturing processes for  low cost
              civilian applications.    A planning meeting was funded by NSF to study if
              industry would  support an Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for 
              Composites Design at Stanford University.  A number of companies  have
              committed to support this effort.  Currently, there are six  sponsors for the
              Center committing approximately $360,000.    The Principle Investigator/Center
              Director and his colleagues are  internationally recognized in this area and
              have the knowledge and  facilities to run this Center.    The proposed research
              projects will address:  1) optimization of  grid panel and shell composite
              design; 2) process modelling of  thermoplastic tape; 3) research in methodology
              of testing,  inspection, maintenance, and repair of composite material; 
              4)manufacturing of thermoplastic composites.    This Center has been
              coordinated with Dr. John Scalzi, Program  Director of L arge Structural &
              Building System, Division of  Mechanical and Structural Systems at the NSF.   
              The Program Director recommends Stanford University be awarded  $50,000 for the
              first year of a five-year continuing award.    Near the end of each 12-month
              period the Program Manager and/or the  Division Director of the engineering
              Education Centers Division  will review the progress of the Center on a number
              of renewal  criteria, including the following:  1) the extent to which the 
              university-industry interaction is developing; 2) the extent to  which the
              support base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a  robust research
              program is developing.  If the review is  satisfactory, the Program Manager
              will recommend support for the  next period of this continuing award.
