Title       : Role of Messenger RNA Location in Cell Orientation and Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9316508

Award Number: 9316508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice B. Fulton alice-fulton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316508  Fulton       Intermediate filaments in cells are associated with 
              mechanical strain and the ability to resist forces.  The  mRNA for vimentin is
              localized, changes position during  development and in fibroblasts remains
              around the centrosome  during wound healing.  The driving hypothesis behind
              this  proposal is that correct mRNA location is required for the  assembly and
              location of the vimentin filaments.  The  proposal addresses three questions: 
              1) Is the 3' UTR of  vimentin mRNA sufficient to direct mRNA to the centrosomal
               region?  2) Does vimentin mRNA need to be in the centrosomal  region to
              produce vimentin filaments that permit cellular  orientation and movement?  3)
              Do cells under mechanical  stress have greater requirements for properly
              located  vimentin mRNA and protein?.  Appropriate plasmids will be constructed
              and transfected  into fibroblasts and the location of mRNA will be shown by  in
              situ hybridization.  Monolayers of transfected cells will  be wounded and cell
              behavior during orientation and  migration will be measured, either with or
              without  mechanical stress.  The mRNA's of several cytoskeletal proteins are
              localized,  suggesting  that synthesis of these proteins may occur at  sites
              appropriate for function or assembly.  The function of  location for
              cytoskeletal proteins will only be known when  cytoskeletal mRNA's are
              mislocalized.  The mechanically  demanding behavior of fibroblasts during cell
              orientation  and movement offers a strong test of the functional  significance
              for mRNA location.  %%%    The messages for several cytoskeletal proteins are 
              concentrated in parts of the cell, suggesting that these  proteins may need to
              be made at the right place for them to  function or assemble.  The function for
              message location for  cytoskeletal proteins will only be known when
              cytoskeletal  mRNAs are mislocalized.  Cells pointing and moving offer a  good
              opportunity to see the functional significance of  message location.    ***
