Title       : RUI: Assembly and Phosphorylation of Neurofilaments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9316365

Award Number: 9316365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Cohlberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9181,9183,9191,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9316365  Cohlberg     Research will be conducted on the pathway and mechanisms 
              of assembly of mammalian neurofilaments from their  constituent proteins and
              the role of phosphorylation in  regulating the assembly process and the
              properties of the  filaments.  The goals are to: 1, gain information about the 
              arrangement of the three proteins in neurofilaments (NF),  their structural
              roles, and the pathway by which they  assemble into filaments and by which they
              become  incorporated in preexisting filaments; 2, investigate the  role of
              phosphorylation in regulating assembly and in  molecular conformation of the
              proteins; and 3, gain  information  on the protein kinase enzymes which
              regulate  neurofilament phosphorylation.  The first phase of the  project will
              center on the role of certain mixed tetramer  assembly intermediates, one
              containing both NF-L and NF-M  and another containing NF-L and NF-H.  The
              presence of these  species is detected by polyacrylamide "native gel" 
              electrophoresis.  The arrangement of polypeptide chains in  the complex will be
              investigated  by electron microscopy of  rotary shadowed protein preparations
              and by experiments  examining the ability of chemically cross-linked proteins
              to  form the tetrameric complexes.  Proteins produced by  recombinant DNA
              techniques will be used to determine the  nature of the specific chemical
              interactions which determine  the rules by which the three proteins combine. 
              NF proteins  contain three domains -- a central rod domain which forms  the
              body of the filament, a head domain important in the  assembly of the rods, and
              tail domains which project from  the filament.  By cutting the DNA from the
              genes for the  proteins into fragments encoding the individual domains and 
              then pasting the fragments together in various combinations,  and then
              expressing the resultant DNAs in bacteria, once can  swap domains and produce a
              modular protein with domains  derived from different members of the NF triplet.
               Determining the ability of these modular  proteins to combine  with each other
              should help to determine the roles of  different domains in the specific
              interactions which  determine the arrangement of the three NF proteins in 
              filaments.  The effect of phosphorylation of the head  domains of NF-M and NF-H
              on assembly will be determined by  adding phosphates with the use of enzymes
              known to  phosphorylate these domains and then conducting  centrifugation
              experiments to examine the ability of the  phosphorylated proteins to form
              pelletable filaments.   The  effect of tail domain phosphorylation on protein 
              conformation will be investigated by using kinase and  phosphatase enzymes to
              prepare NF in different states of  phosphorylation and then to measure their
              circular dichroism  and infrared spectra.  Protein kinases which catalyze NF 
              phosphorylation will be identified from neuronal extracts.  The action of the
              enzyme, glycogen synthase kinase 3, shown  in previous work to phosphorylate NF
              in vitro, will be  further characterized.  %%%  Neurofilaments (NF) are those
              members of the family of  "intermediate filaments" which form part of the
              cytoskeleton  in neurons of the central nervous system.  They are found 
              primarily running longitudinally down the axon along with  microtubules, and
              they are thought to be responsible for  promoting the radial growth of axons,
              establishing axonal  diameter, and maintaining the structural integrity of the 
              axon and its resistance to compressive forces.  The are  composed of three "NF
              triplet" proteins, termed NF-H (high),  NF-M (middle), and NF-L (low) according
              to their molecular  weights.  These proteins are synthesized in the cell body 
              and move down the axon in a process termed "slow axonal  transport," eventually
              leaving the moving phase and becoming  incorporated into the stationary
              filament network.  As they  move down the axon, phosphate groups are added,
              primarily to  the carboxyl-terminal "tail" domains which project from the 
              filaments.  A number of diseases of motor neurons involve  abnormal  NF, and
              overexpression of either NF-L or NF-H in  mice leads to pathology very similar
              to amyotrophic lateral  sclerosis ("Lou Gherig's disease").  In addition, in
              this  and other neuropathologies, abnormally phosphorylated NF  accumulate in
              different parts of the neuron.  In addition to  the obvious relevance to health
              and the normal function of  CNS neurons, these biochemical studies of NF can be
              expected  to lead to insights into "general principles" of  cytoskeletal
              assembly in other intermediate filament  systems.  The mechanism of
              self-assembly of biological  polymers is of particular interest in the area of 
              biomolecular materials, materials science, and materials and  nanofabrication
              engineering, since the underlying  principles, and even the biological polymers
              themselves,  have potential for adaptation and commercial exploitation as 
              "smart" materials for a variety of uses.  ***
