Title       : GRGC: Holocene Paleoenvironments in the Central Midwest: Vegetation, Climate,
               and Landscape Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9316391

Award Number: 9316391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Baker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Diana G. Horton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Arthur Bettis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9316391  Baker    Studies of Holocene paleoenvironments in the northern tier of 
              states have relied heavily on palynology, which supplies relatively  continuous
              and detailed records of vegetational and climatic  change.  In the central and
              southern Midwest, however, sites are  relatively rare, and paleoenvironments
              are poorly known.  The  objectives of this study are 1) to sample a series of
              stream  cutbanks along north-south and east-west transects for plant  remains. 
              These deposit constitute a relatively untouched and  unknown source of
              excellent paleoenvironmental information;  2) to  analyze these samples for
              pollen and especially for plant  macrofossils, to provide information on past
              vegetation; 3) to  reconstruct Holocene vegetation and climate for each site,
              along  the transects, and for the entire central Midwest; 4) to add these  data
              to the North American Pollen Database and the soon-to-be-  formed North
              American Plant Macrofossil Database, so that models of  Holocene vegetational
              and climatic change can be extended; 5) to  continue to study the alluvial
              history and pedological development  of these deposits, so that we can evaluate
              how the pattern of  lithostratigraphy, soils stratigraphy, and landscape
              development  (produced by E.A. Bettis) extends from Iowa to adjacent states.  
              The project will be significant in several fields. 1) The 
              ecological/paleoecological information will provide the first  comprehensive
              picture of the development of vegetation across the  central Midwest, including
              the Prairie Peninsula.  2) The  paleoclimatic data will extend greatly the
              coverage of Holocene  climates in the central United States.  3) The timing and
              extent of  climatic and vegetational changes will be cross-checked with a 
              completely independent source of evidence;  carbon and oxygen  isotopes from
              cave stalagmites across the same area, as outline in  the accompanying Project
              Summary of the proposal by Gonzalez et al.  4) Both vegetation and climate will
              be correlated with soil  formatio n and with Holocene changes in stream
              behavior over a broad  area.  5) Changes in stream behavior and landscape
              development are  critically important to archaeologists in locating sites and
              in  understanding how and where to look for sites of specific ages.
