Title       : An Integrated Analysis of Lithospheric Structure in Southern Kenya: Anatomy of
               an Active Plume
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1997     
File        : a9316868

Award Number: 9316868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277883             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Keller keller@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316868 Keller          The results of Kenya Rift International Seismic Project
              (KRISP) experiments in 1985 and 1989 90 provide an excellent and unexpected
              picture of lithospheric structure in the central and northern portion of the
              Kenya rift.  From the apex of the Kenya dome (near Lake Naivasha, northward)
              the crust thins, the physiographic expression of the rift widens, the floor of
              the rift valley and the rift shoulders lose elevation, and the amount of
              extension increases.  Two interfaces within the mantle also deepen to the
              north.  The lithospheric mantle is thinned considerably more than the crust
              indicating that an active process is at work.  These observations lead to the
              obvious question of what happens in the southern portion of the rift.         
              The southern portion of the Kenya rift is the focus of this research.  In this
              project, the U.S. team of researchers will join with the University of
              Karlsruhe, The University of Leicester, the Dublin Institutes for Advanced
              Studies, the University of Potsdam, and Kenyan colleagues to conduct a variety
              of geophysical and petrological studies in southern Kenya.  The primary
              emphasis of these studies will be determining lithospheric structure and
              formulating an integrated model of the evolution of the rift.  The University
              of Karlsruhe will concentrate on the eastern flank of the rift and tie their
              results to recent petrologic results.  The University of Leicester and the
              University of Texas at El Paso will concentrate on a long profile crossing the
              rift just north of the Tanzanian border.  By using shotpoints in Lake Victoria
              and the Indian Ocean, this 700km long profile provides a unique opportunity to
              probe the deep struct ure of an active plume.  The University of Texas at El
              Paso will also concentrate on the operation of a small seismic array including
              broadband recording, gravity studies, petrological studies, and the integrated
              analysis of the combined results. ***                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
