Title       : Chloroplast PS II: targeted random mutagenesis in Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9316915

Award Number: 9316915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne M. Erickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1325,9109,9169,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Erickson  9316915                              Photosynthetic organisms capable
              of converting light energy into chemical energy are the primary source  of
              renewable biomass on earth. In plants and eukaryotic algae, this conversion
              takes place in the  chloroplast. The photosynthetic reaction centers,
              pigment-protein complexes found in the chloroplast  thylakoid membrane, harness
              light energy to drive the photosynthetic electron transfer chain. The goal  of
              this proposal is to study how the structure of the core D1 reaction center
              polypeptide of the  photosystem ll (PSII) reaction center affects chloroplast
              PSII assembly/stability, and PSII function  including the photooxidation of
              water to molecular oxygen. PSII, and the oxygen-evolving complex in 
              particular, is labile under conditions of environmental stress, contributing to
              loss of productivity in the  field. An increased understanding of how
              chloroplast PSII function is regulated in response to  environmental cues may
              provide a basis for improving crop yields. This proposal describes a new 
              approach to studying structure-function relationships of the chloroplast PSII
              of a eukaryotic organism.  Random mutagenesis targeted in vitro to specific
              sub-regions of the D1 chloroplast gene and subsequent  co-transformation of the
              chloroplast genome of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii with the 
              mutagenized gene and a selectable drug-resistance marker gene will be followed
              by a classical genetic  screen of drug-resistant transformants for those
              exhibiting an aberrant fluorescence phenotype. The genetic  screen relies on
              measurements of chlorophyll fluorescence which provide a rapid and sensitive
              assay of  PSII function. Hence, this method will allow for the ready
              identification of all D1 amino acid residues  in each targeted region which,
              when altered, affect PSII function as monitored by chlorophyll  fluorescence.
              The regions targeted will include sequences coding for amino acid residues
              found in a) the  fifth transmembrane helix through to the  COOH terminus, b)
              the lumenal loop between the first and  second transmembrane helices, and c)
              the lumenal loop between the third and fourth transmembrane  helices. The use
              of random mutagenesis in select regions of the D1 gene followed by a phenotypic
              screen  of resulting transformant algae should provide a major advance in this
              field. By letting the transformed  algae identify (through expression of an
              observable altered phenotype) which amino acid residues are  important for
              function, the laborintensive work involved in a classic site-directed
              mutagenesis approach  is avoided, as is the prejudicial selection of specific
              residues as site-directed targets. Detailed molecular,  biochemical and
              biophysical analysis of resulting transformants of interest will provide a
              correlation  between D1 structure and PSII stability and function. These
              studies should yield significant insight into  a biochemical process crucial to
              our ecosystem. Results of these investigations may ultimately allow for  the
              educated design and manipulation of macromolecules of biological relevance to
              agricultural  productivity. Finally, the light-driven photosynthetic electron
              transfer reactions studied here are  absolutely essential for the production of
              renewable biomass on earth which is used as food, fiber and   fuel.  %%%  Life
              on earth as we know it is sustained by the important chemical process known as
              photosynthesis.  Using this process, plants, algae and some bacteria are able
              to live on water, minerals and air,  receiving the energy they need from
              sunlight. The capture of light energy by plants and algae takes  place within
              the cell in a structure called the chloroplast. Inside the chloroplast,
              specific proteins  assemble with each other and with cofactor molecules to form
              a large membrane-associated complex  called Photosystem ll (PSII) which carries
              out the first steps of photosynthesis. In these first steps,  light energy is
              stored up and then used to break apart water molecules, producing oxygen. When 
              the water  molecules are split, electrons are removed from water and are then
              transferred, in an orderly  fashion, through a series of other molecules which
              are in the correct position to receive and pass on  the electrons. It is
              ultimately this carefully coordinated electron transfer chain that produces the
               chemical energy that the plant cell needs to survive. However, in order for
              the electron transfer chain  to work properly, the electron acceptor molecules
              must be lined up in the proper order and at the  correct distance from each
              other. We want to find out where these acceptor molecules are located  within
              the protein complex, and how they assemble with the different protein subunits
              to form the  functional PSII complex. These questions are of particular
              importance because under certain  conditions of environmental stress, including
              strong light, PSII becomes damaged and plants are  unable to photosynthesize.
              This can result in reduced crop yield and in some cases plant death. One 
              particular subunit of the PSII protein, called the D1 subunit, appears to be
              the part of PSII that is  specifically damaged and subsequently degraded.
              Without Dl, PSllis unstable. Without PSII, plants  can not survive.  Because of
              its central role in PSII assembly, function and stability, the Dl subunit will
              be the focus of our  studies. Our approach to studying how D1 functions in PSII
              will involve the molecular manipulation of  the DNA molecules which carry the
              information dictating the structure of the Dl protein subunit. We are  using a
              unicellular green alga as a model experimental system for our studies because
              it contains a single  large chloroplast, and we are able to introduce DNA into
              the chloroplast of living algal cells. Thus, we  will mutate the DNA sequences
              which code for D1, put the mutant DNA back into the chloroplast of cells  to
              produce mutant algae, and then see what the mutants do. A video imaging system
              that records the  fluorescence light emitted by algal cells will be used to
              look at thousands of m utant algae in a very short  period of time. Because the
              fluorescence signal emitted by the algae comes from PSII, this system will 
              allow us to identify mutants with defects in PSII function. Once these mutants
              are identified, we will  characterize them in detail to find out what changes
              are present in the mutant D1 subunit, and exactly how  PSII function is
              different. We particularly want to find out whether PSII can assemble, whether
              the  electron acceptor molecules are correctly positioned, and how quickly PSII
              is damaged in the mutant  algae. In this way, we will identify regions of the
              D1 subunit that are critical for PSII function and that  affect PSII stability.
              The long-term goal of our studies is to understand in detail how PSII works so
              that  it might be possible to produce plants which are more resistant to PSII
              damage under environmental  conditions, more active in photosynthesis, and
              hence more productive.  ***
