Title       : Dolomite Microstructures and Reaction Mechanisms of Dolomitization: An
               Integrated TEM, Petrographic, Geochemical and Field Study of Selected Dolomite
               Bodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1995        
File        : a9316969

Award Number: 9316969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156360             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Hardie   (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Veblen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316969  Hardie       In the last 10 or so years that TEM studies have unveiled
              the  true nature of the internal architecture of natural calcian  dolomites,
              revealing diversity of heterogeneous microstructures  occurring on a scale of
              one to a few thousand Angstroms.  It is  clear from electron microscopy on
              sedimentary dolomites that one of  the root causes of the "dolomite problem"
              lies in the existence of  energy barriers to cation ordering and phase
              separation inherent in  the dolomite crystal structure at low formation
              temperatures.  This  inability to reach thermodynamic equilibrium leads to a
              host of  compromise edifices built of compositionally and/or structurally 
              different domains with dimensions of only a few hundred Angstroms.   Thus,
              calcian dolomites display a range of structural modifications  and are
              characterized with the electron microscope by heterogeneous  microstructures,
              such as chemical or structural modulations.         Case studies integrating
              field, petrographic geochemical, SEM,  and TEM observations are essential if we
              are to make progress in  bringing together the atomic-scale features of the
              mineral dolomite  with the microscopic and macroscopic features of
              stratigraphic  bodies of the rock dolomite.  We propose to carry out such an 
              integrated study that compares three dolomite bodies different from  each other
              in age, scale, and style of dolomitization.  The three  dolomite bodies wee
              have chosen for study are the Triassic Latemar  Limestone of northern Italy,
              the Holocene tidal flat carbonates of  the Bahamas and Florida, and the
              Cambro-Ordovician platform  carbonates of the central Appalachians.  We have
              chosen these  particular dolomite-bearing carbonates because (1) we have 
              extensive experience with all of them, (2) they present a spectrum  of
              dolomitization features yet they have in common a most important 
              characteristic, namely, they all preserve dolomite-CaCO3 phase  boundaries at
              both the outcrop and the microscope scales, (3)they  record a variety of do
              lomitization environments that range from  low-temperature supratidal
              conditions (Holocene and Triassic  dolomites) through shallow to deep burial
              conditions (Cambro-  Ordovician dolomites) to 200C hydrothermal conditions
              (Triassic  dolomites).       By making the study a comparative one carried out
              on dolomite  bodies with significantly different microscopic and macroscopic 
              properties related to their different environments of  dolomitization, we hope
              to uncover diagnostic differences in the  reaction mechanisms and in the
              microstructures of the dolomites at  the atomic scale and in the
              intracrystalline geochemistry as  determined by TEM and AEM analyses.  In
              particular, we will attempt  to:  1) relate dolomite microstructures and
              fine-scale chemical  variations to the environment of dolomitization; (2)
              relate  dolomite microstructures to reaction mechanisms such as crystal  growth
              into passive voids, fabric-retentive and fabric-destructive  replacement, and
              annealling recrystallization; (3) combine 1 and 2  to link reaction mechanism
              to dolomitization environment.       The origin of dolomite remains one of the
              major unresolved  problems in geochemistry.  Resolution of this "dolomite
              problem"  has considerable economic significance because many sedimentary 
              dolomite bodies are hosts to gas, oil, and hydrothermal ore  deposits.
