Title       : Sources and Functions of Defenses Against Solar UV Radiationand Photooxidative
               Stress in Sea Urchins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1995   
File        : a9316426

Award Number: 9316426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360129             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Malcolm Shick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter C. Dunlap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316426  Shick         The regulation of defenses against solar ultraviolet 
              radiation-induced photooxidative stress will be studied in  sea urchins. Like
              other marine organisms, sea urchins  contain mycosporine-like amino acids
              (MAAs) which absorb  environmentally relevant wavelengths of UV. Various
              seaweeds  eaten by sea urchins are rich in MAAs, and preliminary 
              chromatographic analyses indicate concordance between the  MAA levels in
              seaweed and in sea urchin tissues, especially  ovaries. Controlled maintenance
              of sea urchins on seaweeds  lacking or rich in MAAs confirms dietary
              accumulation of  MAAs in the urchins' ovaries, and provides an experimental 
              means to fortify the eggs with these presumptive UV  defenses.       Published
              documentation of a UV-protective effect of  MAAs is largely circumstantial.
              Thus, a major objective of  the proposed research is to test directly whether
              MAAs  protect echinoid eggs and larvae from exposure to natural  and simulated
              solar UV. If the hypothesis that MAAs do  confer protection against UV
              radiation is correct, dietary  fortification of sea urchin ovaries should
              confer a greater  resistance to UV in eggs and larvae; therefore, effects of 
              acute UV exposure on pyrimidine dimer formation in DNA,  fertilization,
              development, and larval survival will be  assessed in MAA-rich and
              MAA-deficient individuals.       A comparative study in this project is aimed
              at  determining whether different exposures to solar UV  radiation are
              associated with qualitative and quantitative  differences in MAA content. MAA
              composition and content in a  Maine species of sea urchin will be compared with
              those in a  sympatric sand dollar. The sea urchin species matures and  spawns
              in late winter; thus gamete maturation and larval  development take place under
              relatively low levels of UV  exposure. In contrast, the sand dollar is mature
              and spawns  repeatedly from June through October, so its eggs and larvae  are
              exposed to higher seasonal UV radiation than the winter-  spawning se a urchin
              and may require more robust  photooxidative defenses.       The results of this
              study will have implications for       the  mechanism of  accumulation and
              effectiveness of natural  photooxidative defenses in marine food chains. This
              is a  genuine concern because of deterioration of the protective  ozone layer,
              where boreal marine organisms have evolved  under relatively low solar UV
              exposure. The research may  also have importance in the search for natural
              (dietary)  antioxidants, some of which may be active as inhibitors of  tumor
              promotion in human cells.  ***
