Title       : Translational Control of RuBPCase Gene Expression in Amaranth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9316806

Award Number: 9316806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Berry camjob@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Berry  9316806  Photomorphogenesis, the phenomenon of growth and development in 
              response to light, provides a valuable experimental system to study  the
              control of gene expression by environmental stimuli.  In  Amaranth seedlings,
              light coordinately regulates the expression of  genes encoding the large
              subunit (LSU) and small subunit (SSU) of  ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase
              (RuBPCase), a principle  enzyme in photosynthetic carbon fixation.  While
              long-term changes  in RuBPCase gene expression are regulated by light at the
              level of  mRNA accumulation, very rapid changes in RuBPCase gene expression 
              are induced at two translational levels.  RuBPCase synthesis is  rapidly
              induced at the level of translation initiation when dark-  grown seedlings are
              transferred to light (light-shift), and is  rapidly blocked at the level of
              translation elongation when light-  grown seedlings are transferred to
              darkness.  We propose to  investigate the regulation of chloroplast-encoded LSU
              and nuclear-  encoded SSU at these two translation steps.  Regulation of 
              translation initiation will be investigated in light-grown, dark-  grown, and
              light-shifted seedlings by analysis of polysome-  associated proteins, analysis
              of proteins that associate with  RuBPCase mRNAs, and by in vivo and in vitro
              analysis of RNA  sequences and associated factors.  Regulation of translation 
              elongation will be studied in light-grown and dark-shifted  seedlings by
              analysis of ribosome distribution and sites of  ribosome pausing, analysis of
              the elongation block in homologous  translation runoff extracts, and analysis
              of polysome-associated  proteins.  The investigations proposed will provide new
              insights  into coordinate regulation of expression of nuclear- and plastid- 
              encoded genes at the translational level.  %%%  In plants, light serves as an
              environmental signal that regulates  development.  Investigations into
              light-regulated responses in  plants are important in determining how factors
              that control plant  development respo nd to environmental stimuli, such as
              light.  To  begin to understand how this occurs, we will study light-control of
               plant genes responsible for forming the carbon dioxide fixation  enzyme in
              Amaranth, a grain plant.  Experiments will be performed  to observe how light
              exposure can control rapid changes in the  amounts of the enzyme in the plant. 
              This appears to happen at the  level of messenger RNA, which is produced from
              DNA and afterwards  is translated into the plant carbon dioxide fixation
              protein.   Results of this research will provide unique perspectives about 
              light on the genetic control in photosynthesis.  In addition, our  basic
              research with Amaranth will contribute to the development of  the plant as an
              important agricultural crop for food production and  for industry.  ***
