Title       : Gene Enzyme and Physiological Characterization of shrunken-2Isoalleles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9316887

Award Number: 9316887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321807             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Curtis Hannah Hannah@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9316887  Hannah  The allosteric properties of ADP-glucose
              pyrophosphorylase are  critical in controlling the amount of glucose polymers
              in organisms  ranging from E. coli to potato.  The maize transposable element, 
              dissociation Ds, was placed within the coding region of the site of  a gene
              encoding the maize endosperm enzyme.  Ds excisions are  imprecise, thus
              revertants represent a series of closely-related  mutations arising from one
              position in the gene.  This form of in-  vivo, site-specific mutagenesis was
              used to create wild type  variants that differ in DNA sequence, enzyme levels,
              allosteric  properties and seed weight.  Since starch comprises 70% of seed 
              weight, starch content likely has been altered.    This research will further
              characterize revertants at DNA, enzyme  and physiological levels.  Additional
              excision events will identify  changes at this site not only restoring gene
              function, but those  not restoring gene function.  Integration of studies at
              the gene,  enzyme and physiological levels of the isogenic maize lines will 
              help define the structure/function relationships of a important  region of a
              critical enzyme and how these changes affect starch  content.    Secondly,
              these studies are providing new insight into the  mechanism of Ds
              transposition.  Unexpectedly some revertants do not  easily fit current models
              of transposition.  Additional excision  events should lead to modification of
              existing models or to  development of new ones.    In summary, a series of
              integrated experiments are proposed to more  clearly understand how this region
              of the enzyme affects its  allosteric properties and, in turn, how changes
              affect starch  biosynthesis.  Coupled with this will be a better understanding
              of  how Ds acts as a mutagen.  ***
