Title       : Purification and Characterization of a Novel Isoprenylated Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9316131

Award Number: 9316131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry R. Faust   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316131  Faust  Mevalonic acid is required for the synthesis of several
              essential  components (e.g. cholesterol, dolichol, and ubiquinone) that 
              function in a wide variety of mammalian cell processes.  Adequate  levels of
              Mevalonic acid are required for sustained cell growth.   In addition to the
              need for cell growth, however, an unknown  Isoprenoid metabolite of mevalonic
              acid is required acutely for DNA  replication in mammalian cells.  The long
              term goals of this  research are to identify and elucidate the mechanisms by
              which  isoprenoids regulate cell proliferation.  Preliminary experiments 
              identified a new, cell cycle-regulated protein that may contain a  novel
              isoprenoid modification, isopentenyladenine.  The expression  of this unique
              protein (named i6A26) correlates with isoprenoid-  mediated regulation of DNA
              synthesis.  Interestingly,  isopentenyladenine, which is derived from mevalonic
              acid, is a  potent growth hormone in plants, a member of the group of plant 
              hormones known as cytokinins.  The function of isopentenyladenine  in mammalian
              cells is unknown.  The goals of this project are:  1)  to purify i6A26 using
              conventional biochemical techniques, obtain  partial amino acid sequence of the
              protein, and to compare the  amino acid sequence of i6A26 with known protein
              which may help to  identify this unique, cell cycle-regulated protein. 2) to
              prepare  antibodies that recognize peptide domains in i6A26 and 
              immunoprecipitate i6A26. 3)  to perform precursor incorporation  experiments
              using radiolabeled mevalonic acid and adenine to  characterize the modification
              in i6A26.  Reagents produced and the  results obtained will be used in future
              studies to address the  mechanism by which i6A26 expression is regulated and
              the role of  this unique protein in controlling cell proliferation.  %%% 
              Isopentenyladenine is a chemical variant of one of the nucleotide  bases that
              make up nucleic acids.  This modified base is found in  transfer RNAs isolated
              from a wide variety of cells.  In plants,   isopentenyladenine is also a member
              of an important class of  hormones known as cytokinins.  Cytokinins regulate
              cell division,  gene expression, and differentiation in various plant tissues. 
              In  mammalian cells, an isoprenoid molecule derived from the same  metabolic
              precursor as the isopentenyl portion of the plant hormone  is acutely required
              for transit of the cell cycle.  The identity of  this isoprenoid is unknown. 
              Since isopentenyladenine affects cell  division in plants it would be very
              interesting determine whether  isopentenyladenine is involved in regulation of
              mammalian cell  proliferation. In preliminary work, this laboratory has
              identified  a cell cycle-regulated protein in mammalian cells that appears to 
              contain isopentenyladenine.  If this is borne out by further work,  it would
              represent a previously unknown type of protein  modification.  It also may lead
              to clarification of the role of the  required, but previously uncharacterized,
              isoprenoid molecule  necessary for mammalian cell division.  Since the exact
              mechanism  of action of this chemical as a plant hormone is not yet understood 
              the results of this research could also shed light on the mode of  action of
              this important class of plant hormones.  ***
