Title       : Vesicle Microtubule Interaction and Fast Axonal Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1996  
File        : a9316540

Award Number: 9316540
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger D. Sloboda rds@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316540  Sloboda    The experiments outlined in this proposal will extend 
              previous studies on microtubule based intracellular particle  transport.  The
              work focuses on the characterization of two  high molecular weight microtubule
              associated proteins which  are involved in the transport of membrane bound
              vesicles in  squid giant axon, termed MAP H1 and MAP H2.  MAP H2 is the  squid
              analog of cytoplasmic dynein.  MAP H1 is a vesicle  surface protein that can
              also bind to microtubules.  MAP H1  binds ATP, and antibodies to MAP H1 block
              vesicle transport  in extruded squid axoplasm.   The MAP H1 polypeptide has a 
              molecular weight greater than 400,000; approximately 25% of  the polypeptide
              has thus far been cloned and its amino acid  sequence thereby deduced.  The
              experiments proposed in this  renewal project are designed to expand our
              knowledge of MAP  H1 and its role in microtubule based motility.  The cloning 
              and sequencing of the MAP H1 polypeptide will be completed.  Functional domains
              of the molecule will be expressed in  bacterial cells, purified, and their
              characteristics  analyzed with respect to their ability to interact with 
              microtubules, vesicle surface proteins, and other elements  of the cytoskeleton
              of nerve cells.  In transfection  experiments with tissue culture cells, the
              effect of over  expression of MAP H1 or of under expression (using antisense 
              constructs) of MAP H1 will be assessed via motility assays  and
              immunofluorescence microscopy.  Finally,  immunoprecipitation and specific
              radiolabelling experiments  will be performed to identify those polypeptides of
              axoplasm  and/or of the vesicle surface with which MAP H1 is capable  of
              interacting.  %%%  The eukaryotic cell is a highly organized structure, and 
              this high degree of spatial organization is critical to  cellular function.  In
              the special case of nerve cells,  whose function is intercellular
              communication, this  communication occurs in part by the release of secretory 
              materials from the tip of the axon, a long slen der cellular  process, in the
              vicinity of a neighboring cell.  The  secretory materials released from the
              axonal tip are  manufactured in the main body of the nerve cell, at the  other
              end of the axonal process.  The mechanism whereby  these materials are
              transported down the length of the axon  is thus critical to proper nerve
              function.  This mechanism,  which involves the movement of membrane-enclosed
              vesicles  containing the secretory materials along axonal  microtubules, is not
              really unique to nerve tissue, since  microtubule-mediated motility is a nearly
              ubiquitous  mechanism for directed intracellular particle movements.  However,
              the axon, particularly the squid giant axon,  is an  especially useful model
              for studying microtubule mediated  transport.  Recent advances in this field
              have led to the  discovery of motor proteins which are involved in this 
              transport.  However, the motors alone are clearly not the  whole story.  The
              results of this project will lead to a  more complete understanding of the
              mechanism of vesicle  transport in neurons, and will provide important
              information  about the components on the surfaces of the transportable 
              vesicles that allow the vesicles to specifically interact  with the microtubule
              based transport apparatus.  This  knowledge will not only be of significance to
              understanding  the biology of the system, but is potentially important for 
              downstream exploitation of microtubule-mediated transport  phenomena in
              non-biological applications, such as advanced  materials and nanofabrication. 
              ***
