Title       : RUI: Steroidogenesis in Drosophila: A Developmental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1996     
File        : a9316896

Award Number: 9316896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent C. Henrich vincent_henrich@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9316896  Henrich    Steroidogenesis is a developmentally regulated, 
              neurohormonally stimulated, second messenger mediated  process whose molecular
              regulation remains largely undefined  in a variety of experimental systems.
              Among insects, neural  factors periodically stimulate the synthesis of the
              insect  steroid hormone, ecdysone, in the larval prothoracic gland.  This
              steroid is then converted into its active form, 20-  hydroxyecdysone, and
              interacts with nuclear receptors in  target tissues to trigger the
              developmental changes  associated with larval molts and metamorphosis. This
              project  will identify and characterize several genes at the  molecular level
              suspected to be involved in the regulation  of ecdysteroid biosynthesis in a
              model organism, the fruit  fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Specifically, the
              project will  pursue the following objectives; 1) clone a gene by  chromosomal
              walking  that is  defined by a conditional  mutation (ecdysoneless; ecd-1)
              which in turn, causes an  ecdysteroid deficiency at the mutation's restrictive 
              temperature; 2) deduce the structure of the ecd gene product  from cDNA clones,
              delineate its developmental expression,  assess its functional role in
              steroidogenesis, and construct  a physical map of the gene; 3) identify and
              characterize  members of the steroid hormone receptor super family active  in
              Drosophila steroidogenic tissues, including those whose  mammalian homologues
              have already been implicated in  steroidogenic regulation and those implicated
              in ecdysteroid  regulation. As part of achieving the first objective, a cDNA 
              library will be prepared by reverse transcriptase-polymerase  chain reaction
              methods with RNA extracted from the  Drosophila ring gland, which contains the
              prothoracic gland.  These methods will also be employed to quantify receptor 
              transcripts through the developmental period during which  the capacity of the
              Drosophila larval prothoracic gland to  produce ecdysteroids and respond to
              proteinaceous neural  factors increases dra matically. By achieving  the aims
              of  this project, a foundation will be laid for future genetic  investigations
              in a powerful model system concerning the  individual roles and functional
              coordination of molecular  activities that underlie steroidogenesis, as well as
              the  relationship between steroidogenic activities and steroid  dependent
              activities in target tissues.  ***
