Title       : Free Convection, Mass Transport and Diagenesis in Thick Heterogeneous Sediment
               Sequences: Implications for the Gulf Basin Geopressured Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9316627

Award Number: 9316627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Nunn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alok Sarkar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Hanor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316627  Nunn    A large portion of the sediments within the northern Gulf Basin
              are  over pressured (i.e., contain pore pressures in excess of  hydrostatic). 
              In some areas, pore pressures may be more than 80%  of lithostatic pressure. 
              Development of geopressure is  permeability sediments in the miocene and
              particularly the Plio-  Pleistocene.  Water and carbon dioxide generated by
              thermobaric  chemical reactions, such as clay dehydration and hydrocarbon 
              maturation, may also contribute to the formation of excess pore  pressure. 
              Numerous studies have examined the formation of  geopressure in sedimentary
              basins and/or expulsion of geopressured  fluids into the overlying into the
              overlying hydropressured zone.   However, very little attention has been given
              to fluid flow within  the geopressured zone itself.  A number of priori
              considerations  make it likely that regional scale thermohaline convection may
              be  occurring within geopressured zones: 1) sediments are  undercompacted and
              therefore porous and permeable; 2)  undercompacted sediments have low thermal
              conductivities which  increases the conductive geothermal gradient; and 3( in
              the Gulf  Basin, dissolution of stratigraphically high salt in the form of 
              domes or allochthonous sheets produces dense saline brines which  further
              destabilizes the water column.  Movement of oils from  source rocks to
              reservoirs in the Gulf Basin requires as much as 10  km of vertical migration
              in a few million years.  Precipitation of  large amounts of quartz and calcite
              cements in some geopressured  sediments also implies fluid flow on a massive
              scale.  We propose  to carry out a two year study on the following aspects of 
              thermohaline conviction and theoretical diagenesis in heterogeneous  sediment
              sequences: 1) modify our existing numerical models to  simulate thermohaline
              convection beneath allochthonous salt sheets:  2) examine the effects of
              heterogeneous sediments (e.g., growth  faults and is continuous sand/shale
              layers) on fluid flow patterns;  3) dev elop and couple the physical models for
              thermohaline  convection to numerical models for quartz and calcite diagenesis 
              assuming that solubility is a function of temperature and salinity  only;  and
              4) compare results from the numerical models to the  pattern of diagenesis in
              the Gulf Basin including the formation of  vertical or horizontal chemical
              seals.  ***
