Title       : RUI: Dynamics of Actin Interactions and Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9316025

Award Number: 9316025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Newman NEWMANJ@GAR.UNION.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Danowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9316025  Newman  The effect of the state of G-actin on its interactions, 
              polymerization kinetics and polymer structure will be investigated  by a
              combination of dynamic light scatting, rheology, and  fluorescence microscopy
              techniques.  Dynamic light scattering and  rheology experiments will be
              performed to determine the effects of  the solvent (divalent cation,
              nucleotide, and temperature) and the  presence of certain actin binding
              moieties (including the two light  chain isoforms of myosin S-1, profilin, and
              cytochalasin D) on the  kinetics and state of actin self-association.  Further
              measurements  in the presence of various high concentrations of an inert low 
              molecular weight polymer (polyethylene glycol, PEG) will study the  effects of
              crowding on the kinetics, bundling, and steady-state  sizes and dynamic
              properties of actin filaments.  The self-  association of actin under crowded
              conditions, using high  concentrations of sucrose or PEG, within
              artificially-prepared  vesicles and within certain epithelial cell types will
              also be  studied using fluorescence imaging microscopy techniques.  These 
              studies will provide detailed information on the self-interactions  of G-actin
              and the dynamic properties of the oligomers, filaments,  and actin bundles,
              both in vitro and in vivo, as functions of the  solvent and actin-specific
              binding molecules using a variety of  experimental techniques.  %%%  Three
              different physical techniques will be used to study the  structure and
              interactions of the protein actin, one of the most  common proteins found in
              nature.  Actin's role in determining the  structure and mechanical properties
              of cells is incompletely known.   It is clear, however, that actin plays a
              unique role in generating  forces within a cell in order to change the cell's
              shape or to  allow the cell to move actively, as many cells can.  A variety of 
              other proteins have been discovered which interact specifically  with actin and
              either regulate or modify the association of many  actins togethe r to form
              long filaments which are capable to  sustaining a force.  The proposed research
              will, in part, attempt  to elucidate the role of several of the more prominent
              such  proteins by studying their effects on actin in a test tube, in an 
              "artificial" cell constructed from lipid vesicles with actin  incorporated
              inside, and in a living cell.  Methods used will  include dynamic laser light
              scattering, viscoelasticity  measurements, and fluorescence microscopy
              techniques.  Two main areas of experiments are planned.  The first will probe 
              the effects of specific proteins, salts, or drugs on the self-  association of
              actins.  Such experiments will help us to understand  the details of filament
              formation in cells leading to eventual  force generation, and some of the
              control mechanisms involved.  The  second area will study the effects of
              crowded conditions, such as  are found within cells, on the actual
              self-association rates and  final states.  Most solution experiments are
              carried out with  purified proteins in the presence of only other small
              molecules.   Recently it has been demonstrated that in the presence of other 
              large macromolecules, not only the rates of self-interaction, but  also the
              final aggregation state can be greatly influenced.   Crowding will be produced
              by the addition of inert macromolecules,  which do not directly interact with
              actin, in order to simulate the  actual conditions within cells.  These
              experiments will be carried  out both in solutions and in artificial cells, and
              will be compared  to experiments performed in living cells using fluorescence 
              methods.  In this way we will attempt to study the interactions of 
              well-characterized proteins in much simpler environments that those  of cells,
              but be able to draw meaningful conclusions about the role  of these
              interactions in living cells.
