Title       : RUI: Metabolism of Carbofuran: cloning and characterization of the hydrolase and
               hydroxylase genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1994       
File        : a9316416

Award Number: 9316416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Rasul Chaudhry chaudhry@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chaudhry  9316416  Carbamates and benzofurans are toxic pesticides that may be
              slowly  biodegraded by microorganisms.  This occurs as a hydrolytic process  in
              some cells and as an oxidative process in others, and sometimes  results in the
              release of more toxic intermediates than the  pesticides themselves.  We have
              chosen to study degradation of  carbofuran
              (2,3-dihydro-2,2-dimethyl-7-benzofuranyl  methylcarbamate) as a model compound
              to investigate the biochemical  pathways and genetic determinants involved in
              the microbial  degradation process.  In previous studies several microorganisms
               were isolated that can utilize carbofuran as sole source of carbon  or
              nitrogen.  One of these, Pseudomonas sp. 50432, has the unique  ability to
              metabolize carbamate by utilizing both hydrolytic and  oxidative degradation
              pathways.  Carbamates are hydrolyzed by a  constitutively synthesized enzyme,
              while oxidation of the compound  occurres only after the induction of the
              oxidative pathway. In the  present research plan, we will: 1) isolate and
              purify the hydrolase  involved in carbofuran degradation; 2) perform
              biochemical and  molecular comparison of the Pseudomonas sp. 50432 hydrolase
              with  enzymes in other microorganisms; and 3) clone the carbofuran  hydrolase
              gene.  The results of this study are expected to improve  our understanding of
              the microbial catabolism of carbofuran and  other carbamates.  In addition,
              these findings should provide the  basis for developing microbial agents
              capable of decontaminating  soil and water polluted with carbamates, as well as
              in devising  strategies for improving the efficacy and environmental safety of 
              this group of pesticides.  %%%  Use of pesticides is vital for agricultural
              productivity.  However,  some pesticides, in particular the carbamate
              pesticides, are also  toxic to animals and, although they may be slowly removed
              from the  biosphere by microbes, this process is slow.  The pesticides are  now
              being found polluting ground water.  In our laboratory, we will   study how a
              microbe, which we named Pseudomonas sp 50432, can  degrade carbofuran, one of
              the toxic polluting pesticides.  To do  this: 1) we will isolate and purify a
              key enzyme, the hydrolase,  involved in degrading carbofuran; 2) we will
              determine if this  enzyme is unique, or similar to enzymes in other related
              microbes;  and 3) finally, we will clone and sequence of hydrolase gene.  The 
              results of this study are expected to improve our understanding of  microbial
              destruction of carbofuran and other carbamate pesticides.  In addition, these
              findings should provide the basis for developing  microbial agents capable of
              decontaminating soil and water polluted  with carbamate pesticides, as well as
              in devising strategies for  improving the efficacy and the environmental safety
              of this group  of pesticides.  ***
