Title       : Distribution, Nutrition, Physiology and Phylogenetics of Oligobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1995  
File        : a9316731

Award Number: 9316731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don K. Button dkbutton@ims.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Button  9316731     A rather even distribution of bacteria occurs in the 
              world's oceans.  They recycle a large fraction of the  organic material to CO2,
              leaving a very dilute organic  mixture, and send an unknown fraction up the
              food chain.  Their adaptation to the dilute solution results in cellular 
              properties that set them apart from organisms commonly  cultured from the sea. 
              These properties include small size  necessitating special methods of
              observation, the ability to  subsist in very dilute conditions suggesting the
              name  oligobacteria, and resistance to cultivation.  The  development of a
              number of new methods is at the stage where  scientists can now applied them to
              these typical  oligobacteria: (i) dilution culture for isolating members of 
              the population and determining  their viability, (ii)  population structure in
              sea water for estimating in situ  growth rates, (iii) high resolution flow
              cytometry for  quantifying their populations, evaluating their  biochemistry,
              and determining their 3-dimensional  distribution, (iv) phylogenetics for
              taxonomic evaluation,  and (v) kinetic theory for interpreting the results. 
              The  overall objective of this project is to describe the balance  between the
              concentration of dissolved nutrients and the  organisms that affect nutrient
              concentrations through  selective removal.  To understand how oligobacteria
              regulate  the concentration of  organic nutrients,  Dr. Button plans 
              nutritional, kinetic and biochemical studies on isolates.  Integrated in these
              studies are experiments to produce dense  cultures to learn how dilute organic
              solutions regulate  maximal marine populations.  In addition, the project will 
              investigate using freshly collected sea water the range of  growth rates and
              organism characteristics that one considers  common, in order to refine
              concepts of viability and  to  evaluate the effect of grazing on
              bacterioplankton  characteristics.  ***
