Title       : Spectroscopic and Magnetic Studies of Metalloprotein Active Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9316768

Award Number: 9316768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $539000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward I. Solomon Edward.Solomon@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9110,9162,9183,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9316768  Solomon  Many metalloenzymes exhibit ususual spectral features which 
              reflect novel electronic structures that can make significant  contributions to
              catalysis.  This research program focuses on  understanding the unusal
              electronic and geometric structures of  active sites in magnetically coupled
              binuclear non-heme iron and  manganese cluster enzymes.  Hemerythrin, methane
              monooxygenase and  ribonucleotide reductase have  FE(II)Fe(II)  sites which
              bind,  activate and reduce O2, respectively, while purple acid phosphatase  is
              active in catalysis in its mixed valent  Fe(II)Fe(III)  state.   The active
              sites in these proteins can generally be obtained in the   Fe(III)Fe(III) , 
              Fe(III)Fe(II)  and  Fe(II)Fe(II)  states and  model complexes exist for all of
              these oxidation states.  Oxy-  intermediates or analogues are now available for
              a number of these  proteins and for non-heme iron model complexes at the peroxy
              and  oxo-ferryl levels.  The manganese-oxo cluster enzymes of interest  include
              manganese catalase, manganese ribonucleotide reductase,  manganese substituted
              iron ribonucleotide reductase and the water  oxidation catalyst in Photosystem
              II.  Again, model complexes are  available for all the biologically relevant
              oxidation states from   Mn(II)Mn(II)  to  Mn(IV)Mn(IV) .  A spectroscopic
              approach is  presented which emphasizes the application of absorption, circular
               dichroism,magnetic circular dichroism and resonance Raman methods  to study
              the excited states in these enzymes and model complexes  and variable
              temperature variable field magnetic circular dichroism  to probe the ground
              state sublevel splittings which relate to the  bridging ligation responsible
              for the coupling.  The results from  these spectroscopies are combined with
              ligand field  and self  consistent field-X-scattered wave calculations to
              determine the  electronic structures of these active sites.  These studies are 
              directed toward defining active site geometric and electron  structure
              differences which relate t o differences in function in  the non-heme iron
              enzymes, determining active site similarities and  differences between the
              binuclear non-heme iron and manganese  enzymes, and understanding the
              electronic structures of the  metal-oxy intermediatesand metal-oxo bonds as
              related to dioxygen  activation and O-O bond formation.  %%%  Many proteins and
              enzymes contain metal ion active sites which play  a key role in biological
              function.  Often these exhibit ususual  spectral features which reflect novel
              electronic structures that  can make significant contributions to calalysis. 
              This research  program focuses on understanding the unusual electronic and 
              geometric structures of active sites in magnetically coupled  binuclear
              non-heme iron and manganese cluster enzymes.  These  clusters are found in
              hemerythrin (reversible oxygen binding),  ribonucleotide reductase (conversion
              of ribonucleotides to  deoxyribonucleotides in DNA synthesis), methane
              monooxygenase  (catalytic conversion of methane to methanol), catalase 
              (detoxification of peroxide), and the water oxidation catalyst in  photosystem
              II (generation of oxygen by green plants).  These  studies are directed toward
              defining active site geometric and  electronic structure differences which
              relate to differences in  function in the non-heme iron enzymes, determining
              active site  similarities and differences between the corresponding binuclear 
              non-heme iron and manganese enzymes, and understanding the  electronic
              structures of the metal-oxygen intermediates involved in  dioxygen activation
              and O-O bond formation.  This research will  provide fundamental insight into
              geometric and electronic  structural contributions to function in biology and
              lay the  groundwork for the design and development of new catalytic systems. 
              ***
