Title       : SGER: Memories of a Life Threatening Event: An Integration of Cognitive and
               Personality Perspectives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9316130

Award Number: 9316130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill Rierdan jill.rierdan@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Pillemer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              9316130  RIERDAN    On May 15, 1993, three gunmen robbed a restaurant and held
              ten  people hostage.  The hostages were bound and gagged and, with guns  held
              to their heads, their lives were threatened.  Although the  hostages were not
              physically harmed, their terrifying ordeal lasted  for almost two hours.  The
              willingness of the hostages and their  families to participate in this research
              study provides a rare  opportunity to examine memory for an extraordinarily
              stressful  personal event that occurred in a natural context.  The hostages 
              will be interviewed about their memories of the robbery at two time  periods,
              one month and six months following the event.  Hostages  will be asked to
              recount the event in their own terms.  Then, they  will be asked a series of
              specific questions about the robbery,  including information about the gunmen,
              other hostages, and the  rescue.  Finally, they will be asked about their own
              psychological  reactions to the event, including persisting visual or sensory 
              images, feelings, and thoughts.  Hostages also will complete  several
              personality tests.  Memory accuracy will be evaluated by  comparing hostages'
              reports to available objective information  about the robbery.  Memory
              consistency will be evaluated by  comparing event descriptions provided by the
              different hostages,  and also by comparing individual hostages' memories across
              the two  time periods.  Memory integration, the degree to which the memory  has
              been incorporated into a stable sense of self, will also be  assessed. 
              Relationships between memory and personality test scores  will be examined in
              order to determine if certain psychological  attributes make it easier for a
              person to integrate the memory of  a horrifying event into his or her ongoing
              life and sense of self.  In addition to the hostages themselves, one male and
              one female  member of each hostage's family will be interviewed.  The 
              interviews will assess the family members' memories of learning  about the
              robbery from the hostages.  The  family members also will  complete several
              personality tests.  As with the hostages'  memories, the accuracy, consistency,
              and organization of family  members' memories will be evaluated.  In addition,
              family members'  own psychological reactions to the hostages' trauma will be 
              assessed.  This study is unique in examining memories of both the  people
              directly experiencing a life-threatening event and also  their close family
              members. Evaluating memories of an  extraordinarily stressful event will not
              only inform the scientific  study of basic cognitive processes, it should also
              deepen our  understanding of the psychological processes affecting eyewitness 
              testimony and successful adaptation to life-threatening events.    ***
