Title       : Genetic and Physiological Studies of the Bacteriophage F1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1998     
File        : a9316625

Award Number: 9316625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1169101            (Estimated)
Investigator: Norton Zinder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Model  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie Russel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9316625  Zinder  Our studies of the bacteriophage f1 are concentrated on two
              areas  of phage biology, its assembly and its interaction with its E. coli 
              host.  Both of these areas bring to the fore the two fundamental  biological
              problems for which the study of virus can be especially  useful.  These involve
              questions about the assembly of complex  structures and interaction of
              multi-protein and nucleic acid  structures, and inquiries into the basic
              aspects of the higher  order elements of cell metabolism.  Very little is known
              about the  facilitated assembly of complex structures at the molecular level 
              (as distinct from the self assembly of most bacteriophage and of  the
              ribosome).  The assembly and extrusion of this simple phage  involves five
              membrane associated coat proteins, a ssDNA-binding  protein complex, and two
              morphogenetic proteins encoded by the  phage and one (thioredoxin) encoded by
              the host.  We are  particularly interested in the role of the morphogenetic
              genes,  since we have only fragmentary information on how they carry out  their
              role.  One of these morphogenetic gene products induces  expression of a host
              operon containing five genes; a deeper  understanding of the mechanism by which
              this induction takes place,  and of the role of these gene products in the
              normal life of E.  coli, should shed light on the mechanism by which f1 pIV,
              the  morphogenetic protein, acts to promote phage assembly and extrusion  from
              the cell.  This protein is related to others found in many  species of
              bacteria, where it is part of a general macromolecular  transport system
              required for the export of other protein,  including virulence factors.  %%%  A
              new method, phage display, of selecting DNA sequence which encode  proteins,
              including immunoglobulins, that bind with high affinity  to desired target is
              increasingly being used.  Applications include  the generation of what are
              effectively human monoclonal antibodies,  catalytic antibodies, hormones that
              bind receptors with higher than  native a ffinity, and many other proteins of
              general interest.   Filamentous phage are extensively (almost exclusively) used
              as  carriers of both the DNA encoding these proteins and, on the same 
              particle, the protein itself.   Since no new method is without its  technical
              problems, there is keen interest in both the academic and  industrial sector in
              the structure, life cycle, and assembly of the  filamentous phages.  Some of
              the experiments in this research deal  with expanding the utility of phage
              display.  ***
