Title       : Mechanism and Function of Polyadenylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9316644

Award Number: 9316644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. S. Butler btlr@uhura.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9316644  Butler       We have identified and characterized an isolate of the
              yeast  Saccharomyces cerevisiae having a conditional defect in the  pathway for
              the production of mature mRNA.  The recessive, lethal  mutation (pap1-1) lies
              in the gene encoding poly(A) polymerase  and results in thermolabile mRNA
              polyadenylation activity in  vitro and in vivo.  Shift of pap1-1 cells to the
              restrictive  growth temperature results in a rapid loss of polyadenylated mRNA 
              and the eventual death of the cell.  We intend to exploit this  mutation and
              the clone of the normal copy of the gene we obtained  to pursue several lines
              of investigation designed to gain a  better understanding of the function and
              mechanism of  polyadenylation.  This novel mutation and the strength of the 
              genetic and biochemical techniques offered by this system put us  in a unique
              position to bring new insights to this area of  molecular biology.  First, we
              will continue to characterize the  pap1-1 mutant to determine why lack of
              polyadenylation kills the  cells, thereby providing insight into the role of
              poly(A) tails  in the cell.  Second, we will search for and characterize 
              suppressor mutations restoring the ability of pap1-1 cells to  grow at the
              non-permissive temperature with the aim of  identifying and understanding genes
              whose products interact with  poly(A) polymerase, or play a role in mRNA
              metabolism.  %%%  This research has as its central aim the understanding  of
              how cells modify the chemical structure of genetic messages,  called messenger
              ribonucleic acids (mRNAs), and how these  modifications affect the function of
              these molecules.   Specifically, we are using to use baker's yeast as a model 
              organism to study how the cell adds a series of nucleosides  called adenosines
              to the end of mRNAs and to what degree this  modification affects the ability
              of these messengers to translate  their genetic information into proteins. 
              During the period of  our previous NSF award we isolated and characterized a
              yeast  mutation that  allows us to control, in living cells, the activity  of
              the enzyme required to carry out this modification.  Our  approaches therefore
              feature the use of this mutation under  conditions that allow us to study the
              synthesis and function of  the modified mRNAs.  Baker's yeast has proved to be
              an invaluable  tool to study basic processes in cells because it is easy to
              grow  and is amenable to biochemical and genetic analyses. Importantly,  the
              basic molecular details of how cells grow and differentiate  appear to be
              remarkably similar in yeast and humans, thus  implying that basic biochemical
              research in yeast will shed light  on the nature of basic molecular biological
              processes in many  organisms as well.  ***
