Title       : Non-Fouling Ceramic Membranes for Treatment of Metastable Oil/Water Emulsions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1994   
File        : a9360331

Award Number: 9360331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Higgins higgins@ceramem.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CeraMem Corporation
	      12 Clematis Avenue
	      Waltham, MA  02453    617/899-4495

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1440,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9360331  Higgins  The objective of this project is to evaluate a physical 
              wastewater treatment process applicable to such waste streams;  namely,
              crossflow ultrafiltration (UF) using novel ceramic  membranes that are treated
              to have low-surface-free-energy, "non-  fouling" surfaces.  Processing of
              metastable oil-in-water  emulsions with conventional UF membranes leads to
              rapid membrane  fouling and flux decline and is generally uneconomic because of
               this problem.  Ceramic UF membranes with modified, low-energy  surfaces will
              be evaluated using low-cost, high-surface-area  supports.  The resulting
              membrane modules will be evaluated for  filtration properties using different
              types of synthetic  metastable oil-in-water emulsions.  The objectives of these
               experiments will be definition of preferred membrane modification  techniques
              and demonstration of the capability of surface-  modified membranes to maintain
              high, stable permeate flux levels  while producing a substantially
              hydrocarbon-free permeate.    This is a Phase I award based on a proposal
              submitted in response  to NSF 93-18, Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
              Program  Solicitation, addresses a class of wastewaters, metastable  oil/water
              emulsions and similar waste streams for which a need  exists for more
              cost-effective treatment and for which the flows  on a national scale are
              large.  Current treatment technologies  for metastable oil/water emulsions are
              often ineffective, and  substantial impairment of water resources results from
              disposal  of such inadequately treated waste streams.  The membranes to be 
              evaluated, if developed and integrated within a production scale  membrane
              module would be the key element in an oily wastewater  treatment system with
              low capital and operating costs.   Applications for this technology include
              those with extremely  high waste flows, such as produced water from oil wells
              and  desalter bottoms from crude oil washing at refineries.
