Title       : Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1993  
File        : a9360857

Award Number: 9360857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64575              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Bloomfield dpb@analyticpower.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Analytic Power Corporation
	      268 Summer Street
	      Boston, MA  02110    617/542-6352

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Analytic Power Corp., 9360857      A fuel cell is a device used to
              convert chemical energy into electrical energy through the electrochemical
              oxidation of a fuel species.  The objective of this SBIR Phase I research
              program is to design, build and test a new solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) and
              bipolar plate.  SOFC power plants have a potential efficiency of greater than
              60%, can eliminate NOx emissions, reduce carbon dioxide emissions, and have
              fewer moving parts.  In the past, SOFC's have been plagued with thermal
              expansion problems, sealing and thermal cycling problems, corrosion problems,
              high electrolyte resistivity, and poor theoretical open circuit potential.   
              This project will test an ultra thin (5-10 micron) oxide ion conducting fuel
              cell which can operate at 650 C.  This temperature is low enough to mitigate
              corrosion, and thermal expansion problems yet it is high enough to permit
              internal reforming of hydrocarbon fuels.  It is low enough to permit the use of
              highly reactive, low cost cathode catalysts such as silver.  Because this
              approach reduced the thickness of the electrolyte, it is possible to reduce the
              operating temperature of the cell and maintain high performance.  By using
              fabrication processes which are common in the electronics industry, a low cost
              product can be assured.     To date bipolar cell stacking configurations have
              been the only arrangement successfully used for fuel cells.  The use of metal
              bipolar plates introduces a thermal expansion problem into the stack structure.
               The coefficient of thermal expansion of the ceramic components is much lower
              than the coefficient of thermal expansion of the metal bipolar plate.  This
              problem is mitigated here by using a bipolar plate and cell frame structure
              which deals with the differential thermal expansion via a mechanical design
              solution.  Steel components can be corrosion protected with silver plating. 
              All parts can then be brazed together.  This prevents the formation of
              electronically insulating oxide layers  on bipolar plate components.
