Title       : Internally Oxidized Dispersion Strengthened Ag for High-Temperature
               Superconductor Composite Wires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1994 
File        : a9360646

Award Number: 9360646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert N. Riley briley@asc.mhs.compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Superconductor Corp
	      Two Technology Drive
	      Westborough, MA  01581    508/836-4200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9360646  Riley    The strengthening of High-Temperature Superconductor (HTS)
              composite wires using internally oxidized, dispersion strengthened (ODS) silver
              is proposed.  Current methods manufacture of state-of-the-art HTS composite
              wires, that consist of ceramic superconductor filaments encased in a silver
              (Ag) sheath, weaken the Ag sheath, resulting  in reduced HTS composite
              strengths.  The low strength of the composite wires are a major obstacle in the
              development of HTS wires for applications requiring robust conductors such as
              power transmission cables, magnets, and  motors.  The one method of increasing
              the strength of the sheath, while maintaining the chemical compatibility and
              oxygen permeability of Ag is ODS.  Because the required strengths cannot be
              obtained using commercially  available ODS-Ag materials and processes, the
              proposed Phase I research will be directed towards evaluating novel ODS-Ag
              materials using novel processing techniques in the context of HTS composite
              processing.  Process-property-microstucture relationships for the ODS-Ag 
              materials will thusly be obtained.  Moreover,  by using statistically designed
              experimental techniques, a quantitative expression of the mechanical properties
              of the novel ODS-Ag materials  as a function of the process parameters
              (temperature,  oxygen activity, time and strain) relevant to HTS composite wire
              fabrication will result.  This evaluation scheme will enable the identification
              of the optimum ODS-Ag material (composition and process) for integration with
              HTS in composite form.  ***
