Title       : PRF/J: Mechanisms of Plant Control Over Nitrogen Cycling in the Rhizosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9303165

Award Number: 9303165
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Jaeger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   This research will investigate the possibility that plants may            
              influence the availability of nitrogen (N) in soil surrounding                 
              their roots.  This came to light when an unexpected alternation                
              between time of maximum N uptake by plants (during the first half              
              of the growing season) and maximum uptake by soil microbes (in the             
              later half) was observed under alpine conditions, despite the fact             
              that moist conditions would seem more amenable to microbial growth             
              early in the season.  Exploring possible explanations for the                  
              observed pattern led to two hypotheses.  First, as a null                      
              hypothesis plant-microbe competition for N may be minimized by                 
              growth constraints on both plants and microbes.  Plants may                    
              assimilate N when it is required for growth in the spring, at which            
              time soil microbes lack the carbon to engage in N assimilation and             
              growth, and so remain quiescent.  Later, when plant requirement for            
              carbon (C) and N decreases, and C becomes available to microbes                
              through increased exudates, microbes begin to assimilate N and                 
              grow.  Second, as an alternate hypothesis direct biotic competition            
              for N may be important.  Plants may acquire soil N during times of             
              predicted high microbial activity by direct manipulation of N                  
              cycling in the rhizosphere through plant exudates.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Nitrogen cycling in the rhizosphere is an important focus for study            
              because long term productivity in an ecosystem is determined by how            
              effectively fixed nitrogen is conserved within the system.  If at              
              any given time, soil available N is not being maximally assimilated            
              by either plants or microbes, that N is susceptible to loss via                
              leaching or denitrification.  Such loss can result in nitrate                  
              pollution of surface waters or groundwaters, denitrification of                
              NO3+ into N20 (a greenhouse gas and a reactant in the degradation              
              of ozone in the ionosphere), and depletion of ecosystem N with                 
              consequent loss of productivity.  The approach taken here should               
              make it possible to evaluate nutrient status of an ecosystem such              
              as California grassland and assess how it differs with change in               
              species composition.  Future ecosystem function might also be                  
              predictable with this knowledge, particularly as a function of                 
              shifts in rainfall, temperature, and nitrogen deposition in the                
              context of global change models.
