Title       : PRF/J: Loss of Functional Constraints: Implications for Molecular Evolution and
               Phylogenetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9303258

Award Number: 9303258
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Crandall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MO Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, MO  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
              9303258 CRANDALL      Within the North American crayfish fauna there are at
              least 13 proposed independent species colonizations of the cave environment;
              the evolutionary divergences span nearly 60 million years.  These troglobitic
              species exhibit loss of vision, lack of pigment, and other aptations to the
              subterranean environment.  Such characters in this taxon make it possible to
              test hypotheses about effects of vision loss at the molecular level.  Thirteen
              species pairs, consisting of one troglobitic (blind) and one epigean (not
              blind) species, will be compared for molecular level changes in the gene for
              the visual pigment rhodopsin.  Effects of relaxed functional constraint on the
              molecular evolution of the rhodopsin gene, in terms of nucleotide
              substitutions, amino acid substitutions, and functional domains, will be
              examined.  This comparative approach will benefit from substantial statistical
              power not previously available in studies of relaxed functional constraint.  In
              addition the utility of the rhodopsin gene in phylogenetic analyses is to be
              explored, along with investigation of relationships of the ten genera of the
              crayfish subfamily Cambarinae. %%% In this study that will generate comparative
              data on the molecular evolution of DNA sequences both with and without
              functional constraint, higher rates of genetic codon substitution are predicted
              in the case of evolution without functional constraints (troglobitic species). 
              Under cond ition of functional release, equal rates of substitution are
              expected at each nucleotide position within a codon.  These mutational events
              will be interpreted in a context of tertiary (3 dimensional) structure of the
              crystallized protein of rhodopsin, which is comprised of 15 definable domains. 
              Mutational "hotspots" can then be detected and interpreted in terms of genetic
              function.  Perhaps the most potent general effect of this research will be to
              demonstrate the interpretive advantage which can be derived by adopting the
              phylogenetic approach when attacking biological questions at the molecular
              genetic level. ***                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
