Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Search for Housing by Female-Headed
               Households in Guadalajara, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9303346

Award Number: 9303346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9992               (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene Tinker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Across the globe, more than one-third of all households are               
              headed by women.  In parts of Latin America, the share of female-              
              headed households approaches one-half.  Despite these striking                 
              statistics, very little research on housing in developing                      
              countries has examined gender and related issues.  Prevailing                  
              theories have focused on social class, often treating "the urban               
              poor" as an essentially homogeneous group.  This doctoral                      
              dissertation research proposal will examine the role of gender                 
              and household composition in addition to other socioeconomic                   
              characteristics as factors influencing housing choices made by                 
              women heading households in two lower-income neighborhoods in the              
              Mexican city of Guadalajara, Jalisco.  Structured surveys will be              
              used to examine correlations between different types of                        
              households and informal housing submarkets.  This phase of the                 
              research project will set the stage for in-depth interviews                    
              focusing on female-headed households in order to examine how                   
              constraints and resources related to class, gender, and household              
              composition affect the evaluation of housing alternatives.                     
                   By examining gender and household composition in addition to              
              socioeconomic variables in the analysis of housing opportunities               
              available to the urban poor, this research project will enhance                
              understandings of fundamental differences among various                        
              subgroups, especially households headed by women.  The project                 
              also will provide valuable insights for planners and others                    
              responsible for providing housing for disadvantaged segments of                
              the population.  As a doctoral dissertation improvement award,                 
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising                     
              student to establish a strong independent research career.
