Title       : PRF/J: Mechanisms of Speciation in an African Rift Lake and the Relationship
               Between Morphological Divergence and Molecular Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1993       
File        : a9303281

Award Number: 9303281
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice E. Michel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Mitochondrial DNA sequences from four prosobranch gastropod               
              genera (Lavigeria, Limnotrochus, Reymondia, Cleopatra) will be used            
              to examine the effect of explosive speciation on molecular                     
              variation.  This addresses a current controversy over the question             
              of whether cladogenesis increases the rate of molecular evolution.             
              From this data a phylogeny (to be constructed) will be used to test            
              two competing hypotheses of allopatric speciation; the hypotheses              
              have been proposed to explain the extreme diversity of endemic                 
              fauna in Lake Tanganyika, East Africa.  One hypothesis relies on               
              separation of the lake into distinct basins while the other                    
              maintains that existing habitat differences are sufficient to drive            
              speciation.  Sequence divergence from two genes of a highly diverse            
              endemic clade, its nondiverse sister group, a related sympatric                
              genus, and a fluvial outgroup.  Results will show: (a) how                     
              morphological and molecular divergence are correlated with relative            
              ages of the clades, and (b) whether morphological and molecular                
              divergence are correlated within the diverse clade.  Another goal              
              is to compare patterns of mitochondrial sequence variation in the              
              diverse gastropod clade with those from a diverse sympatric cichlid            
              fish to derive a general lacustrine speciation model and to                    
              identify conservation priorities.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              The molecular data set to be obtained will be used to test                     
              phylogenetic conclusions that emerged from previous morphometric               
              studies of shell, soft anatomy, and electrophoretic characters.                
              These molluscs are not particularly well known with regard to                  
              number of species, life histories, and ecology, so this study will             
              provide the opportunity to learn details of fundamental biology.               
              Past studies of Lake Tanganyika focussed on cichlid fish and the               
              intended studies promise to yield a sort of comparative "yardstick"            
              for those investigations by placing them in a broader context.  In             
              addition this will be the first molecular genetic study of                     
              Tanganyikan aquatic invertebrates, despite the fact they are major             
              components of the benthic ecosystem.
