Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Reaction-Diffusion Models for Mathematical Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9303708

Award Number: 9303708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Cosner gcc@math.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Cantrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1305,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9303708  Cosner       The investigators construct and analyze mathematical
              models  for the growth, decline, or interactions of spatially distributed 
              biological populations.  Most of the models involve partial  differential
              equations, specifically reaction-diffusion equations  or systems explicitly
              incorporating spatial effects in their  coefficients.  Some of the activity is
              directly focused on  modelling specific phenomena such as the spread of exotic
              plants  into the Florida Everglades.  The significance of this portion of  the
              activity is in providing ways of understanding and  predicting the results of
              land management and conservation  policies.  Other parts of the research are
              focused on more  general problems in the design and evaluation of mathematical 
              models in ecology, with the aim of providing new or improved  mathematical
              tools for other scientists working on related  problems.  Many of the
              mathematical methods are taken from the  theory of dynamical systems; in
              particular, the idea of  permanence or uniform persistence and alternatives to
              that idea  are especially important.  Other important components of the 
              mathematical methodology are nonlinear analysis, especially  bifurcation theory
              and related topics, and the spectral theory of  elliptic operators.  In
              addition to itsapplied value the research  aims to yield new mathematical
              results in those areas.       The project deals with the development and
              analysis  of mathematical descriptions of how populations interact with  the
              spatial aspects of an environment.  Mathematical models  are effective means of
              identifying what factors are important in  the growth or decline of
              populations.  Spatial features of  an environment, such as its size, shape, and
              geographic  variability, can affect the growth or decline of the resident 
              populations in the environment.  The models of the present  project are
              particularly well-suited to quantifying these  effects.  The analysis of the
              models involves new and challenging  mathematics, and provid es a flexible
              theoretical tool for  objective assessment of the viability of the species in
              question.   Moreover, understanding the models can also suggest what data to 
              collect or what experiment to run in actual situations.  A  better
              understanding of the effects of the spatial aspects of an  environment upon the
              viability of species within the  environment can improve the design of wildlife
              refuges and the  development of management schemes for dealing with problems 
              arising from habitat fragmentation, whether the fragmentation is  the result of
              a natural disaster such as Hurricane Andrew or the  eruption of Mount St.
              Helens, or the result of human activity  such as logging, mining or
              development.  ***
