Title       : Replication of the lagging strand by DNA Polymerase III Holoenzyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1993      
File        : a9303921

Award Number: 9303921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard Eberle                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. O'Donnell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weill Med Coll of Cornell
	      1300 York Avenue
	      New York, NY  100214805    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9179,
Abstract    :
              9303921  O'Donnell  The polymerase that replicates the chromosome of E. coli,
              DNA  polymerase III holoenzyme (polIII), consists of 10 different  subunits. 
              As a holoenzyme, polIII hydrolyzes ATP to bind tightly  to DNA enabling highly
              processive DNA synthesis.  The holoenzyme  can be dissociated into
              subassemblies:  the 3-subunit core  polymerase  @ subunit (polymerase),
              @subunit (3'-5' exonuclease)  and 0 subunit , the 5-subunit y complex (y@@xy
              subunits); the B  subunit and the t subunit.  The function of the y complex is
              to  couple ATP to deliver the B subunit to DNA.  The B subunit is a  dimer
              shaped like a ring (X-ray analysis) and completely encircles  DNA.  The B ring
              then binds the core polymerase acting to tether it  to DNA for highly
              processive synthesis.  The t subunit dimer binds  two core polymerases
              together, presumably for simultaneous  synthesis of both leading and lagging
              strands of the duplex  chromosome.  Synthesis of the lagging strand is
              discontinuous,  being composed of approximately 300 fragments (Okazaki
              fragments).   Hence, each time polIII on the lagging strand completes an
              Okazaki  fragment it must be capable of rapidly recycling itself from the  end
              of the fragment to initiate synthesis of new fragment.   However, the polIII is
              bound to DNA so tightly by the B subunit  ring that it remains tightly bound to
              a completed product DNA  rather than cycling to new primed templates.  We have
              recently  discovered a mechanism whereby polIII rapidly cycles to new DNA 
              templates.  The mechanism entails a novel disaggregation of the  polIII
              structure followed by reassembly in which the polIII  disengages its B ring
              specifically upon completing the replication  of a DNA template and then it
              reassembles with a B ring on a new  DNA molecule.  This proposal aims to
              discover the detailed  molecular basis behind this polymerase transfer event. 
              New  reagents and technology important to the proposed work include  large
              amounts of pure preparations of each of the 10 subunits of  polIII an d the
              ability to reconstitute the entire holoenzyme from  these individual proteins. 
              Hence we propose to perform a series of  subunit omission studies to determine
              which subunits are  responsible for disengaging the B ring from polIII and
              which are  needed to transfer the polymerase to the next B ring on another DNA 
              molecule.  We will also investigate how the B rings that are left  on DNA as
              the polymerase cycles to multiple templates, are  themselves removed from the
              DNA for eventual reutilization.  Then  we will develop a replication fork
              system to investigate which  subunits of polIII are needed for efficient
              interaction with the  helicase and primase during ongoing synthesis of both
              strands of  duplex DNA.  %%%  The genetic material is in the form of two long
              interwound strands  of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA.  These two DNA strands
              contain  the information needed to instruct the cell how to live (eg. eat  and
              divide) and therefore they must be duplicated prior to cell  division such that
              each new cell receives a copy of these  instructions.  This process of DNA
              duplication is called  "replication" and it is performed in a series of
              complicated steps  many of which have yet to be precisely defined.  Each step
              is  performed by a different protein molecule and therefore several 
              "replication proteins" are needed to duplicate DNA.  These several  replication
              proteins assemble together to form a multiprotein  complex in which each
              protein occupies a distinct position where it  can carry out its individual
              function in the overall process.  The  multiprotein complex is analogous to a
              machine in which each gear  performs a function, except here the gears are
              proteins and each  protein performs a function.  Recently this laboratory
              showed that  one of the gears of this "replication machine" of the bacterium, 
              Escherichia coli, is a protein shaped like a washer (ie. a ring)  and
              completely encircles the strands of DNA for the purpose of  tethering the
              replication machine down to DNA so it can eff iciently  perform its function. 
              Each of the replication proteins for this  bacterium are now available in
              separate test tubes and we have  learned how to assemble the machine from these
              separate gears.   With these individual protein reagents and the knowledge of
              how  they assemble into a machine, this proposal aims to determine what  the
              function is of other individual proteins, or gears, of this  replication
              machine as it duplicates the two strands of DNA.  ***
