Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Bifurcation from Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1993      
File        : a9303767

Award Number: 9303767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen C. Chicone carmen@chicone.math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator proposes to continue his recent                
              research on nonlinear differential equations. The primary                      
              theoretical focus of this work is the analysis of bifurcations to              
              periodic solutions near resonance for multidimensional                         
              multiparameter systems and the description of related phenomena,               
              especially the phenomenon of passage through resonance.  The                   
              methods employed include several aspects of the geometric                      
              analysis of nonlinear dynamics and classical perturbation theory:              
              ``Melnikov'' theory, Lyapunov-Schmidt reduction,                               
              elliptic functions and expansion in a small parameter.  There is               
              also an important computational component; especially,                         
              integration of differential equations, computer graphics and                   
              computer algebra.                                                              
              The theory will be applied to physical systems modeled by systems              
              of coupled nonlinear differential equations. The primary                       
              application proposed for this project is to study the motions of               
              a DC motor driven  mechanical linkage.  It is proposed to                      
              determine the existence and stability of periodic motions, the                 
              stabilization of periodic motions by feedback control and the                  
              effects of slow variation of control parameters near resonance.                
                   When mechanical or electrical components are linked together              
              (for example when a motor is connected to a machine) it is                     
              important to determine the subsequent operational capabilities of              
              the coupled system. In the design and operational control of                   
              coupled systems the following phenomenon can occur: a small                    
              effect produced by one of the components can have a large effect               
              on the operation of the coupled system.  This phenomenon can be                
              used to advantage in electrical devices, for example amplifiers,               
              but often it has dramatic undesirable consequences when present                
              in machinery. A motor attached to an elastic support may operate               
              smoothly until a small change in its rotational speed causes                   
              a large vibration and subsequent failure of the motor or                       
              its linkage.  This is analogous to the classic example of an                   
              opera singer breaking a wine glass with her voice.  The proposed               
              research seeks to find methods to determine the effects                        
              of couplings among mechanical or electrical components by                      
              developing  techniques to analyze mathematical models for the                  
              operation of such coupled systems.  These methods will be useful               
              in the design of machinery as well as the design of auxiliary                  
              systems needed to control its operation.
