Title       : RUI: Biochemistry of Nitrogen-Limited Growth of Wood Decaying Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9303879

Award Number: 9303879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walt W. Lilly wlilly@biology.semo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeast Missouri State U
	      900 Normal
	      Cape Girardeau, MO  637014753    314/651-2000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9161,9178,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research program is to elucidate mechanisms of                
              sustained mycelial growth of wood-decaying fungi.  In the model                
              organism, Schizophyllum commune, proteolysis and recycling of amino            
              acids supports mycelial growth during nitrogen limitation.  S.                 
              commune produces a wide range of proteolytic activities, including             
              members of the aspartic-, serine- and metallo-protease type                    
              enzymes.  Two proteases that have increased activities during                  
              nitrogen-limitation are ScPrA (a serine-endopeptidase) and ScPrB (a            
              metallo-endopeptidase).  In addition, two aminopeptidases and a                
              carboxypeptidase are also regulated by nitrogen.  Objectives of the            
              work proposed are 1) to extend the study of the proteolytic system             
              in S. commune by using mutant analysis and molecular cloning of                
              specific protease genes, and 2) to initiate studies designed to                
              elucidate the regulatory mechanism(s) for proteases involved in                
              intracellular protein turnover.  Mutants will be screened by                   
              ability to hydrolyze chromogenic peptide substrates and gelatin.               
              S. commune protease genes will be cloned using heterologous                    
              hybridization with protease genes from other fungi (particularly               
              yeast), and by transformation/complementation testing in mutant                
              strains.  Cloned genes will be sequenced analyzed, and then used to            
              generate probes to measure RNA transcript levels and to localize in            
              situ protease mRNA under nitrogen-limiting conditions.  Regulation             
              of protease ScPrB by an endogenous inhibitor will be studied by                
              standard biochemical techniques and mutant analysis.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Nitrogen is an essential nutrient for all organisms.  In mushroom              
              producing fungi, nitrogen must be obtained from the material upon              
              which the organism grows.  Often this "food" (leaf litter, wood) is            
              a poor source of nitrogen.  This limits the growth of the organism.            
              However, even under nitrogen-poor conditions fungi may continue to             
              expand by digesting older portions of its body, and recycling                  
              nutrients to younger, growing areas.  The goal of the present work             
              is to understand the cell mechanism of protein-nitrogen recycling              
              in wood-decaying fungi.  We will characterize the cell machinery               
              required to digest proteins in older parts of the organism and see             
              how this machinery is regulated at the molecular level.  The                   
              research is important because it will provide insight into the                 
              basic cellular mechanism of protein and nitrogen metabolism of a               
              diverse group of organisms. This group of organisms includes the               
              edible mushroom, fungi that rot wood and wood products, and fungi              
              that are pathogens on corn and wheat.  An added objective is to                
              provide research opportunities for undergraduate students to                   
              prepare them for careers in science and technology.                            
              This award is funded jointly by Metabolic Biochemistry (Division of            
              Molecular and Cellular Biosciences) and the Functional and                     
              Physiological Ecology (Integrative Biology and Neuroscience)                   
              Programs.
