Title       : PRF/M: Evolutionary Morphology of Gastropod Larval Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9303169

Award Number: 9303169
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51202              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole S. Hickman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Three problems in gastropod biology serve as the focus for                
              this research on metamorphosis and morphological diversity.  First,            
              development and functional significance of modifications to shell              
              apertures of many marine gastropod species when in the planktic                
              veliger larval stage (the sinusigeral larval form) will be studied.            
              Second, developmental causes of an unusual mechanical deformation              
              occurring in larval shells of some primitive marine gastropod                  
              species are to be investigated.  A third topic relates to                      
              characterizing and evaluating the diversity of sequential events               
              and timing involved in development of trochoidean gastropods, with             
              the specific goal of translating data into characters and character            
              states useful for phylogenetic analysis; such descriptors should be            
              useful in tandem with more traditional morphological characters.               
              %%%                                                                            
              This work will inform persistent and unresolved problems of                    
              molluscan evolutionary morphology.  The first two problems reside              
              in the realm of functional and evolutionary interpretation of                  
              features of the larval shell and its relationship to the adult                 
              shell, for which solutions require developmental information                   
              gathered in a comparative systematic way.  Both questions are                  
              relevant to phenomena observable in shells of living and fossil                
              gastropods.  Addressing the third problem would cultivate a                    
              consistent language of characters and character states that                    
              translate the rich vocabulary of developmental biology into a                  
              language for systematics and phylogenetic analysis.
