Title       : PRF/J: Hormonal Regulation of Worker Behavior in Stingless Bees (Melipona favosa
               F.)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9303244

Award Number: 9303244
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean O'Donnell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WI Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, WI  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   The first endocrinological regulating mechanism for plasticity            
              in division of labor identified in a eusocial insect, the honey bee            
              (Apis mellifera), is juvenile hormone (JH).  The evolution of JH as            
              a regulator of division of labor by age-based task performance (age            
              polyethism) in advanced eusocial insects will be examined in this              
              research.  What will be sought are correlative and causal                      
              relationships between JH titer and age polyethisms in workers of               
              two species exhibiting independently- evolved advanced eusocial                
              behavior: the stingless bee Melipona favosa and the swarm-founding             
              wasp Polybia occidentalis.  Field studies in Panama are to                     
              encompass three topics: (a) association of JH titer with behavioral            
              differences, by examination of correlations between endogenous JH              
              titer (assessed by radio-immunoassay) and rate of age polyethisms              
              in workers from unmanipulated colonies, (b) effects of increased JH            
              on behavior, by application of JH topically to M. favosa workers               
              and then testing for dose-dependency effects on age polyethism, (c)            
              correlation of JH titer with plasticity of behavioral role, to be              
              studied by removal of workers from foraging and nest working tasks,            
              then gauging the JH titers of behaviorally altered individuals                 
              compared with non-responsive ones.  Results will elucidate patterns            
              of the evolution of division of labor, a central component of                  
              insect colony integration of advanced eusocial insects.                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Insect societies are complex, self-organizing entities that are                
              useful as models for other systems such as nervous systems and                 
              organismal development.  This study will augment our knowledge of              
              rules governing colony function by enhancing understanding of how              
              the behavior of individual components of the system are regulated              
              physiologically.  Comprehending mechanisms by which individual                 
              behavior is translated into colony function is a central focus of              
              insect sociobiology.  Such information is critical to discovering              
              the elements responsible for evolutionary success and ecological               
              impact of eusocial insect in contemporary terrestrial ecosystems,              
              especially tropical ones such as these Hymenopterans inhabit.
