Title       : Raman, Brillouin, Infrared and Modulation Spectroscopy of Collective and
               Localized Excitations in Tetrahedrally Coordinated Semiconductors and their
               Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9303186

Award Number: 9303186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant K. Ramdas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergio Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This research focuses on the vibrational, electronic, and                 
              magnetic excitations in tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductors.              
              Both bulk and submicron heterostructures fabricated by molecular               
              beam epitaxy and chemical vapor deposition will be investigated.               
              II-VI and III-V semiconductors (bulk, epilayers, and quantum well              
              structures) will be examined using Raman, Brillouin, modulated                 
              reflectivity, and photoluminescence and absorption spectroscopy.               
              Magnetic ions introduced into II-VI compounds have resulted in a               
              new class of materials called diluted magnetic semiconductors which            
              possess striking magneto-optic effects. Further exploration of                 
              these systems will be undertaken with special emphasis on materials            
              of low dimensionality. The vibrational spectra and electronic                  
              levels of donors and acceptors intentionally introduced into                   
              diamond and silicon carbide will also be studied. The thrust of the            
              program is to provide a fundamental understanding  of the physical             
              properties of tetahedrally coordinated semiconductors whose optical            
              characteristics form the basis of many optoelectronic applications.            
              %%%                                                                            
                   The family of tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductors                    
              encompasses the well known group IV semiconductors such as C, Si,              
              and Ge as well as the II-Vs (e.g., GaAs, InSb, etc.) and the II-VIs            
              (e.g., CdTe, ZnTe, etc.) The electronic, vibrational, and magnetic             
              excitations in these materials will be examined through                        
              spectroscopic investigations using a variety of techniques. The                
              results of such spectral studies will yield important fundamental              
              quantities related to their optical properties and are expected to             
              form the basis of many optoelectronic devices. In particular,                  
              magnetic ions introduced into the II-VIs generate striking magneto-            
              optic effects which have potential applications as magnetic                    
              isolators and optical sensors.                                                 
                   These novel advanced material systems are accessible to both              
              experimental and theoretical studies, thanks to the ingenious                  
              techniques increasingly exploited in the growth of new                         
              semiconductors in the bulk as well as with submicron dimensions.               
              The work will be done in collaboration with scientists and                     
              technologists at several industrial research laboratories who will             
              supply many of the materials. In addition, the program benefits                
              from an active collaboration with the Argonne National Laboratory.
