Title       : PRF/J: The Evolution of Metabolic Rate in Response to Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1993       
File        : a9303164

Award Number: 9303164
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Berrigan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Interspecific comparisons of temperature effects on metabolic             
              rates of ectotherms have long been used as premier examples of                 
              physiological adaptation to environment  - -  typically populations            
              from relatively cold habitats have evolved increased metabolic                 
              capacities (compensation) at low body temperatures.  Interspecific             
              comparisons provide a perspective on long term evolutionary                    
              patterns, but little insight into contemporary dynamics of                     
              physiological evolution.  The dynamics of metabolic evolution in               
              contemporary populations will be explored using a series of                    
              complementary studies of the thermal dependence of metabolic rate              
              in Drosophila melanogaster.  First, replicate stocks of the species            
              will be compared.  Second, these results will be compared to the               
              same type of data from specimens collected along a 3000 kilometer              
              transect.  If compensatory evolution has occurred, flies evolving              
              at low temperatures (or high latitudes) are expected to exhibit                
              elevated metabolic rates relative to flies from high temperature               
              situations.  Correlated responses of thermal dependence of                     
              metabolic rate to selection for temperature extremes will also be              
              examined.  If there are genetic correlations between components of             
              the metabolic response to temperature, selection for tolerance of              
              temperature extremes should influence metabolic rate at other                  
              temperatures.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Metabolic rate in ectotherms has a profound significance for                   
              locomotor performance, competitive ability, and is strongly                    
              correlated with an array of life history variables.  Recent work in            
              comparative and evolutionary physiology repeatedly stresses the                
              importance of understanding the evolution of thermal sensitivity,              
              but few studies have examined this feature in small ectotherms.                
              One important goal of studying comparative physiology is to                    
              ascertain why tradeoffs between life history parameters (for                   
              example, the tradeoff between growth rate and asymptotic size)                 
              exist.  Ultimately such research has implications for understanding            
              the biological limits of human life history traits such as                     
              longevity and reproductive life span.
