Title       : PRF/J: Molecular Systematics of the Polyporaceae (Fungi, Basidiomycota)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9303268

Award Number: 9303268
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Hibbett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Phylogenetic relationships of the basidiomycete family                    
              Polyporaceae will be investigated using DNA and amino acid sequence            
              data.  Sporocarps in the Polyporaceae range from simple, resupinate            
              forms, to complex, pileate-stipitate forms.  Hymenophores may be               
              poroid, lamellate, toothed, etc.  This study will inform the                   
              interpretation of fungal morphological evolution by providing a                
              phylogenetic context.  The principal focus is on: (a) the roles of             
              morphological elaboration, reduction, and convergence in sporocarp             
              evolution, (b) patterns of switching between hymenophore types.                
              Evolution and homology of decay types and mating systems will be               
              similarly elucidated.  Sampling of diverse genera, with special                
              attention on type species, will contrast traditional and modern                
              concepts of the Polyporaceae.  Two sources of molecular data will              
              be utilized: mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal RNA genes and               
              nuclear-encoded vacuolar ATPase B-subunits.  Emphasizing cladistic             
              methods, phylogenetic analyses of the two regions will permit                  
              independent corroboration of gene trees used to interpret                      
              organismal phylogenies.  Results from unconstrained phylogenetic               
              analyses will be compared with those obtained under user-defined               
              topological constraints, enabling a quantitative evaluation of                 
              competing taxonomic and evolutionary hypotheses.                               
              %%%                                                                            
              To date molecular phylogenetic studies of the fungi (with 1.5                  
              million species, the most speciose taxon after the insects) have               
              been quite limited, making this study an important one since a                 
              comprehensive phylogenetic classification for the group is                     
              presently lacking.  Some preliminary data are available for the                
              Polyporaceae, which are hymenomycetes (fungi that bear their spores            
              on an exposed hymenium).  Polypores and other wood decay fungi play            
              a significant role in global carbon cycling and cause great losses             
              in the timber industry.  The information derived from this research            
              will be of practical use in studies of wood biodegradation because             
              it will clarify results of homology and function in wood rot                   
              organisms.
