Title       : Genetics and Photophysiology of Novel Anoxyphototrophs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9303836

Award Number: 9303836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Bauer cbauer@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Gest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9108,
Abstract    :
              9303836  Bauer    The recently described nonsulfur purple photosynthetic
              bacterium  Rhodospirillum centenum exhibits several physiological traits 
              previously unknown among photosynthetic eubacteria.  One feature  is the
              existence of a life cycle involving the formation of heat  and desiccation
              resistant cysts.  Germination of Rsp. centenum  cysts leads to cell
              differentiation characterized by swarm cell  behavior on solid media.  Swarm
              cells grown on solid agar medium  have numerous lateral flagella and are
              distinct from non-swarm  cells which bear a single polar flagellum.  Swarm cell
               differentiation appears to be a stage of a life cycle and to be a  specific
              response to an increase in medium viscosity.  A second  unusual feature of Rsp.
              centenum is that swarm cell colonies have  the capacity to migrate rapidly
              either towards or away from  light; rates as high as 45 mm/hour have been
              observed.  An action  spectrum has demonstrated that 585 nm light repels
              whereas light  over the region 800-880 nm attracts.  Major goals of this 
              proposal include the physiological characterization of swarm  cells as well as
              an analysis of phototactic behavior of Rsp.  centenum.  In addition, genetic
              analyses of swarm cell formation  as well as phototaxis will be undertaken to
              determine the number  and nature of the genetic loci involved in these
              processes.  These studies will also be augmented by biochemical and molecular 
              genetic characterization of the photoreceptor(s) involved.  It is  anticipated
              that the proposed research will provide significant  information on prokaryotic
              cell differentiation and in addition,  should provide the first molecular
              analysis of the mechanism of  phototaxis in eubacteria.    We also propose to
              extend genetic analysis of bacterial  photosynthesis to evolutionarily divers
              species of eubacterial  phototrophs.  The aim of this area of research is to
              obtain  clones of bacteriochlorophyll biosynthesis genes from Chlorobium 
              tepidum, Heliobacterium gestii, Rhodopseudomonas viridis and   cyanobacteria
              for the purpose of determining the extent to which  a Photosynthesis Gene
              Cluster is conserved among various genera  and species of phototrophic
              prokaryotes.  The clones obtained  will also be used to generate sequence
              analyses of genetic loci  common to bacterial and plant chlorophyll
              biosynthetic pathways  for use in subsequent studies of chlorophyll
              biosynthesis in  plant systems.  ***
