Title       : NMR and MRI Studies of Biomaterials. Structure, Dynamics, and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1995   
File        : a9303870

Award Number: 9303870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn W. Jelinski lwj2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9108,9162,
Abstract    :
              9303870  Jelinski  The goals of this project are to delineate the molecular and 
              processing mechanisms that underlie the exceptional mechanical  properties of
              spider dragline silk.  Magnetic resonance imaging  (MRI) of intact spiders and
              solid state nuclear magnetic  resonance (NMR) of oriented fibers, will be used
              as the primary  tools.  Parallel mechanical measurements will be performed. 
              The  experiments proposed here will provide considerable new,  molecular-level
              information about the structure, processing, and  dynamics of this model
              biomaterial.  It is likely that these  results will contribute greatly to our
              ability to genetically  engineer robust materials with designed properties. 
              The MRI  experiments, which will be performed as silk is being spooled  from
              the intact spider, will test hypotheses concerning silk  processing.  Of
              special interest is the dehydration mechanism by  which the silk biopolymer
              goes from an isotropic liquid in the  silk gland to a highly oriented fiber as
              it exists the  spinnerete.  Direct NMR observation of dissected silk glands
              will  also be performed.  The solid state deuterium NMR experiments, to  be
              performed on oriented, deuterium-labelled silk fibers, will  specify the angles
              that specific amino acid sidechains make with  respect to the fiber axis.  The
              deuterium experiments will test  hypotheses concerning (i) the role of water in
              the  supercontraction phenomenon, (ii) the role of alanine residues in  the
              elasticity of silk and (iii) the dynamic environment of  glycine in the
              crystalline and amorphous regions.  %%%  In several instances Nature has
              conspired to produce biopolymers  with superior materials properties.  One
              example is spider  dragline silk, which is stronger per cross-sectional area
              than  steel.  The goal is to understand the origins of these superior 
              properties, so that someday it might be possible to produce  "designer" 
              materials based on insights gleaned from Nature.  ***
