Title       : PRF/J: Neighborhood Models of Spatial Interactions in Tropical Tree Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9303304

Award Number: 9303304
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean C. Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, MA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 5927,9179,9200,
Abstract    :
              Neighborhood models of plant competition have recently proved of               
              considerable use in predicting consequences of local interference              
              to plant population dynamics.  In tropical forests, competition is             
              but one of several kinds of local interaction thought to be                    
              important; others significant interactions include the effects of              
              "natural enemies" on growth and survivorship of conspecific trees              
              (the "Janzen-Connell effect"), and local pollen limitation of                  
              reproductive output in obligately outcrossing species (a form of               
              "Allee effect").  This research will develop general neighborhood              
              models that incorporate competitive interactions as well as Janzen-            
              Connell and Allee-type interactions in tropical tree populations.              
              Empirical analyses and simulation studies will make use of                     
              extensive data sets available from 50 hectare forest plots at Barro            
              Colorado Island, Panama and at Pasoh Forest Reserve, Malaysia.  An             
              important facet of developing these models will be a focus on                  
              dioecious tree species.  The fact that female trees produce seed,              
              while male trees do not, provides an unexplored aspect of spatial              
              analyses aimed at elucidating patterns of seed dispersal, and for              
              detecting and measuring Janzen-Connell and Allee-type interactions.            
              It is expected the models will be particular useful in predicting              
              consequences of habitat fragmentation on tropical tree populations.            
              %%%                                                                            
              Spatial interactions in tropical forests have received relatively              
              little research attention.  A variety of hypothesized mechanisms               
              has been advanced for explaining the maintenance of tree species               
              diversity in tropical forests, including niche partitioning on                 
              edaphic gradients, Janzen-Connell effects, "regeneration niche"                
              differences, demographic "storage effects," and size structure                 
              effects but these potential mechanisms have generally been modeled             
              in isolation such that effects of interactions have been ignored.              
              Recognition of this shortcoming in previous models may represent               
              the best hope of addressing predicted responses of rainforest trees            
              to habitat fragmentation and other massive anthropogenic changes in            
              the forested tropics.
