Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multiunit Reliability Systems: Optimal Allocations of
               Resources, Stochastic Order and Aging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9303891

Award Number: 9303891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe Shaked shaked@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This research is concerned with applications of the concepts              
              of multivariate conditional hazard rate functions, and of                      
              stochastic convexity and concavity, for the purpose of                         
              characterizing optimal allocation policies, stochastic orders and              
              aging in reliability theory.  In many applications in reliability              
              theory, the main interest lies not necessarily in the total                    
              lifetime of the components of the system, but in the total                     
              benefit delivered by the system during its lifetime.  This is                  
              particularly important when a limited resource is available for                
              enhancement of the components which make up the system.  Using                 
              the notions of majorization, stochastic convexity and stochastic               
              concavity, the optimal allocation policies will be sought.  The                
              performance of reliability components is often strongly                        
              influenced by the environment in which they function.  Using the               
              multivariate conditional hazard rate functions, it is possible to              
              mathematically model such environments in a relatively simple                  
              manner.                                                                        
                   This research is concerned with the applications of concepts              
              from statistics and probability for the purpose of characterizing              
              optimal allocation policies and aging in reliability theory.                   
              Performance of reliability components is often strongly                        
              influenced by the environment in which they function.                          
              Mathematical models will be described and analyzed, and optimal                
              policies for allocation of limited resources will be                           
              characterized.
