Title       : ESPRIT COLLABORATIVE: Control of Perception in Active Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9303980

Award Number: 9303980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruzena K. Bajcsy bajcsy@cis.central.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9303980  Bajcsy   This is the first year of a three-year continuing award to
              support  collaboration of researchers in four U.S. institutions (University  of
              Pennsylvania, University of Rochester, University of Maryland,  and University
              of Massachusetts) with their European colleagues  engaged in the ESPRIT-funded
              research project entitled "Vision-As-  Process ".  The collaborative objective
              is to develop a practical  theory of perception control in active vision, while
              pooling  expertise and avoiding unnecessary duplication of effort.  The  broad
              areas of concentration are development of novel physical and  computer
              hardware, conceptual frameworks, and software tools for  integrated
              vision/robotic systems, which include an actively  controlled binocular camera
              head and various actuators for  affecting the external world.  The
              collaboration covers four  subareas: Control of perception in active vision,
              Interpretation of  dynamic scenes, Robust image and scene measures, and Dynamic
              gaze  control and image formation.  For each subarea a mailing list for 
              information exchange will be created, scientific meetings held, and  techniques
              and associated experiments organized.  Two to three week  partner-to-partner
              visits will facilitate intense collaboration on  the specific topics.  US Ph.D.
              students will spend time in EEC  laboratories as part of an exchange agreement.
               Both sides will  benefit from a demonstrated real-time active vision system,
              and  development of a common framework for integration and control 
              experiments.  Such a system will enlarge the variety of experiments  within the
              same class of problems and the range of applications in  different domains. 
              The results will be made widely accessible,  through planned publication of a
              book on the theoretical and  experimental results, journal papers, and
              presentations at  conferences.  ***
