Title       : Auxin-Responsive Promoters and Auxin-Induced Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9303956

Award Number: 9303956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Guilfoyle GuilfoyleT@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gretchen Hagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9303956  Guilfoyle    The plant hormone, auxin, plays roles in cell
              division, extension,  and differentiation. Dr. Guillfoyle has cloned a number
              of auxin  responsive genes (GH1, GH2/4, GH3, and SAURs) from soybean, pea and 
              Arabidopsis that are expressed in meristems, epidermal and cortical  cells
              within elongation zones, vascular tissues, and/or developing  xylem elements.
              Each of these gene families shows distinct tissue,  organ, and developmental
              specific patterns of expression. The  functions of the auxin responsive gene
              products are under  investigation. The GH2/4 gene encodes a putative
              glutathione S-  transferase. The promoters for these genes are being analyzed
              in  transgenic plants and by particle gun bombardment of soybean and  transient
              expression in carrot cells. Putative auxin responsive  elements (AuxREs) have
              been identified and transcription factors  that bind to the AuxREs are being
              cloned. The auxin responsive  promoters have been used to monitor auxin
              regulated gene expression  during tropisms, xylogenesis, rooting, flowering,
              and seed  formation. These promoters have also been used to drive expression 
              of auxin and cytokinin biosynthetic genes and a gene encoding an  auxin
              conjugating enzyme in transgenic plants. The tissue and organ  specific
              expression of these hormone modifying genes produces a  number of changes in
              plant growth and development, as well as  changes in cell fate. The transgenic
              plants with altered hormone  levels are being used along with Arabidopsis
              gravitropic mutants to  study alterations in expression of auxin responsive
              genes. Dr.  Guilfoyle is proposing to 1) determine precisely what sequence 
              elements make a gene auxin responsive; to determine if more than  one type of
              AuxRE exists in different auxin responsive genes and to  clone and analyze the
              transcription factors that interact with the  AuxREs; 2) to use the AuxREs or
              auxin responsive promoters as  molecular probes to study gene expression during
              auxin regulated  growth and development; to  use transgenic plants that
              overproduce  or conjugate auxin or overproduce cytokinins as tools to study 
              auxin regulated gene expression; 3) to gain insight into the  functions of the
              auxin responsive gene products and their possible  roles in auxin action; and
              4) to take advantage of the chimeric  constructs to identify auxin responsive
              mutants; to search for  mutants in the auxin signal transduction pathway(s).
              The long range  goals of this research are to understand how auxin regulates
              gene  expression and how signals are transduced from the auxin receptor  to
              events such as cell expansion, cell division, and plant  development; to
              manipulate auxin responsive promoters, auxin  responsive gene products and/or
              auxin or cytokinin biosynthetic  genes to modify plant growth and development
              in beneficial ways.  ***
