Title       : PRF/J: Molecular Evolution in Strepsirhine Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9303313

Award Number: 9303313
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne D. Yoder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   The intent here is to generate and compare mitochondrial and              
              nuclear DNA sequences in order to explore the tempo and mode of                
              sequence evolution in strepsirhine primates (e.g., lemurs and                  
              lorises).  The primary objective of this research is to test two               
              discrete hypotheses: (a) do lemurs show a reduced rate of molecular            
              evolution compared to lorises and other primates?, and (b) do                  
              lemurs exhibit a slower transition rate?  If it can be demonstrated            
              that lemurs have experienced a molecular slowdown relative to other            
              primates, this would indicate that generation time isn't the                   
              principal variable responsible for controlling the rate of primate             
              evolution.  A reduced overall rate of molecular evolution                      
              coincident with a depressed transition rate would be suggestive of             
              a mechanism whereby overall rates can be retarded or accelerated.              
              The large number of mtDNA and nuclear DNA sequences to be generated            
              for a uniform taxonomic sample will enable comparisons of rates of             
              evolution and phylogenies for the two data sets.  A prime research             
              strength of this approach is that molecular evolutionary phenomena             
              are to be explored within a robust phylogenetic context.                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Results are expected to shed light on our understanding of                     
              strepsirhine evolution and more specifically Malagasy lemuriforms,             
              which exemplify biological diversity.  In addition findings will               
              impact the on-going debate over the reality of a molecular clock.              
              The lack of consensus that predominates the current controversy is             
              partly due to the poor phylogenetic grounding of many studies.  A              
              third justification for the study is its assessment of nuclear                 
              versus mitochondrial nucleotide sequences, an approach not taken so            
              often.  Estimation of the magnitude of mtDNA and nuclear rate                  
              differentials may affect the phylogenetic utility of those genes.
