Title       : Hormone Receptors and Signal Transduction Pathways in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1998    
File        : a9303877

Award Number: 9303877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $532294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell L. Jones rjones@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9303877  Jones    The objectives of this research are to localize the receptors
              for  gibberellins (GAs) and abscisic acid (ABA) in the aleurone layer of 
              barley and to identify and test the roles of the molecules that  transduce
              hormonal signals in this cell.  Alpha amylase secretion  can be visualized when
              single, secreting protoplasts are embedded  in an agarose matrix containing
              starch.  This secretory response  provides a rapid assay for the effects of GA
              and ABA.  Preliminary  experiments show that cells microinjected with GA or ABA
              do not  respond to these hormones by changing their rate of secretion, but 
              when GA or ABA are presented to the cell surface, GA stimulates  alpha-amylase
              secretion and ABA inhibits it.  The cellular location  of the receptors for
              these hormones will be determined.  Aleurone  protoplasts will also be used to
              examine the events that lead from  hormone perception to cellular responses. 
              One of the first  detectable responses to GA in the aleurone cells is proton 
              extrusion.  Since proton extrusion via the plasma membrane proton  pump is
              associated with hyperpolarization of plant cells, the  hypothesis that membrane
              potential measurements can be used as an  assay for the early response of
              aleurone cells to GA and ABA will  be tested.  The pH of the cytosol will be
              mapped and quantitated  fluorescent dyes and confocal microscopy to determine
              whether pH  plays a role in signal transduction.  The possibility that protons 
              and membrane potential act to gate ion channels in the plasma  membrane will be
              explored using patch clamp.  Calmodulin has been  implicated in signal
              transduction in the aleurone cell.  The  relationship between calmodulin and GA
              and ABA will be studied, and  the distribution of activated calmodulin in
              aleurone cells will be  mapped using a new fluorescent probe.  These
              experiments should  establish whether the calmodulin gene, like the genes for
              secretory  proteins, are regulated by GA and ABA at the transcriptional level 
              in aleurone cells.  The m apping of calmodulin activity should  clarify the
              relationship between calmodulin and membrane  transporters whose activities are
              regulated by calmodulin.  The  roles that molecules such as calcium,
              calmodulin, and protons play  in signal transduction will be tested by asking
              whether the signal  transduction pathway from GA or ABA can be mimicked in
              aleurone  cells by the introduction of components of the signaling pathway 
              that act as agonists or antagonists of the hormones.    %%%  The goals of this
              research are to understand the perception and  transduction of hormonal signals
              in plants.  Techniques have been  developed to test the hypothesis that some
              hormones are perceived  at the cell membrane, and perception generates signals
              that affect  the activity of proteins within the cell. The roles that molecules
               such as calcium, calmodulin, and protons play in signal  transduction will be
              tested using a variety of biochemical and  biophysical techniques. The results
              will provide fundamental new  knowledge about the nature of the receptors and
              signal transduction  pathways linking GA and ABA to the response of the cereal
              aleurone  cell.  ***
