Title       : PRF/J: Lethal and Nonlethal Effects of Predators on Prey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9303297

Award Number: 9303297
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Skelly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MI Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Predators affect prey populations and prey by consuming                   
              individuals and by influencing prey behavior itself.  Despite the              
              attention that both lethal and non-lethal predator-prey                        
              interactions have received, little empirical evidence of the                   
              relative importance of each, or of how lethal and non-lethal                   
              predator effects interact with each other to influence prey                    
              performance, population dynamics, species interactions and                     
              distributions, is available.  Previous research has either measured            
              the entire effect of predation (i.e., lethal and non-lethal                    
              together) or the isolated non-lethal effect.  Because lethal and               
              non-lethal effects of predation can have opposing influences (e.g.,            
              on prey growth rate), the component consequences of predation                  
              cannot be determined from these experiments.  Laboratory                       
              experiments to estimate lethal and non-lethal effects of a larval              
              odonate on its larval anuran prey over a gradient of density                   
              dependence among prey, and a field experiment to determine lethal              
              and non-lethal predator impacts on natural prey populations will be            
              performed.  The complex nature of predator-prey interactions means             
              that predictions of prey performance are not intuitive when both               
              types of predator effects are occurring.  A further goal of this               
              study is to develop a conceptual framework for understanding                   
              effects of predators that account for both lethal and non-lethal               
              influences on prey growth and survivorship.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Insights gained from this work ought to have generality because the            
              sorts of behavioral responses exhibited by tadpoles are also                   
              evident within many other taxa (fish, insects, crustaceans, and                
              mammals for instance).  Field tests are necessary in order to                  
              detect the extent to which results are artifacts of the specific               
              setting (artificial wading pools).  One of the goals of this                   
              investigation is to more realistically mathematically model prey               
              performance relationships between foraging behavior and predation              
              risk/gain.  Recognition of the composite nature of predation                   
              effects on prey should alter the way ecologists view communities               
              conceptually.  If higher order effects occur commonly among prey               
              and predators, then it will not likely be possible, as some have               
              hoped, for ecologists to understand community patterns based on                
              pairwise interactions (a building block approach).  Ecological                 
              models that successfully predict population dynamics and community             
              structure will need to incorporate both indirect as well as direct             
              interactions among species.
