Title       : Synthesis and Reactivity of Aromatic Metallacycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9303516

Award Number: 9303516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242200             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Bleeke Bleeke@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program supports research on aromatic metallacycles by Dr. John                
              R. Bleeke, Department of Chemistry, Washington University.                     
              Late transition metals, such as Ir, Os, Rh, and Pt, would be                   
              incorporated into carbon rings of various sizes to form                        
              compounds with aromatic character.  Other heteroatoms, such as                 
              oxygen, sulfur, nitrogen and phosphorus, would also be included                
              in the rings to form a wide variety of compounds of a                          
              fundamentally new type.  Using methodology developed to                        
              synthesize "iridabenzene", compounds such as metallapyridine                   
              and metallafuran would be prepared.  The reactivity of the                     
              metallabenzenes would be explored, including their behavior in                 
              cycloaddition reactions and electrophilic and nucleophilic                     
              substitution reactions.  Synthesis of larger pi-systems would                  
              be attempted.  Calculational modeling would be used to                         
              interpret the degree of aromaticity in the compounds, to help                  
              understand their electronic and magnetic properties, and to                    
              predict their reactivity.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Aromatic compounds predominantly formed by rings of carbon                     
              atoms form a large class of organic compounds.  In this study,                 
              Dr. Bleeke will synthesize analogous compounds in which carbon                 
              is replaced by a metal.  The extended bonding systems                          
              characteristic of aromatic compounds would be maintained, but                  
              altered.  Bleeke will determine the new bonding and reactivity                 
              characteristics of these compounds.  In addition, he will                      
              attempt to prepare other analogous compounds in which oxygen,                  
              phosphorus, and sulfur are also included in the rings, and to                  
              make larger aromatic compounds of this type.  The results of                   
              this fundamental study may be helpful to researchers attempting                
              to construct conducting or semiconducting polymers which                       
              contain both metals and organic portions.
