Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Subsystems of Second Order Arithemtic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1994  
File        : a9303478

Award Number: 9303478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Wood                              
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Simpson simpson@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9303478  Simpson       This project addresses a controversial question in the 
              foundations of mathematics.  The orthodox view (e.g. Bourbaki)  holds that the
              ultimate axiomatic foundation for mathematics is  set-theoretical.  However, it
              is also clear that set theory  itself is concerned mainly with objects
              (pathological subsets of  the real line, large cardinals, etc.) which are
              rather far  removed from ordinary mathematics (analysis, algebra, 
              combinatorics, etc.).  The question which drives this project is:   Which set
              existence axioms are actually needed to prove specific  theorems of ordinary
              mathematics?  This question has been  investigated in the context of subsystems
              of second order  arithmetic, because:  (1) the language of second order
              arithmetic  is just rich enough to accommodate the bulk of ordinary 
              mathematical practice; and (2) subsystems of second order  arithmetic embody a
              detailed classification of set existence  axioms according to "logical
              strength" as measured by proof  theoretic ordinals.  It turns out that, for
              many specific  theorems of ordinary mathematics, one can precisely determine
              the  weakest subsystem of second order arithmetic in which the  given theorem
              is provable.  Furthermore, the subsystems which  arise in this way are few in
              number and correspond to certain  alternative foundational programs such as
              recursive analysis  (Myhill-Specker), predicativity (Weyl), predicative
              reductionism  (Kreisel-Feferman-Friedman), and finitisic reductionism 
              (Hilbert).  The study of subsystems of second order arithmetic  and their role
              in the foundations of mathematics has been  vigorously pursued by Stephen G.
              Simpson, the Principal  Investigator in this project, who is also in the final
              stages of  writing a book which covers the entire subject.  Some specific 
              questions which Simpson is currently investigating are: Which set  existence
              axioms are needed to prove basic theorems in countable  combinatorics (e.g. the
              dual Ramsey theorem of Carlson and  Simpson, and Laver's th eorem on
              embeddability of countable linear  orderings) and in Borel combinatorics? 
              Which set existence  axioms are needed to prove basic theorems of dynamical
              systems  theory?  Which set existence axioms are needed to prove Lebesgue 
              measurability of analytic sets?      This project is concerned  with the
              foundations and logical structure of mathematics.  The  orthodox view,
              promulgated by the Bourbaki school among others,  is that the ultimate
              foundation of mathematics is set  theoretical.  This view was basic to the "New
              Math" experiment of  the 1960's.  The research in this project tends to show
              that, in  certain respects, the orthodox view is incorrect and the 
              foundational claims of set theory are unwarranted.   Through systematic
              investigation of the relationships between  axioms and theorems, it emerges
              that carefully chosen systems of  second order arithmetic provide a logically
              more appropriate  foundation for mathematics.  ***
