Title       : U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research: Intelligent Control in Manufacturing Via a
               Fuzzy Logic Based Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9303198

Award Number: 9303198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14214              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Yen yen@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reza Langari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522300   Man-Machine Communication               
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5922,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Americas Program award will support Prof.                                 
              John Yen and Prof. Reza Langari of Texas A&M                                   
              Engineering Experiment Station in collaboration                                
              with Prof. Rogelio Soto and Prof. Jose M.                                      
              Sanchez, both of the Instituto Tecnologico de                                  
              Monterrey (ITESM).  The proposed research focuses                              
              on the development of fuzzy logic based                                        
              intelligent control strategies for applications                                
              in manufacturing automation and specifically in                                
              the development of control strategies for                                      
              autonomous operation of unit manufacturing                                     
              processes.  The emphasis will be on application                                
              areas where the complexity of the unit                                         
              manufacturing process, and the amount of                                       
              interaction among the subsystems involved,                                     
              preclude the application of conventional control                               
              engineering methods.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Integration of the activities of human operators                               
              in relation to the operation of unit                                           
              manufacturing processes requires the ability to                                
              control rather complex large scale systems  These                              
              systems are generally nonlinear, from a dynamical                              
              subsystems standpoint, and are made up of                                      
              multiple interacting subsystems.  Current                                      
              techniques in control theory, primarily focused                                
              on linear systems, are not optimally designed for                              
              this category of problems.  The researchers aim                                
              to show that fuzzy logic, an alternative to                                    
              classical logic, provides a viable means for                                   
              dealing with the reality of manufacturing process                              
              control in that it enables one to deal more                                    
              effectively with the issue of complexity that                                  
              inevitably arises in this context.  This                                       
              collaboration should bring together well-                                      
              established research teams in both countries to                                
              solve management and control problems of complex                               
              manufacturing systems.
