Title       : Static and Dynamic Properties of Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9303667

Award Number: 9303667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehran Kardar kardar@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical research will be aimed at understanding the static and             
              dynamic fluctuations of a variety of polymers, surfaces and                    
              networks.  The many interesting and fundamental issues that can be             
              probed are relevant to a diverse variety of subjects which can be              
              broadly placed into the following categories: (1) Extended                     
              networks, such as polymers, membranes and gels, fluctuating in a               
              higher dimensional space.  The interplay between entropic                      
              elasticity, rigidity, and microscopic interactions leads to a                  
              number of unusual macroscopic phases. (2) Dynamic evolution of                 
              surfaces and paths far from equilibrium cannot be described by a               
              Hamiltonian, and is instead probed by appealing to symmetries and              
              conservation laws.  Evolution equations relevant to roughening of              
              crystal facets, moving lines, and flowing sandpiles are constructed            
              and their dynamic steady states are explored. (3) Path integrals in            
              random media are relevant to tunnelling of localized electrons,                
              wave propagation in inhomogeneous media and pinning of vortex lines            
              in superconductors.  Numerical and analytical methods are developed            
              for performing these path integrals. (4) Substrate roughness and               
              its influence on adsorption and surface phase transitions is                   
              investigated.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              The theoretical research to be conducted on this grant probes the              
              behavior of extended objects such as surfaces and chains, including            
              how these objects grow into various structures.  The general                   
              treatment is then applied to such systems as polymers, membranes,              
              interfaces and surfaces.  The results have wide applicability in               
              materials research and are also fundamental to modern condensed                
              matter physics.
