Title       : Understanding the Function of the Upfl Protein in mRNA Turnover
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9303898

Award Number: 9303898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart W. Peltz peltz@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9303898  Peltz       Recently, it has become clear that the decay rates of mRNAs
               are regulated and play an important role in controlling gene  expression. 
              Work from many laboratories has demonstrated the  requirement for translation
              in the degradation of mRNAs, and  understanding the relationship between these
              two processes is a  major challenge for this field.  One clear example of this 
              relationship is the observation that nonsense mutations accelerate  the decay
              rates of mRNAs 10- to 20-fold.  We have demonstrated that  the product of the
              UPF1 gene is involved in this pathway.  Deletion  of the UPF1 gene from the
              yeast chromosome completely abrogates the  accelerated decay of
              nonsense-containing mRNAs without affecting  the decay of wild-type
              transcripts.  The DNA sequence of the UPF1  gene has been determined and
              demonstrated to contain several  sequence motifs and regions of homology with
              other genes that may  suggest several putative activities, including:  1) an
              NTP binding  and hydrolysis motif(s), 2) an RNA helicase motif, 3) Zinc-finger 
              motifs and 4) sequence homology with the SEN1 gene, whose protein  product is
              the noncatalytic subunit of the tRNA splicing  endonuclease.  Biochemical
              analysis of the Upf1 protein has  revealed that it is polysome-associated and
              that the decay rates of  nonsense-containing mRNAs in extracts prepared from
              UPF1+ and upf1-  strains recapitulate the results observed in cells.  Based on
              these  observations, the objective of this proposal is to genetically 
              characterize the UPF1 gene in order to begin to identify its role  in the
              nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway.  Mutations in the UPF1  gene will be
              isolated and their alleles will be characterized to  determine the effect of
              these mutations on the decay of nonsense-  containing mRNAs.  %%%  Proper
              cellular growth and differentiation is determined by the  regulated expression
              of the genetic material within the cell.  The  control of gene expression has
              been studied intensively in many  organisms and ha s been demonstrated to be
              controlled at multiple  points from transcriptional initiation to protein
              stability.   Recently, it has become clear that the decay rates of mRNAs are 
              regulated and play an important role in controlling gene  expression.  The
              decay rates of mRNAs vary from each other by more  than fifty-fold.  In
              addition, mRNA decay can be modulated  depending upon multiple factors
              including the stage of the cell  cycle, cellular differentiation and reponses
              to hormones.  The  mechanisms which are responsible for determining either the 
              intrinsic decay rate of an mRNA or the regulation of that rate are  largely
              unknown.  It is the goal of my laboratory to identify both  cis-acting
              sequences and trans-acting factors which regulate mRNA  stability.  ***
