Title       : PRF/J: The Direct and Indirect Effects of Temperature and Food on Life History
               and Production of Pseudochironomus Richardsoni
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9303172

Award Number: 9303172
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Gresens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Direct and indirect effects of temperature and food resources             
              on the life history and production of the aquatic insect                       
              Pseudochironomus richardsoni (Diptera: Chironomidae) will be                   
              determined by this research.  Field studies are to be conducted in             
              the Eel River of northern California.  In this system, larvae of               
              the midge Pseudochironomus are an integral link in the trophic                 
              cascade by which carnivorous fish affect the abundance of algae in             
              the river.  Specific objectives are to: (a) compare estimates of               
              seasonal production by the midge in distinct river habitats that               
              vary in temperature and food resources, (b) determine variability              
              of relevant physical factors and food resources using path                     
              analysis, (c) by means of radioisotope techniques, identify                    
              physiological mechanisms involved in the interactions between                  
              Pseudochironomus, diatoms (Cladophora), and algal epiphytes such as            
              green algae (Zygnema).                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Prior laboratory studies have examined effects of temperature on               
              interactions of primary consumers, chironomids, and algal foods and            
              habitats but the tendency has been to perform such studies by                  
              rearing chironomids in isolation from other species.  This research            
              has the advantage of integrating larger scale investigations with              
              small scale enclosure experiments and laboratory studies of midge-             
              algae interactions.  Results should reveal whether shelter provided            
              by floating algal mats enhance chironomid growth and numbers.                  
              These small aquatic invertebrates serve as essential prey items for            
              fish species of the northwestern United States, such as salmonids,             
              whose recent numbers have declined along with the quality of                   
              running waters.  This research focuses on gaining a better                     
              understanding of interactions at the base of the aquatic food                  
              pyramid (the critical primary producers and consumers), and can                
              provide a basis for studies at higher levels on the trophic pyramid            
              as well.
