Title       : Electric Field Effects on Excited State and Electron Transfer Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9303109

Award Number: 9303109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Boxer sboxer@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Boxer of Stanford University will use Stark effect                   
              spectroscopy to investigate charge-transfer processes in simple                
              molecules, with support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                  
              Organometallic Chemistry Program.  The technique entails                       
              subjecting the sample (a thin film containing the molecule of                  
              interest) to a high and variable electric field, and observing                 
              the effect of the field on the absorption or emission of light.                
               Characteristic lineshapes are obtained that yield information                 
              regarding the relationship between the transition dipole and                   
              the molecular axes.  Processes to be investigated include LMCT                 
              transitions, intramolecular electron transfer reactions, proton                
              transfer reactions, and vibrational transitions.  Of particular                
              interest is the influence of driving force on electron transfer                
              rates.  Molecules to be investigated include coordination                      
              complexes such as tris(bipyradyl)ruthenium(II) ion and related                 
              mixed-valence species, covalently-linked                                       
              benzophenone/naphthalene derivatives, porphyrin/quinone                        
              species, certain rhenium complexes, and bromobenzene.  This new                
              technique should add an important new dimension in the                         
              understanding of molecular dynamics.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              A particularly nettlesome problem is to understand the flow of                 
              charge within molecules.  For example, if a molecule absorbs a                 
              photon of visible light, how do the electrons within the                       
              molecule respond spatially?  Professor Boxer has developed a                   
              potentially powerful new technique, called Stark effect                        
              spectroscopy, to answer such questions.  Essentially, the                      
              molecules are subjected to high electric fields while their                    
              interactions with light are measured.  The results to be                       
              obtained will reveal how different parts of a molecule                         
              "communicate" and will improve understanding of the                            
              charge-separation processes so important in photosynthesis and                 
              related phenomena.
