Title       : Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Thin Film Depositions on Plane Substrates and
               in Vias
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9303007

Award Number: 9303007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256342             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vishwanath Prasad vprasad@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chin-Chih Fang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fletcher Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9303007  Prasad    This project is a multidisciplinary, university-industry AMPP
               collaborative research program to develop a molecular dynamics  (MD)
              simulation tool which can be used to create and develop new  thin film
              technologies, improve the old ones, and study the  effect of process parameters
              on film structure and its  mechanical and electrical properties.  Essential
              features of  this MD model are:  a suitable potential function(s); efficient 
              algorithms for force evaluation and sorting of neighbor atoms;  higher-order,
              adaptive time-interval integration schemes; an  appropriate temperature control
              algorithm and an improved method  for calculations of local and average film
              stresses.  It can  simulate three-dimensional thin film depositions on plane 
              substrates and in vias for metallization of passivation of  devices.  By
              allowing the periodic boundary conditions to vary,  this model can demonstrate
              the effect of substrate conditions,  e.g., external stresses and temperature. 
              The effect of gas  impurity and ion bombardment can be studied by varying the 
              descriptions of the deposited atoms.  A hybrid approach where a  via solution
              is built from the results for plane surfaces and  corners is also proposed. 
              Two different strategies, use of a  massive parallel computer, and distributed
              computing on a  cluster of workstations will be developed  for computations for
               a large number of particles.  Predictions of the PI will be  compared with the
              experimental data obtained from the IBM and  AT&T research laboratories.   
              With the help of this simulation code, a deposition process can  be designed on
              a computer and a range of optimized conditions  for the growth of thin films of
              uniform structure and consistent  properties can be predicted.  A suitable
              visualization software  can display the evolution process on a monitor screen
              which can  be video recorded for further analysis.  This research will be  a
              major step in the direction of using molecular dynamics theory  for micro-and
              nano-technolo gy, an area of significant future  growth.  ***
