Title       : Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Chaos Theory for Control of Manufacturing
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9303405

Award Number: 9303405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15449              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Talavage tala@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moshe M. Barash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   The objectives of this project are investigation of chaotic               
              or unpredictable behavior in manufacturing systems and development             
              of methods for controlling variations in system performance due to             
              nonlinear interactions.  The novel approach identifies if a                    
              manufacturing systems is under control and prescribes control                  
              actions for systems not under control.  Experimental evidence of               
              chaotic or unpredictable behavior in manufacturing systems for                 
              certain scheduling rules is presented, and the transition in system            
              behavior, from chaotic to periodic, due to change in scheduling                
              disciplines is explained using theoretical results.  Other system              
              parameters influencing predictability of system performance are                
              identified.  Improvements in classical system performance measures,            
              such as sojourn times, throughput rate, conformance to due dates,              
              due to enhanced predictability are measured.  Control schemes for              
              manufacturing systems are presented that do not require explicit               
              analytical models of the system.                                               
                   The research opens new directions for analyzing and                       
              controlling manufacturing systems, or in general any complicated               
              system.  The research is essential for developing an understanding             
              of dynamic behavior of integrated manufacturing systems.
