Title       : Exploitation of Primitive Molecular Recognition Effects in Electron Transfer
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9303682

Award Number: 9303682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph T. Hupp jthupp@chem.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Hupp of Northwestern University will investigate the                 
              effects of molecular recognition on electron transfer rates                    
              with support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                             
              Organometallic Program.  He plans to probe two fundamental                     
              aspects of electron transfer reactions, one being the molecular                
              aspects of the solvation barrier, the other being the influence                
              of the intervening medium on the donor/acceptor electronic                     
              coupling strength.  He will conduct four classes of experiments                
              to assess these issues.  1)  Crown ethers in solution will bind                
              to D/A complexes, and this binding will simulate the molecular                 
              aspects of solvation.  2)  Donors and acceptors will be trapped                
              inside hemicarcerands, and the influence on bimolecular                        
              electron transfer will likewise simulate the molecular aspects                 
              of solvation.  3)  D/A complexes where the bridging ligand is a                
              crown ether or related moiety will be examined vis-a-vis their                 
              binding of cations;  this will give information on the effects                 
              on coupling strength.  4)  D/A complexes will be examined as a                 
              function of the conformation of the bridging ligand;this will                  
              give information about gated electron transfer and it will help                
              in the interpretation of the studies in part 3.  The general                   
              outcome of these studies will be an enhanced understanding of                  
              how electron transfer over long distances is affected by the                   
              intervening and surrounding media.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              One of the major types of chemical reaction is electron                        
              transfer from one atom to another.  This can even occur over                   
              long distances, when the two atoms are separated because they                  
              reside in bulky molecules, or because they reside in remote                    
              sites within the same molecule.  Under such circumstances the                  
              rates of electron transfer are quite sensitive to the                          
              intervening medium and also to the surrounding solvent.                        
              Experiments to gain a general understanding of these effects                   
              will be undertaken by examining electron transfer in molecules                 
              that have been designed specifically for this purpose.  In                     
              particular, aspects of "molecular recognition" will be                         
              investigated.  Molecular recognition means that the specific                   
              structural features of one molecule will cause it to bind to                   
              another molecule in a highly controlled way;  this binding will                
              then lead to effects on the rates that can be directly                         
              attributed to known aspects of the bound molecule.
