Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Transmission Electron Microscope for Materials
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1993  
File        : a9303794

Award Number: 9303794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilhan A. Aksay iaksay@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mehmet Sarikaya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9165,
Abstract    :
              9303794  Aksay       This transmission electron microscope (TEM) with analytical
               and high resolution imaging attachments will be used to improve  research and
              education in materials sciences and engineering at  Princeton University.  The
              Princeton Materials Institute (PMI) will  provide the location and support for
              a multidisciplinary TEM  center.  Materials research at Princeton University
              involves  collaboration among 55 faculty members from several departments 
              (Chemical, Electrical, Mechanical, and Civil Engineering, Physics,  Chemistry,
              Molecular Biology, and Earth Sciences) and is  coordinated by the PMI.      
              The primary TEM system will comprise:  (i)a TEM with a high  resolution pole
              piece for high resolution electron microscopy  (HREM) imaging and convergent
              beam electron diffraction (CBED),  (ii)a scanning transmission electron
              microscopy (STEM) accessory   (iii)an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer
              (EDS), (iv)an electron  energy loss spectrometer (EELS) with an energy filter,
              and (v)a  multichannel analyzer and support computers for data acquisition, 
              storage, and processing.       This instrument is capable of high spatial
              resolution imaging  of crystalline and amorphous structures, small-beam
              electron  diffraction, and compositional and spectroscopic analyses of micro- 
              and nano-scale features, all necessary tools for characterizing  materials
              structures.  It will replace the present TEM (Philips  400) which has
              inadequate spatial resolution and no analytical  attachments.  Although the
              current microscope cannot be used for  high resolution studies, it will be
              retained for teaching. In fact,  PMI is promoting a series of courses for both
              graduates and  undergraduates in which electron microscopy is taught.       The
              recognition of the importance of TEM to Princeton is  evidenced by the
              dedication of laboratory space specifically for  this instrument in the new PMI
              building and the appointment of new  faculty and staff with expertise in both
              TEM and materials  sciences.  These sc ientists will serve as a dedicated core
              of  microscopists who will enable the microscopy facility to meet the  critical
              demands of the present research and educational needs as  well as to open new
              avenues in teaching and collaborative research  in materials sciences at
              Princeton University.  ***
