Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Large-Sample Approximations for Analysis of Qualitative
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9303713

Award Number: 9303713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelby J. Haberman haberman@casbah.acns.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Large-sample approximations used in the analysis of                       
              qualitative data are to be examined.  Problems to be considered                
              involve both large numbers of parameters and large numbers of                  
              observations.  Log-linear models, conditional log-linear models,               
              latent-class models, canonical models, and association models are              
              to be explored.  Large-sample approximations are to be considered              
              for distributions of maximum-likelihood estimates, Pearson and                 
              likelihood-ratio chi-square statistics, and measures of                        
              predictions.  Analyses are to be developed without the assumption              
              that the underlying model is correct.                                          
                   In large-scale surveys and censuses, statistical analyses                 
              are commonly performed on very large samples.  In such analyses,               
              models used to approximate the observations often involve very                 
              large numbers of unknown quantities which must be estimated from               
              the sample in order to apply the model.  In the proposed                       
              research, approximations are developed for the variability                     
              expected from the estimates of unknown quantities and for                      
              measures of the value of the model for construction of predictors              
              of future observations.  In contrast to usual statistical                      
              analyses, the methods developed apply even if the proposed model               
              is not entirely consistent with the data.  It is shown that                    
              approximate models can be quite valuable in statistical work even              
              when they do not fully describe the data.
