Title       : PRF/J: Mitochondrial DNA Sequence Variation and the Genetic Structure of
               Canvasback and Redhead Duck Populations: Direct Sequencing of the Control
               Region to Improve the Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9303298

Award Number: 9303298
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Sorenson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   The primary objective of this research is to test predictions             
              about the genetic structure of canvasback duck (Aythya valisineria)            
              and redhead duck (A. americana) populations using sequence                     
              variation data from the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) control region.              
              Philopatry to natal areas is strongly female-biased in migratory               
              waterfowl, whereas males disperse widely prior to the time they                
              breed; this characteristic is unlike that of most other birds.  The            
              uniqueness of such a social system suggests that despite a massive             
              flow of nuclear genes mediated by male dispersal, mtDNA variation              
              may be geographically structured.  In other words, mitochondrial               
              DNA lineages in local or regional populations may differentiate                
              because they are isolated from other maternal lineages due to                  
              female site-fidelity.  This work will test whether effects of                  
              gender-based philopatry on mtDNA gene flow are reflected in                    
              geographic patterns of mtDNA sequence variation.  Geographic                   
              structure in mtDNA variation is to be evaluated using nucleotide               
              sequence data from the rapidly evolving control region.  This                  
              technique should permit much finer resolution of genetic                       
              differentiation than restriction fragment analysis, the technique              
              used in nearly all previous avian mtDNA investigations.                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Acquiring fine-grained knowledge about the genetic structure of                
              long-distance migrants will facilitate the prudent management of an            
              economically-important component of native North American                      
              biodiversity.  In addition insights gained in this research will               
              advance historical phylogeography (geography from a phylogenetic               
              perspective), a growing point in ecology and systematics.
