Title       : SEM and Electron Microprobe Analysis of Ceramics from Machu Picchu, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9303942

Award Number: 9303942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26873              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Burger richard.burger@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Burger and his                   
              colleagues will conduct a technical analysis of pottery excavated              
              at the archaeological site of Machu Picchu which is located in the             
              Andes mountains of Peru. Discovered by Hiram Bingham in the early              
              1900s, this is one of the most spectacular Incan sites and is                  
              visited by large numbers of tourists each year. However despite                
              it's fame and extensive excavations conducted by Bingham, it is not            
              well understood how the site functioned and what purpose within the            
              Incan empire it served. Through ceramic analysis Dr. Burger will               
              address this question. He will take a sample of ceramic materials              
              and subject them to combined scanning electron microscope (SEM) and            
              electron microprobe examination. With the former technique he will             
              gain insight into the manufacturing process and this will allow him            
              to determine the degree of standardization. The latter technique               
              will permit him to determine the elemental composition of the paste            
              and allow Dr. Burger to infer whether it derived from one                      
              geographical source or many. On this basis he can begin to                     
              reconstruct the economic and political context in which these                  
              essential materials were distributed and produced.                             
                                                                                             
              The Inca peoples created an empire which spread from Ecuador to                
              Argentina and from the heights of the Andes mountains to the arid              
              Pacific coasts. Lacking both writing and a centralized market                  
              system they were able to integrate large numbers of disparate                  
              peoples into a single political system. Archaeologists wish to                 
              understand how they were able to accomplish this and how the Incan             
              system developed. The study of pottery in what is clearly an elite             
              context should provide insight.                                                
                                                                                             
              In addition to the knowledge this research will provide about Incan            
              prehistory, it is important because of the methodological                      
              contribution it will make. Although the combined SEM electron                  
              microprobe is currently used in geological studies it has not been             
              applied an archaeological contexts. If it is successful it may                 
              greatly simplify ceramic analysts' work. Dr. Burger's research                 
              constitutes a first practical test and the methodological                      
              implications are considerable.
