Title       : Particle Dynamics in Crystallizing Colloidal Suspensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1993  
File        : a9303763

Award Number: 9303763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice P. Gast   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study will pioneer the use of a newly emerging  light                     
              scattering technique, diffusive wave spectroscopy (DWS), to the                
              study of the dynamics of structure formation in colloidal systems.             
              In DWS applied to colloidal suspensions, light scatters off of many            
              colloid particles before leaving the system. The scattered light               
              is measured by a PM tube.  For each particular photon path, the                
              displacement of the particles in the path (ri(t)) gives rise to a             
              change in the scattering intensity. By measuring the scattering                
              intensity as a function of time,  the autocorrelation g1(t) of the             
              scattered light can be obtained. It is assumed that (1) the net                
              phase change for the scatterings along a photon path is a Gaussian             
              random variable, (2) the displacement vector of a particle in a                
              photon path (ri(t)) and the scattering vector qi are uncorrelated,            
              and (3) the direction of propogation becomes uncorrelated over a               
              length l*.  With these assumptions,   the contribution to the                  
              correlation function for one photon path can be written in terms               
              of the mean square displacement <r2>,  l* and the path length s.              
              To obtain the contribution of  path lengths of length s to the                 
              total scattering intensity, the energy density of the light at time            
              t and position r (the photons per unit volume U(t,r))  is first                
              obtained by solving a diffusion equation for the particular sample             
              geometry, and from this function the weighting factor can be                   
              obtained. The transport mean free path is obtained by a calibration            
              procedure in which an autocorrelation is measured on particles                 
              which are not interacting and the mean square displacement can be              
              estimated from theory. The technique will be used to probe the                 
              influence of ionic stregth and concentration on short time particle            
              dynamics in disordered and ordered systems.
