Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: An Ethnoarcheological Study of
               Specialized Pottery Production in Guizhou Province, China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9303334

Award Number: 9303334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne P. Underhill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign                                        
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's                                   
              awards provide opportunities for joint                                         
              research, and the use of unique or                                             
              complementary facilities, expertise and                                        
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a four-month                                           
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Anne                                        
              Underhill to the Museum of the Qiannan Buyi and                                
              Miao Autonomous District in China.                                             
                                                                                             
              The goal of Dr. Underhill's research is to                                     
              examine archaeological indicators of different                                 
              kinds of specialized pottery production.  She                                  
              wants to determine whether or not criteria                                     
              described in the literature can be supported                                   
              and if new criteria can be developed.  She will                                
              assess vessel standardization and diversity in                                 
              order to identify variation among family                                       
              (household industry) specialists and individual                                
              workshop production.  Dr. Underhill will also                                  
              assess spatial indicators of organization of                                   
              production such as number and location of work                                 
              tools and size of work space.  She will attempt                                
              to determine whether differences in scale and                                  
              intensity of production can be recognized as                                   
              well.  Dr. Underhill feels that the south-                                     
              central Guizhou would be an excellent study                                    
              area given the quantity of communities where                                   
              potters use traditional techniques.                                            
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for four                                 
              months and an allowance for field expenses.
