Title       : PRF/M: Molecular Phylogeny of Tribe Antirrhineae (Scrophulariaceae): A Genetic
               and Morphological Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1993       
File        : a9303317

Award Number: 9303317
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne J. Elisens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   Comparative studies of variation in nuclear DNA and                       
              chloroplast DNA have helped elucidate the pattern of evolutionary              
              relationships in many plant groups.  A phylogenetic framework is               
              particularly important in groups of organisms used as model                    
              systems, to correctly interpret biological phenomena and apply                 
              valuable data.  This research is a molecular phylogenetic                      
              investigation of a lineage of flowering plants, tribe Antirrhineae             
              (Scrophulariaceae) that includes a model system in genetic and                 
              developmental studies, the cultivated snapdragon.  To provide a                
              broad molecular database that will insure rigorous tests of                    
              hypotheses, a broad experimental and analytical approach based on              
              comparative DNA sequencing in nuclear and chloroplast genomes and              
              restriction site variation of five chloroplast genes has been                  
              designed.  The objectives here are to evaluate: (a) the evolution              
              of floral morphological characters, (b) the origin and evolution of            
              "Tam" transposable elements, and (c) how floral homeotic genes have            
              evolved and whether their evolution has been influenced by "Tam"               
              elements.                                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This research presents unusual opportunities for studying basic                
              patterns and processes of molecular evolution, floral morphology,              
              and developmental genetics using Antirrhinum majus and its                     
              relatives as model organisms.  A phylogenetic context offers the               
              chance to develop optimal application, extrapolation, and                      
              interpretation of biological results and this study, when                      
              completed, will constitute a robust demonstration of such a piece              
              of research.
