Title       : GOALI: Gene Delivery: Bioengineering Characterization by Flow Cytometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a9902697

Award Number: 9902697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268527             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd D. Giorgio todd.d.giorgio@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F R. Haselton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis C. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902697
Giorgio
Many human diseases result from abnormal genetic sequences. 
              Some of these genetic errors are inherited at birth, but many do not cause
              disease until adulthood.  Others are acquired though contact with the
              environment.  Gene therapy is the broad strategy that seeks to replace or
              repair this abnormal genetic information with the goal of altering the course
              of disease.  

The practical application of gene therapies has been limited
              for many reasons including the scientific challenges of creating the 'gene
              medicines' and the clinical challenges in delivering these therapies.

The
              proposed work addresses these issues in a new way, by combining the efforts of
              basic research in academic and applied research in industry.  The cornerstone
              of this effort is an integrated plan for training of the next generation of
              engineer-scientists.  A graduate student candidate for the Ph.D. degree in
              biomedical engineering will study the problem of gene therapy delivery in our
              academic laboratory at Vanderbilt University.  This training will continue from
              an industrial perspective at Valentis, Inc. (formerly GeneMedicine, Inc.), our
              partner in this combined research and training program.  The student will then
              understand both the basic and applied problems in gene delivery during this
              training.  The student will have a mentor both at Vanderbilt and at
              Valentis.

This student will return to Vanderbilt University for an extended
              period to develop possible solutions using the broad perspective gained by this
              distributed training.  Another advance in this field involves the testing of
              these possible solutions using state-of-the-art laboratory tools coupled with
              new ideas in mathematical modeling of gene delivery.  Satisfactory solutions
              demonstrated in the laboratory will be tested by the student under the
              practical constraints offered in the industrial laboratories at Valentis, Inc. 
              

There are two final goals of this work: (1) a unique and valuable new
              training method in biotechnology that uses both academia and industry and (2) a
              solution to an important problem in gene delivery that is ready for practical
              application.

