Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics of the Lower Florideophyte Red Algae Based on
               DNA Sequences and Morphological Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902426

Award Number: 9902426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Max H. Hommersand hommersand@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia G. Gensel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902426
Hommersand, Gensel, and Volovsek
	The "lower florideophytes" consist
              of a diverse assemblage of red algal families and orders with representatives
              in marine and fresh water habitats throughout the world.  Many occur in
              tropical areas in close association with other organisms, often as epiphytes or
              endophytes.  A few, such as dulse, can be conspicuous members of marine boreal
              ecosystems and have been an important part of the local human diet.  Like all
              typical florideophyte algae, the lower florideophytes display a remarkable
              triphasic life history and a unique structure called the pit-plug, a cellular
              connection which results from incomplete cytokinesis. The group differs from
              the higher
florideophytes by possessing comparatively simple reproductive and
              vegetative morphologies, unique patterns of mitosis and cytokinesis, and a
              diverse array of life histories, photosynthetic pigments and pit-plug types. 
              Some lower florideophyte features have been interpreted as primitive,
              suggesting that the group may be transitional between the putative oldest red
              algal assemblage, the bangiophytes, and the more advanced florideophytes.  The
              higher level taxonomy of this group has been problematic, and even though
              recent emphasis on pit plug ultrastructure has provided some clarification,
              conflicting characters continue to frustrate attempts to achieve a natural
              classification. 
This study by graduate student Miguel Volovsek, under the
              supervision of Dr. Max Hommersand and Dr. Pat Gensel at University of North
              Carolina, aims to identify ordinal and familial level groups among the lower
              florideophytes and to assess their phylogenetic relationships by using
              independent molecular evidence from the chloroplast rbcL and 23S rDNA gene
              sequences.  Diagnostic features for each group will be explored with
              morphological
techniques, concentrating on understudied representatives. 
              Because of the important taxonomic position occupied by the lower
              florideophytes, this research will provide a framework for  interpreting life
              histories and vegetative and reproductive features across the red algae.


