Title       : A Fully Algebraic Multigrid Software Package for Automated Solution of
               Unstructured Sparse Linear Systems on High Performance Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9902022

Award Number: 9902022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Zhang jzhang@cs.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig C. Douglas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is to design robust and efficient computational kernel software for
              solving large sparse unstructured linear systems on high performance computers.
               Such large scale problems can only be solved by iteritive techniques.  The
              iterative techniques under our consideration include multilevel preconditioning
              techniques and algebraic multigrid methods.  Our goal is to unify these two
              groups of methods and to take advantage of both and avoid the disadvantages of
              either.
We will investigate, design, and test algebraic preconditioners that
              offer the scalability of multigrid techniques, the parallelism of domain
              decomposition methods, and the robustness of incomplete LIU
              preconditioners.

We will also use a factored sparse approximate inverse
              technique to replace standard iterative schemes in algebraic multigrid methods.
               Such an approach may increase the robustness of our methods and improve their
              parallelism.  Graph partitioning of submatrices is to be used to balance loads
              among processors.  The proposed research will result in a software package that
              may be used by researchers and engineers as kernel software in large scale
              numerical simulations and
computations.

The general purpose high
              performance iterative solvers from this research project are expected to make
              significant impact in the field of applied scientific computing.  The results
              of the research will make a clear judgment concerning the relative advantages
              and disadvantages of algebraic multigrid methods and multilevel incomplete LU
              preconditioning methods.  The research has applications in aerospace,
              semiconductor, reservoir simulation, combustion, ocean/climate modeling, and
              pollution tracking
 


