Title       : Dissertation Research: Integrating Phylogenetic and Taxonomic Studies of the
               Commelinaceae using Molecular and Morphological Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902015

Award Number: 9902015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerrold I. Davis JID1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902015
Davis and Hardy
	The flowering plant family Commelinaceae consists of
              approximately 41 genera and 650 species of perennial or occasionally annual
              herbs distributed throughout temperate and tropical zones worldwide.  Known
              also as the "Spiderwort Family", the Commelinaceae includes familiar cultivated
              ornamentals such as Tradescantia and Zebrina (the spiderwort and wandering
              jew).  Common wildflowers include various species of Commelina (dayflowers)
              among other genera.  More numerous but less well known are the tropical genera
              of the family, some of which are being studied by graduate student Christopher
              Hardy under the direction of Dr. Jerrold Davis at Cornell University. The goals
              of this project are to conduct phylogenetic and taxonomic studies within the
              family on three closely related genera native to the tropical forests of
              Central and South America.  These genera are Cochliostema, Geogenanthus, and an
              undescribed genus consisting of an estimated six to seven new species.
Plants
              of Cochliostema are unusual for the Commelinaceae in that they are found
              growing primarily high in forest canopies as epiphytes, some with the "tank
              plant" habit that resembles bromeliads vegetatively. Plants of Cochliostema
              also possess the largest flowers known in the family. Geogenanthus consists of
              five primarily Amazonian species; low growing and rhizomatous, plants of
              Geogenanthus are distinguished primarily by their unusual habit of bearing
              flowers at the soil surface and beneath the leaves.  Finally, plants of the
              undescribed genus are rosette understory plants often possessing leaves with
              deep purple beneath and a brilliant white longitudinal stripe above. The
              objective of the phylogenetic component of this research is to better
              understand how these three genera and thirteen to fourteen species are related
              to one another and to other members of the family.  Inferences of phylogenetic
              relationships will be obtained by analyzing variation in floral and vegetative
              structure in addition to DNA sequences from nuclear and chloroplast genes. The
              sequence of evolutionary divergences in this phylogeny will establish
              hypotheses about the evolution of the large and bizarre floral forms in the
              group. A taxonomic treatment (monograph) of this group will include keys and
              new or updated descriptions of all species of the several genera. 

