Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics of Asteromyia and Macrophoma:
               Patterns of Association and Divergence in an Insect-Fungus Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9902259

Award Number: 9902259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Harrison rgh4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902259
Harrison and Carr
	Symbiosis describes situations in nature where two
              or more species live together, often, but not necessarily, to the benefit of
              both. Symbioses are thought to be important in maintaining natural diversity
              and proper functioning of ecosystems. Nonetheless, important questions about
              symbioses remain open, including: 1) how do species associate to form a
              symbiosis; and 2) what is the role of symbioses in promoting diversity?  To
              help answer these questions, graduate student Timothy Carr, under the direction
              of Dr. Richard Harrison at Cornell University, is examining the taxonomic and
              phylogenetic relationships of a group of flies (in the genus Asteromyia) and
              their symbiotic gall-forming fungi (usually placed in the form-genus
              Macrophoma) and the ecological factors involved in this relationship. Insects
              and their symbiotic fungi are valuable systems for examining questions about
              symbiosis because insect and fungal genomes are now sufficiently well known for
              good genetic analysis and because both groups of taxa are amenable to
              laboratory experimentation.
	Preliminary evidence from this fly-fungus system
              suggests that there are many hidden or cryptic species of fly and fungus
              involved, because both fly and fungus species may be indistinguishable
              morphologically but divergent genetically. Data from DNA sequences from nuclear
              and mitochondrial genes will be used to identify the lineages of flies and
              fungi present and the relationships among them. Genetic data will also be used
              to determine the close relatives of the fungi; of interest is whether they are
              symbiotic with insects or if they have another ecological role. The proposed
              research also involves ecological field studies and experiments that will
              compare the effects of the symbiotic relationship on the different species of
              flies and fungi. One possibility is that the symbiotic relationship is a
              mutualism for some fly-fungus pairs, but that in other situations neither
              species benefits or one species is negatively affected.  
 

