Title       : Scalable Parallel Computational Methods for Partial Differential Equations with
               Moving and Varying Boundaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9902035

Award Number: 9902035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330222             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland Glowinski roland@math.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuri Kuznetsov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Lennart Johnsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate novel parallel numerical methods, relying on a
              special type of finite element 
meshes, called here LRLFH-meshes (Locally
              Refined Locally Fitted Hierarchical meshes), and on coupling of advanced
              multigrid methods with domain embedding/fictitious domains and domain
              decomposition techniques, for solving linear and nonlinear Partial Differential
              Equations with moving and varying boundaries. The efficient solution of such
              problems is very important in various scientific and industrial applications,
              e.g., particulate flows, optimal control of systems with moving parts, optimal
              shape design. In the case of problems with varying geometry, requiring the
              solution of a large number of finite element/finite volume systems of equations
              associated with varying meshes, finding the right balance between accuracy and
              algorithmic efficiency is very difficult, particularly on parallel platforms.
              Recent results indicate that highly efficient parallel methods can be designed
              for the above problems by coupling multigrid preconditioning with domain
              decomposition and fictitious/embedding domain 
techniques on meshes which are
              block structured or almost structured, respectively. 

The main objectives of
              this project are:

To develop and investigate parallel generators for Locally
              Refined Locally Fitted Hierarchical meshes for complex two and three
              dimensional geometries.

To develop and investigate scalable parallel
              iterative solution methods with preconditioning based on coupling advanced
              multigrid algorithms with fictitious (embedding) domain and domain
              decomposition techniques.

To apply the mesh generators and iterative
              solution methods, to be developed, to the numerical simulation of flow problems
              with complex moving boundaries, e. g., particulate flows governed by the
              Navier-Stokes equations, and to optimal shape design problems on parallel
              platforms (clusters of workstations and IBM SP/2).

The work will have impact
              on the simulation of various phenomena encountered 
in chemical, mechanical
              and aerospace engineering.

