Title       : Seasonal Attenuation and Release of Arsenic by Pyrite Weathering Products,
               Southern Mother Lode Gold District, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902859

Award Number: 9902859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis K. Bird bird@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902859 
Bird 
This project focuses on the geochemical cycle of arsenic
              released to the environment by weathering of arsenian pyrite at an open pit
              gold mine in the Mother Lode Mining District of California.  Arsenic is
              concentrated by coprecipitation and sorption on pyrite weathering products
              (iron sulfates and oxyhydroxides). These secondary phases are destabilized by
              seasonally changing environmental conditions and by physical transport into the
              alkaline lake environment of the open pit mine. They are only temporary sinks
              for arsenic, with the potential to release arsenic to aquatic environments via
              desorption or dissolution.  We approach this study through a series of field
              and laboratory observations/experiments and theoretical models, including: (1)
              field and laboratory analysis of arsenic distribution in primary minerals of
              the pit mine; the distribution and speciation of arsenic in outcrop weathering
              products; and arsenic concentration and speciation in the mine pit lake,
              springs, and groundwater; (2) laboratory experiments to evaluate arsenic uptake
              and speciation in jarosite, a major product of pyrite oxidation; and (3)
              geochemical modeling of pit lake evolution.  Results will improve our
              understanding of the controls on arsenic attenuation and release by secondary
              minerals, linking seasonal field and analytical observations of weathering
              mineralogy with pit lake water quality. Evaluation of arsenic bioavailability
              requires knowledge of its oxidation state and bonding environment. Our study
              will address both solid-phase (by X-ray absorption spectroscopy) and aqueous
              arsenic speciation, enabling us to make predictions about arsenic release from
              secondary minerals which will be applicable to other pyrite-bearing
              environments such as coalfields, mine and mill tailings, and low-grade
              mineralized outcrops. 

