Title       : Design and Testing of Femoral Tracking Device
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9902340

Award Number: 9902340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109483             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. John Yack John-Yack@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902340
Yack
Using standard, non-invasive motion analysis techniques it is not
              currently possible to accurately monitor transverse rotations of the femur. 
              Research and clinical studies are, thus, unable to make meaningful assessments
              of relative rotations of the hip and knee and are, therefore, unable to
              determine critical information about human movement and the effects of
              pathology.  At the University of Iowa a prototype femoral tracking device has
              been developed that makes it feasible to track the femur using a non-invasive
              technique.  The goal of this project is to complete development and testing of
              this femoral tracking device. In order to accomplish this goal, three
              objectives have been identified:

Objective 1: Obtain better models of the
              femoral condyles using CT imaging techniques in combination with Image Analysis
              and Rapid Prototyping.
Based on our initial work the importance of the
              condylar pads in maintaining the position of the device has been appreciated. 
              Working with individuals in Radiology, the Imaging Analysis Center, and the
              Rapid Prototyping Center, models using the data on four individuals of
              different body builds will be generated.  Using a new high resolution CT
              scanner, images of the distal femur will be acquired and transferred in the
              Imaging Analysis Center.  Doctoral students will be trained in the use of
              Voxblast software to edit the volume and generate a polygonal surface of the
              femur.  These surfaces will be used to create a composite model of the
              condyles.  The polygonal surface will be converted into stereo lithography
              format and can be shipped to the Prototyping Center. Fused deposition modeling
              will be used for rapid prototyping models of the knee that can be used to
              create the condylar pads.

Objective 2: Engineer the design to obtain a light
              weight and adjustable device that minimizes the medial profile and optimizes
              the fit on a variety of subjects.
Working with personnel in the Engineering
              Design and Prototyping Center the design of the device will be optimized by
              re-engineering the current prototype.  These advanced designs will be tested on
              a variety of subjects to judge: comfort, fit, stability, reliability, and
              validity.  Subjects will be tested during walking and running activities.
              Validity will be assessed using a lower limb rotation test with the knee
              straight.

Objective 3: Establish the reliability and validity of the new
              design.
The design of the device will be tested on 20 subjects, who span a
              variety of body builds, over five different days in order to establish the
              reliability of the device during walking, jogging and stair gait.  The motion
              analysis system and associated software in our lab will be used to collect and
              process the kinematic and kinetic data.  Working with Drs. Pierrynowski and
              Ball at McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, the validity of the
              device will be determined by comparing measures obtained with bone pin data to
              measures obtained with the device during walking, running, and step-up
              activities. 

Identifying a strategy that will enable the accurate
              measurement of femoral rotations will have implications for understanding
              normal movement, as well as abnormal movement in patients with hip, knee, and
              foot pathology.  The area of immediate interest for our group is the ACL
              deficient patient population where control of rotations with loss of the ACL
              becomes a critical issue that is thought to lead to instability in the knee. 
              


