Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Meiotic Maturation and Cryopreservation of
               Starfish Oocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9902703

Award Number: 9902703
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirsten C. Sadler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5940,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902703
Sadler
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide support for a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Kirsten C. Sadler to work with Dr. Asli
              Tolun at Bosphorus University in Istanbul, Turkey.
The goal of this research
              is to identify components of the signaling pathway and the motogen receptor in
              starfish oocytes.  This is important because neither the hormone receptor nor
              the early signal transduction pathways have identified in any oocyte.  Starfish
              oocytes have long been used as a model for studying the cell cycle and meiotic
              maturation.  The oocytes are stored in the ovary arrested in the first meiotic
              cell cycle and upon stimulation by their natural mitogen, they re-enter the
              cell cycle and develop fertilization competency.  Conversion of an immature
              oocyte to a fertilizable egg is termed oocyte maturation.
The university is
              located on the Bosphorus and in close proximity to the Sea of Marmara, which is
              filled with starfish.  In addition, the geographic position of Turkey allows
              access to the Black Sea, the Aegean and the Mediterranean.  The environments of
              each are unique and support different species of starfish with different
              reproductive cycles, providing a unique opportunity to obtain material for
              comparative studies.  In addition to working with researchers at Bosphorus
              University, Dr. Sadler will be able to form collaborations with other
              researchers in Europe, such as Dr. Christain Sardet at Villefranche,
              France.
***

