Title       : STTR Phase II: Wire Grid Polarizer for Liquid Crystal Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9902946

Award Number: 9902946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Gardner egardner@moxtek.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack R. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MOXTEK Inc
	      452 West 1260 North
	      Orem, UT  840572941    801/225-0930

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1505,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project,  wire-grid
              polarizers (WGP),  offers performance improvements for crystal displays.  They
              are reflective, inorganic, polarizers which offer brighter, lower-power liquid
              crystal displays.  MOXTEK has pioneered this technology.  The Liquid Crystal
              Institute at Kent State University has facilities to build and test liquid
              crystal display cells which use wire-grid polarizers.  The objective of the
              Phase I research was to determine the value of wire-grid polarizers in liquid
              crystal displays.  The application of this wire-grid polarizer in liquid
              crystal devices based on the twist effect enhances the display's brightness and
              improves the contrast ratio in the case where the device produces a near linear
              polarization hitting the reflector.  These results are encouragings.  Building
              a demonstration display using a wire-grid polarizer is the next stop in the
              commercialization of an advance liquid crystal display.  The successful
              demonstration of the proposed device will have a powerful impact on the liquid
              crystal display industry.  Thus, the objective of this phase II project  is to
              develop a demonstration liquid crystal display.  This experimental display will
              be used to show the superiority of this technology for key companies in the
              display industry.
     The key application of this research will be in the
              field of information display technologies.  Currently, this means computer
              displays and TV, but this market is expanding and will soon impact
              communications, navigation, travel, etc.  The research will be key in
              developing low-power flat panel displays of all types as required for the
              revolutionary information applications coming over the next 10 years.

