Title       : Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Group IVA Reactive Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9902021

Award Number: 9902021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis J. Clouthier dclaser@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dennis Clouthier of the University of Kentucky is supported by the Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program to study the electronic spectra and excited state
              dynamics of a variety of group IVA silicon- and germanium-containing reactive
              intermediates.  A variety of laser spectroscopic techniques will be employed to
              study reactive intermediates in the gas phase, generated using electron impact
              or pyrolysis and subsequent supersonic free jet expansion methods.  Wavelength
              resolved fluorescence and stimulated emission pumping spectra of
              monohalosilylenes, monohalogermylenes, silylidene, germylidene, and their
              deuterated analogs will be measured in order to obtain further knowledge of
              their ground state energy levels and molecular structures.  Intersystem
              crossing and internal conversion dynamics of silylidene and the germylidene
              will be examined by quantum beat spectroscopy.  Previously unknown electronic
              spectra of silicon and germanium methylidyne, silanone, thiosilanone, and
              germanium carbide will be searched for and studied.  The species chosen for
              study play a significant role in semiconductor growth processes, and are also
              of current interest in astrophysics.  A strong motivation for this work is the
              difference between silicon and germanium compound chemistry and that of their
              carbon-based analogs, and interest in detection and characterization of
              molecules involving multiple bonds to silicon and germanium.

Unstable
              chemical compounds that contain silicon and germanium are believed to play a
              significant role in semiconductor growth processes, but few of these reactive
              molecules have actually been identified or characterized at this time. 
              Establishing sensitive methods for detecting and characterizing reactive
              intermediate molecules involved in chemical vapor deposition is important in
              order to develop predictive capabilities for the production of thin films and
              nanoparticles.  Outcomes from this effort are expected to provide useful
              information for semiconductor processing technologies. 


