Title       : Mechanisms of Optical Transitions in AlGaN Alloys and GaN/Al GaN Quantum Wells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9902431

Award Number: 9902431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jingyu Lin jylin@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hongxing Jiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses optical transitions and carrier dynamics in GaN/AlGaN
              quantum well (QW) structures; mechanisms of optical transitions in AlGaN
              epilayers with high AlN mole fractions; and effects of reduced volume and
              optical confinement on the optical and optoelectronic properties of GaN
              microstructures including micro-disks, prisms, and pyramids. Picosecond
              time-resolved photoluminescence will be used to study the mechanisms of optical
              transitions in a variety of III-nitride samples and structures, and, in
              conjunction with additional characterization techniques, to provide information
              on sample crystalline quality, purity, alloy composition, and quantum well
              interface properties. Emphasis will be placed on AlGaN with high AlN mole
              fractions. 
Additionally, since many III-nitride based applications take
              advantage of heterojunctions and multiple quantum wells (MQW),  AlGaN/GaN and
              AlxGa(1-x)N/AlyGa(1-y)N(y > x) heterojunction and MQW structures and the
              tunability of the bandgap in the alloys from GaN (Eg=3.4 eV ) to A1N (Eg=6.2
              eV) will be explored for achieving greater understanding of fundamental deep
              ultraviolet (UV) optoelectronic phenomena associated with these materials.
              Materials synthesized by both MBE and MOCVD will be studied. Research efforts
              will address properties which affect selective and lateral growth including
              crystallographic orientation as well as buffer layers. Quantum well thickness,
              doping concentration in the barrier layers, alloy composition in the AlGaN
              layers, and post-growth processing conditions will be studied to assess n- and
              p- type doping in AlGaN alloys, defect energy levels, self-compensation, and
              the formation of deep level impurities in AlGaN. Structural characterization
              includes TEM, AFM, SEM and X-ray analyses; SIMS, optical spectroscopy, and Hall
              effect measurements will be used to assess compositional and electrical
              properties.
%%%

