Title       : Acquisition of a Flow Injection System and a Carbonate Carbon Analyzer for the
               Large Lakes Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9902853

Award Number: 9902853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33218              (Estimated)
Investigator: James McManus   (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik T. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902853
McManus

This grant provides partial support of the costs of
              acquiring both a carbonate carbon coulometer and an autoanalyzer (flow
              injection system) for the analysis of nutrients (i.e. nitrite, nitrate,
              phosphate, dissolved silica, ammonia) for the University of Minnesota Large
              Lakes Observatory (LLO) in Duluth.  Both instruments are standard in
              oceanographic and limnological laboratories for the analysis of natural waters
              and sediment samples.  The LLO is undergoing an expansion in faculty (a total
              of seven new faculty) and has recently instituted a new Ph.D. program in Water
              Resources.  As Duluth is remote from existing analytical facilities at the
              Minneapolis main campus and is a natural venue for the study of the Great Lakes
              (especially Lake Superior), provision of these basic analytical capabilities
              for studies of organic carbon and nutrient dynamics in the water column and
              within lake sediments will greatly facilitate in-house research and education
              in the fields of paleolimnology, paleoclimatology and the biogeochemistry of
              sediment diagenesis. Understanding the relationships between nutrient
              availability, primary production and benthic regeneration and/or burial of
              organic carbon is critical for understanding the global carbon cycle,
              paleoclimatology and to aid in prediction of the effects of increasing
              anthropogenic CO2 in the atmosphere.  The U.S. and Canadian Great Lakes are an
              obvious and globally important reservoir for carbon and fresh water due to
              their sheer size.  Understanding the biogeochemistry of these systems is
              therefore important for scientific and economic reasons.  Faculty and students
              at the LLO do not limit themselves to study of the U.S. Great Lakes but have
              been and continue to be involved in study of the East African Rift Lakes and
              large lakes in central Asia.

***

