Title       : Dissertation Research: Patterning of Morphological Diversification: Evolution of
               Floral Form in Tribe Amorpheae (Fabaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9902206

Award Number: 9902206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8669               (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry D. Hufford hufford@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902206
Hufford and McMahon

	Understanding patterns of morphological
              diversity among groups of organisms
is a key aspect of systematics. Among the
              12,000 species of the legume subfamily Papilionoideae, pea-like flowers are
              highly conserved; but in the New World tribe Amorpheae (including "prairie
              clovers" of the genus Dalea) flower forms are highly modified, and often not
              pea-like in shape or development. To understand the historical origins of this
              floral diversity in Amorpheae, graduate student Michelle McMahon, under the
              direction of adviser Dr. Larry Hufford at Washington State University, will be
              analyzing the historical relationships (the genealogy or phylogeny of
              representative taxa) among species in the tribe with emphasis on DNA sequencing
              of the chloroplast matK gene as main source of evidence. In addition, a
              thorough morphometric study will be made of floral forms to assess accurately
              structural similarities in petals and stamens and to establish the full range
              and distribution of variation among taxa.  
	Two approaches will be taken to
              synthesize phylogeny and diversity of floral form. First, developmental data
              for structurally similar (homologous) flower parts, analyzed in the context of
              the molecular-phylogenetic framework, can provide insights about the
              evolutionary transformations involved in the origin of disparate adult forms.
              Second, detailed measurement data of key floral organs mapped onto a phylogeny
              can be compared with null models of evolutionary change in floral characters,
              in order to determine unique as well as recurring patterns of character
              combinations or trends. A synthesis of phylogenetic and developmental data
              should help to explain patterns of floral form in Amorpheae, patterns that may
              be due to correlations between adult and early-stage characters, to accelerated
              rates of evolution, or to evolution through new combinations of recurring
              features. The proposed work will provide techniques for the thorough analysis
              of floral form evolution and an understanding of how patterning of diversity
              among lineages has occurred in Amorpheae.


