Title       : Dissertation Research: Integrating Biosystematics and Phylogenetics: Floral
               Diversity, Polyploidy, and Serpentine Endemism in the Recently Resurrected
               Plant Family Themidaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9902169

Award Number: 9902169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Sytsma kjsytsma@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy F. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Sytsma and Pires 9902169
Integrating biosystematics (the experimental study of
              biological aspects of organismal variation, diversity and diversification) and
              phylogenetics (the study of genealogical relationships of organisms) has been a
              promising avenue for evolutionary and ecological investigations because
              genealogies provide a meaningful historical context for making biological
              comparisons.  Themidaceae is a recently resurrected plant family of onion-like
              herbs from western North America.  The family is an ideal model system because
              several genera (e.g., Brodiaea)  are incredibly diverse with respect to floral
              features, chromosome number, and habitat preference.  Polyploidy - when an
              organism contains two or more sets of chromosomes -appears common, and a
              significant number of species are endemics found only on California islands,
              serpentine soils, or other unusual substrates.  Genealogical histories will be
              derived using both molecular and morphological data.  This historical context
              will be integrated with new
chromosome painting techniques to determine the
              types of polyploidy and
kinds of chromosomal change involved in speciation and
              endemism within the
family.  Chromosome painting can also assist in
              determining which DNA
sequences should be compared for genealogical studies. 
              Preliminary results
have already revealed new morphological, cytological, and
              ecological insights at various taxonomic levels within the Themidaceae.


