Title       : Adaptable and Scalable Techniques for Branching Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9902092

Award Number: 9902092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Eckstein jeckstei@rutcor.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project intends to advance the state of the art in applying parallel
              computing to branching algorithms. The term "branching algorithm" refers to any
              method built on the basic principle of branch-and-bound search for numerical
              optimization, including branch-and-bound, branch-and-cut, and branch-and-price
              methods.

The software platform for the work will be PICO, a C++ class
              library package already being developed in cooperation with Sandia National
              Laboratories. The main goals for the continued development of PICO
              are:

SCALABILITY: the software should scale efficiently up to hundreds or
              thousands of processors. While systems this large are rare today, and some of
              the "hype" surrounding them has quieted, a robust trend towards greater
              parallelism continues in the computer hardware industry. The project intends to
              develop 
technology that will continue to be useful as systems with more
              highly parallel CPU's become available.

SYSTEMS PORTABILITY: the package
              should be adaptable, by changing its run-time parameter configuration, to
              varying communication/computation speed ratios. It should be usable on hardware
              from any vendor offering standard parallel software 
tools (C++ and
              MPI).

APPLICATIONS PORTABILITY: the basic parallel search engine will be
              applicable to a wide variety of branching algorithms without duplication of the
              fundamental programming effort. The same core code should be able to manage
              parallel search applied to any branching algorithm, including relatively
              advanced methods like 
branch and cut. 

OBJECT ORIENTATION: extensible,
              object-oriented software design should help achieve the portability
              goals.



