Title       : Hydraulic Resistance of Large Woody Debris in Step-Pool Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a9902440

Award Number: 9902440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76642              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen E. Wohl ellenw@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9902440
Wohl

The stability of headwater channels with step-pool morphologies
              exerts an important control on downstream water and sediment discharge, and
              aquatic and riparian habitat.  Recognition of this role has prompted increasing
              attention to management and restoration of step-pool channels by resource
              managers, particularly through the manipulation of large woody debris. 
              However, our present understanding of the basic hydraulics and sediment
              transport mechanisms operating in these channels is limited.  The complex
              hydraulic resistance and turbulence associated with coarse clasts, large woody
              debris, and plunging flow over the steps creates velocity distributions that
              are poorly approximated by the standard log-velocity profile, for example. 
              Detailed characterization of hydraulic resistance and associated velocity
              distributions is a key first step in understanding the mechanics of step-pool
              channels.

We propose to use flume experiments to manipulate the variables
              contributing to flow resistance in step-pool channels in order to directly
              measure the proportion of total resistance produced by each of three
              components.  These components are grain roughness, which is provided by the
              skin friction of the bed material; form roughness, which is related to the drag
              produced by pressure differences on the upstream and downstream sides of an
              obstacle to flow that occurs at regular intervals along the channel (such as
              bed-steps); and debris roughness, produced when individual pieces of debris
              that are not regularly spaced along the channel create hydraulic resistance. 
              Recent field research indicates that existing equations for partitioning flow
              resistance associated with these three components do not accurately
              characterize resistance in step-pool channels.  We have developed an
              experimental design involving a series of basic flume configurations for which
              total resistance will be measured under varying conditions of channel gradient
              and discharge.  By systematically altering flume configuration, we can test
              hypotheses regarding the relative importance of each component of hydraulic
              resistance.

The results from the proposed research should allow
              quantification of the hydraulic resistance produced by large woody debris in
              step-pool channels.  This quantification will be very useful to resource
              managers attempting to design and manage rates of wood recruitment and
              retention in headwater channels in response to increasing concern over the
              potential impacts of land use on debris loading in headwater streams.

