Title       : Expansion of the Permanent GPS Network on Kilauea Volcano
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9902903

Award Number: 9902903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Segall segall@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1322,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9902903
Segall

This grant provides partial support for the costs of
              acquiring and monumenting two continuously recording global positioning
              satellite receivers (CGPS) for permanent deployment on Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii.
               This will expand an existing network of GPS receivers on Kilauea to monitor
              ongoing deformation associated with fault slip on the south flank of Kilauea's
              east rift zone and subsurface magmatic activity.  The geodetic data would be
              used in conjunction with previously USGS supported GPS, seismic and tilt meter
              data to model the structural geology, magma chamber shape, size and volcanic
              plumbing dynamics beneath Kilauea; a volcano that continues to be active, has
              produced many recent large earthquakes, and due to evidence of rapid fault slip
              on the south flank, could produce a devastating tsunami in the future.

The
              expansion of the network on Kilauea follows eight years of prior space geodetic
              monitoring of volcanic deformation and seismic monitoring of the volcano. 
              Recent seismic activity on the south flank has migrated along the east rift
              zone, away from the existing GPS network.  Combined geodetic and seismic
              interpretation suggest dike injection and not magma chamber inflation as the
              source of this deformation and seismic energy.  This expansion of the network
              will fill some obvious gaps in the geodetic data.
Continuous GPS data should
              be able to document any deformation rate changes that might now be aliased with
              only discrete, campaign GPS data from this area of new activity and in any
              event will provide a valuable source of data to help us understand volcanic
              deformation and subsurface magmatic dynamics on an active hotspot volcano.


