Title       : Saturation-Based Theorem Proving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9902031

Award Number: 9902031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo Bachmair leo@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Two kinds of calculi are prevalent in automated theorem proving: saturation
              calculi and tableau and connection calculi.  The latter support a goal-directed
              proof search, but the former are superior for logics with equality and similar
              domains.  The most spectacular success for theorem proving to date---the
              solution of the Robbins problem was obtained with a saturation method.

In
              saturation-based deduction, redundancy is a key concept.  Formulas or
              inferences are redundant if they either do not contribute to any derivation of
              a contradiction, or else contribute in ways that allow for alternative, but
              simpler derivations.  If all inferences from a set are redundant, the set is
              called saturated and is inconsistent only if there is an explicit
              contradiction.  Saturation thus provides a basis for checking for
              inconsistency.  An inference can always be rendered redundant by adding its
              conclusion to the current set of formulas, but techniques that avoid the
              generation of redundant formulas are indispensable for efficiency reasons.  The
              objectives of this project are to develop further insights into this process
              and to advance theorem proving technology by focusing on three key
              technique---saturation, extension, and combination.

Approximation refers to
              techniques such as unification and constraints that connect inferences at
              different levels, for variable-free and general formulas, respectively.  The
              performance of saturation provers often depends on the subtle interaction
              between approximation and redundancy techniques. The extension of a formal
              language by new symbols has different uses in automated deduction, e.g., in
              congruence closure algorithms.  This research aims at developing a theory of
              congruence closure as saturation-based decision procedures, to include not only
              standard congruence closure, but also extensions to richer theories and
              elimination methods for translating back to the original
              language.

Saturation techniques have been implicitly used in computer
              algebra methods such as Buchberger's algorithm or Wu's method for proving
              theorems in geometry.  The plan is to reformulate these methods in logical
              terms so as to integrate them in general-purpose provers and apply theorem
              proving techniques to obtain optimized or extended decision procedures.

