Title       : Measurement of Crystal Mush Compaction in the Palisades Sill, NJ, Using Serial
               Sections and X-Ray CT Scans of Partly Melted Oriented Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902890

Award Number: 9902890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100791             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. Philpotts philpotts@geol.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902890
Philpotts
The goal of this research is to quantify the amount of
              magmatic differentiation that takes place in a slowly cooled sheet of intrusive
              basaltic magma as a result of crystal mush compaction. Such differentiation has
              previously been hypothesized only on the basis of chemical variations through
              sheets. However, the recent discovery that plagioclase crystals cluster
              together to form a continuous 3-D network early in the crystallization of
              slowly cooled basaltic magma provides a means of measuring directly the amount
              of compaction that has occurred. This network, when initially formed, has a
              random fabric, but during compaction it can become deformed. The shape of the
              deformed network is most easily measured in samples that have first been partly
              melted so as to convert late crystallizing minerals to liquid, which can then
              be quenched to glass. The shape of the network is measured in serial sections
              or in CT X-ray scans. Such measurements in the thick Holyoke flood basalt of
              Connecticut have revealed a pattern of compaction and dilation that matches
              exactly the pattern indicated by the chemical variation through this flow. In
              the present research, these same techniques will be applied to a classic
              differentiated intrusive igneous body, the Palisades Sill of New Jersey.
              Numerous chemical studies have pointed to compaction having been an important
              differentiation process in this sill. Measurements of the degree of deformation
              of the plagioclase network in a vertical section through this sill will
              indicate directly how much compaction took place during its solidification. If
              these techniques can be applied successfully to the Palisades Sill, they may
              have wide application in the study of the differentiation of larger intrusive
              igneous bodies.


