Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Consequences of the Interaction Between Flooding and
               Drought for Tree Physiology and Diversity in Seasonally Flooded Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9902211

Award Number: 9902211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10774              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Kursar kursar@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Tropical rainforests experience periods of drought and our studies indicate that
              rainforest trees, including Prioria copaifera, are drought-sensitive. Tropical
              forests also are among the most diverse ecosystems on earth and the relative
              absence of drought may permit greater diversity. These observations led the PIs
              to propose that the reduced diversity of many tropical forests may be the
              consequence of periodic drought. The PIs research focuses on P. copaifera, a
              species that occurs in nearly pure stands in Panama even though the
              surrounding, nonflooded forest is highly diverse. In an average year, P.
              copaifera experiences flooding followed by drought. The PIs hypothesize that
              this is a severely stressful environment for plants and that the dominance by
              P. copaifera is explained by adaptations permitting it to survive and grow
              where there is extreme variation in water availability. This hypothesis is
              consistent with recent proposals that tolerance of flooding, while necessary,
              may not be sufficient to explain the distributions of plants in flooded
              habitats. Instead, it is hypothesized that the capacity of a species to respond
              to drought conditions that follow the end of flooding may also be very
              important. P. copaifera also is the main tree harvested in Panama and a better
              understanding of its requirements for establishment will assist in developing a
              management plan for this species.


