Title       : Theory and Implementation of Algorithms for Semi-Definite and Cone Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9902010

Award Number: 9902010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renato D. C. Monteiro monteiro@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In a semidefinite programming (SDP) problem, a linear function of a symmetric
              matrix variable X is minimized subject to linear equality constraints on X and
              the essential constraint that X be positive semidefinite.  Several problems can
              be cast as SCP problems including linear programs, convex quadratic problems
              with convex quadratic inequality constraints, matrix norm minimization and a
              variety of maximum and minimum eigenvalue problems.  In addition, SDP has many
              applications in engineering, combinatorial optimization and
              statistics.

Today, it is known that several interior-point algorithms for
              linear programs can be extended to SDP problems.  As in linear programming,
              many of these methods are polynomially convergent and perform very efficiently
              in practice.  In particular, the class of primal-dual interior-point methods
              and their higher-order variants are very effective methods for solving SDP
              problems.  In contrast to linear programming, there are many ways one can
              compute the Newton search directions used in primal-dual algorithms for SDP. 
              For this reason, the theory of primal-dual methods for SDP is substantially
              more difficult than that for LP.  

This project addresses the development of
              the theory and implementation of algorithms for SDP problems.  The objectives
              of this research consist of: 1) advancing the knowledge of the theory of
              polynomial and superlinear convergence analysis of primal-dual methods for SDP;
              2) studying the existence and asymptotic behavior of continuous trajectories
              for SDP; 
3) developing superlinearly convergent higher-order primal-dual
              methods for SDP problems which do not have strictly complementary solutions; 4)
              developing interior-point primal-dual algorithms to solve more general classes
              of cone programming problems; 5) developing new methods for solving specially
              structured SDP problems based on nonlinear programming techniques; 6)
              implementing these new approaches and comparing them against existing SDP
              methods; 7) extending primal-dual interior point algorithms to the context of
              nonlinear SDP  and complementary problems.

This research will lead to new or
              improved algorithms to find exact or approximate solutions to large-scale
              optimization problems arising in diverse applications in industry, finance,
              science, and engineering.

