Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Survival of the Gutsiest: A Study on Function and Quality
               of Signals Given to an Incoming Predator by Anolis Lizards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9902323

Award Number: 9902323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9693               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Losos losos@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel S. Leal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The evolution of communication is a central theme in behavioral
              biology.
Historically, research has focused on social interactions as the
              selective
force for the evolution of communication, however interactions with
              members
of other species can also be a selective force in the evolution of
              signals.
This project proposes to expand the PI's understanding of the
              evolution of
signals by investigating the function and the quality of the
              signals
performed by three species of Anolis lizards during
              predator-prey
interactions under natural conditions.  Possibilities include
              that they are
either trying to misdirect the predators' attention or trying to
              deter the
predators' attack.  Particularly interesting is the observation
              that
differences among species in the use of conspicuous signals
              against
predators may be correlated with differences among species in
              physiological
capacity.  These questions will be addressed by combining
              observations of
the lizards' responses to predators with laboratory measures
              of lizards'
physiological capacity.

	A major controversy regarding the
              evolution of signals, including those
used by the prey during predator-prey
              interactions, is the nature of the
message encoded in the signals.  Is the
              prey notifying the predator that it
has been detected, or is it producing more
              specific information about its
escape abilities?  Surprisingly, no empirical
              data have addressed this
controversy.  The results of this project promise to
              add to our
understanding of the evolution and quality of signals performed
              during
predator-prey interactions.  Furthermore, because the signals that are
              used
during predation episodes are also used socially, these results can
              also
help us to understand the evolution and quality of signals that are
              used
during social interactions. 

