Title       : RUI: Halogens in Granitic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9902185

Award Number: 9902185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Wolf glwolf@augustana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Augustana College
	      639 38th Street
	      Rock Island, IL  612012210    309/794-7000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902185 
Wolf 
Fluorine is a minor yet important gas emitted from many
              volcanoes.  Its emission indicates that the molten rock, or magma, within the
              volcano contains but is slowly losing its fluorine.  It is important for us to
              learn about fluorine in volcanic systems because the presence of this element
              in magmas affects a wide variety of fundamental parameters such as the
              viscosity, density and polymerization of the magma; the ability of other
              elements to bond within and diffuse through the magma; the conditions under
              which many minerals crystallize or melt; and the distribution of other elements
              between coexisting crystal, liquid and gas phases.  Such knowledge is of great
              value in determining the ability of fluorine to act as a flux and mineralizer
              during the formation of granite-associated magmatic-hydrothermal ore deposits
              if we know more about the effects of fluorine on ore deposition, then we just
              may be able to use this information to help us find future ore deposits.  One
              problem with this optimistic scenario, however, is that we need to know the
              fluorine content of the magma, but how can we do so if most of the fluorine was
              lost from the crystallizing magma before it solidified into rock?  We can do so
              because certain minerals that grow in the magma incorporate fluorine into their
              structures and do not subsequently lose it.  By measuring the fluorine content
              of these minerals, we may be able to determine the fluorine content of the
              magma from which these minerals grew.  However, we can only do so if we know
              how much fluorine these minerals "sucked up" relative to the amount of fluorine
              in the coexisting magma (this parameter is called the distribution or partition
              coefficient), and we can only determine this parameter by doing experiments. 
              Thus, in a series of high pressure and high temperature experiments simulating
              conditions beneath volcanoes, we will grow a variety of different
              fluorine-bearing minerals from a range of magma compositions to determine the
              fluorine contents in the coexisting phases, the corresponding distribution
              coefficients, and, when applied to real rocks, how much fluorine was in the
              magma initially and how much was lost.  

