Title       : Microscopic-Level Investigations of Electrochemical Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9902156

Award Number: 9902156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred E. Lytle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Weaver  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In work supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor 
              Michael J. Weaver at Purdue University is exploring the electrochemical
              interface at the molecular level.  Using vibrational spectroscopic probes of
              the electrochemical interface, including reflection absorption infrared and
              surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy, Weaver and his coworkers probe UHV models
              of the electrode-solution interface.  Electrostatic versus chemical interaction
              effects are probed by comparison between gold and platinum electrode surfaces. 
              Scanning tunneling microscopy studies are used to probe mixed CO/NO overlayers
              on the platinum surface, in order to understand the interaction between
              substrate and overlayer structure.  Computational studies are carried out in
              conjunction with these measurements to provide a more detailed understanding of
              the electronic structure of these mixed overlayers.  The development of surface
              enhanced Raman spectroscopy as a chemically versatile probe of the
              electrochemical interface is an overarching goal of the research project. 

              
In order to understand in detail the behavior of the electrode-solution
              interface in the electrochemical environment,  atomic level structural and
              compositional information is needed.  This research project combines
              vibrational spectroscopic probes, scanning probe microscopy, and calculational
              studies on well chosen model systems to provide this information.  This
              increased understanding will impact the development of improved
              electrocatalysts, fuel cell electrodes, and materials synthesis methods. 
 

