Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Endocrine Mechanisms and Evolution of the Placenta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9902098

Award Number: 9902098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9972               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Moore michael.moore@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
During the evolutionary transition from egg-laying to live-bearing, several
              physical and physiological changes must occur to support the developing embryo.
              The placenta provides an interface between the mother and fetus, allowing
              life-sustaining transport of oxygen, nutrients, and wastes. Because the
              structure of the placenta also permits exchange of steroid hormones, species
              with relatively recently evolved placentation may face the additional challenge
              of regulating maternal and fetal hormone levels. Steroid hormones influence
              pregnancy maintenance and fetal development, so placental effects on these
              processes could have critical consequences. Study of the evolution of placental
              physiology in mammals has been limited, because the placenta of eutherian
              mammals has only one evolutionary origin. However, in reptiles, the placenta
              has evolved recently and independently as many as 100 times, making this an
              ideal group for comparative evolutionary study. This proposal aims to define
              hormonal mechanisms that accompany the evolution of the placenta, and their
              effects on fetal and maternal hormone levels. The PIs  recent work demonstrated
              that,  by reducing the levels of some hormones, the placenta of the mountain
              spiny lizard may contribute to the isolation of the maternal and fetal hormonal
              environments. A series of three additional studies will identify placental
              steroid products, examine interactions between the placenta and fetal glands,
              and determine the placenta's role in mediation of maternal effects on fetal
              hormone levels. This comparative mechanistic approach promises to provide novel
              perspectives on the evolution of placental hormone function.

