Title       : SGER: Radiometric Dating of Whalebones: A Method for Studying Succession and
               Persistence of Whalefall Chemoautotrophic Assemblages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9902095

Award Number: 9902095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50059              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Stephens mstephens@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stephens OCE 9902095

The discovery of  chemoautotrophic communities living on
               seafloor whale-fall carcass in the Santa Catalina Basin in 1987 and later at a
              number of other locations has raised the question about their role and
              importance for deep-sea biology because these communities bear taxonomic
              similarities to other deep-sea reducing environments, such as hydrothermal
              vents.  Whale-falls are of biological significance for the following reasons:
              1) their potential roles as stepping-stones for sulfophilic species in the
              deep-sea; 2) they enhance the biodiversity of the deep-sea; and 3) they can
              provide insights into anthropogenic influences, such as sewage sludge
              emplacement, on the marine environment.

Knowledge of community succession
              and the persistence times of whale-skeleton chemoautotrophic assemblages is
              needed to reliably estimate the abundance of whale-fall habitats and to
              understand the dynamics of the whale-fall communities and their potential roles
              as stepping stones for sulfophilic species.  Time series observations of
              several communities living on carcasses that were experimentally placed on the
              seafloor up to six years ago are providing information regarding early
              succession, but currently there is no method available to accurately estimate
              the ages of skeletons discovered on the seafloor.

This study will develop
              and apply radiochemical methods for estimating the ages of seafloor whalebone
              communities.  Preliminary measurements performed on samples of a known age
              yielded calculated ages that are in good agreement with the known bone ages,
              thus confirming the feasibility of the methods. Further testing of the methods
              and assumptions will be performed using additional whale bones of known age,
              including samples from a carcass that was planted for over 5 years on the
              seafloor.   Upon successful establishment of the technique, application to
              bones from two skeletons discovered on the seafloor (of unknown age) will
              follow.  The dating techniques will be useful for determining the patters of
              succession and development and the persistence times of whale-fall
              chemoautotrophic communities.
.



