Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: An Ecological and Taxonomic Study of
               Ectomycorrhizal Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9902175

Award Number: 9902175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Stephenson sstephenson@mail.fscwv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ashok Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajendra P. Bhatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairmont State College
	      Locust Avenue
	      Fairmont, WV  26554    304/367-4000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902175
Stephenson

Description:  This award is for the US-India
              Collaborative Research: An Ecological and Taxonomic Study of Ectomycorrhizal
              Fungi.  Collaborators Steven L. Stephenson, Fairmont State College, West
              Virginia and Indian botanist Rajendra Bhatt, H.N.B. Garhwal University will
              undertake comprehensive studies of the ectomycorrhizal fungi associated with
              the forests of eastern North America and northwestern India.  These forests
              have a number of ecologically important ectomycorrhizal-forming tree genera in
              common.  The objectives are: 1) to compare the species composition, diversity,
              taxonomy, fruiting phenology, and sporocarp productivity of selected groups of
              these fungi, and 2) to elucidate the biological and taxonomic relationships
              existing between populations of fungi that appear to represent the same
              taxonomic entity in these two regions.  This project will produce new sets of
              data on the phenology, productivity, and diversity of ectomycorrhizal fungi
              from northwestern India that will be compared with a similar body of data for
              the US study site.   

Scope:  This research is a unique opportunity for
              mycologists from the US and India to collaborate on a major study of
              ectomycorrhizal fungi in two distant regions of the world having similar
              assemblages of fungi.  Stephenson has done preliminary research at both test
              sites; Bhatt has studied the fungi of the Indian forest area for much of the
              past decade.  The project contributes to fundamental knowledge on
              ectomycorrhizal fungi and provides a body of new data for launching further
              studies.  A postdoc with expertise in the techniques of modern molecular
              biology will make important analytical contributions to this project and will
              serve as a link with one of the major centers for molecular-based studies of
              higher fungi. The data resulting will have important implications for timber
              management, watershed protection, and reforestation. 



