Title       : Transient Oxidation Stages of Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9902863

Award Number: 9902863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith C. Yang jyang@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9902863
Yang

The goal is to gain new understanding of the stages of
              oxidation where metal surface conditions and impurities are highly controlled.
              A coordinated series of in-situ TEM experiments on copper and aluminum address
              open issues in transient oxidation, including the kinetics of initial oxide
              formation. Sample preparation, initial ex-situ characterization and oxidation
              experiments, as well as data analysis and modeling, are conducted at University
              of Pittsburgh. The initial stages of oxidation are followed by in-situ
              ultrahigh-vacuum transmission electron microscopy performed at the Materials
              Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).  Close
              interaction with the Corrosion Science and Technology (CS&T) Group at Oak Ridge
              National Laboratory (ORNL) is integral to this program. At present the behavior
              of oxygen atoms on metal surfaces are observed by surface techniques such as
              low energy electron diffraction (LEED) and ultra-high vacuum-scanning tunneling
              microscopy (UHV-STM), where the surfaces are highly controlled, or by studies
              of macroscopic oxide growth occurring at high and low temperatures, where
              surface cleanliness at the atomic level is extremely challenging to achieve.
              The planned experiments provide essential information that bridges the gap
              between these two extremes.
%%%
Surface oxidation processes play critical
              roles in environmental stability, high temperature corrosion, electrochemistry,
              certain catalytic reactions and thin film growth as well as extreme fuel
              reactions.  Much is known about oxygen interaction with metal surfaces and
              about the macroscopic growth of thermodynamically stable oxides.  At present,
              however, the transient stages of oxidation, from the nucleation of the metal
              oxide to the formation of the thermodynamically stable oxide, represent a
              scientifically challenging and technologically important area.
***

