Title       : SGER: Assembled Nanotubes as High Sensitivity Resists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9902944

Award Number: 9902944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Gonsalves   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9902944
Gonsalves

Electron projection lithography and, to some extent, X-Ray
              lithography suffer from electron proximity effects, which is highly detrimental
              to the critical dimension in integrated cirduits no matter how sophisticated
              the machines are.  The proposed new concept to virtually eliminate the electron
              proximity effects and to attain sub-100 nm resolution relies on the use of
              anisotropic resists based on inorganic nanotubes-polymer composites
              (NANOCOMPOSITES).  The original solution is to strongly reduce the lateral
              scattering of the secondary electrons by forcing them to follow vertical paths
              imposed by the columnated microstructure of the nanocomposite.  Three
              interrelated phases in the nanocomposite development can be distinguished:
              PHASE 1: the chemical synthesis of a series of high contrast, high sensitivity
              resists (core of the project).  Processing silicate-metal-surfactant mesophases
              by established liquid crystal mehtods and then polymerizing the inorganic
              component will be investigated for producing ordered organic-inorganic resists.
               Nanocomposites will be prepared based on metal oxide/liquid crystal
              cores/nanoparticles with functionalized sufaces onto which PMMA oligomers can
              be grafted and engineered into 3D crystal like non-agglomerated structures. 
              The alignment  of the mesoscopic structures will also be examined in fluid
              media, such that the organic-inorganic resists can be spun on to a wafer,
              magnetically aligned and then frozen in the desired orientation after drying,
              i.e., in the direction of the e-beam.  The latter meets the criterion for
              strongly reducing the lateral scattering of secondary electrons by forcing them
              to follow veritcal paths imposed by the columnated microstructure of the
              anisotropic resis.  PHASE 2: resist characterization and fundamental study of
              radiation-nanocomposite interaction.  These materials will be characterized via
              thermal analysis, viz DSC and TGA for detemining their Tg and thermal
              stability, molecular weight by GPC; adhesion by peel and blister tests;
              rheology by viscometry; film formation by spin-coating and film thickness by
              ellopsometry and profilometry.  The stability of the resist materials will be
              analyzed for their resistance to acids and bases by IR spectroscopy.  SEM, TEM
              including HRTEM, AFM/STM will contribute to invaluable insight into the 3D
              structures of the inorganic-organic nanocomposite materials.  Fundamental
              radiation effects will be essentially followed by in situ FTIR spectroscopy of
              the nanocomposite maintained at variable Temperatures (LN2 to RT) and
              pressures.  PHASE 3: high resolution lithographic tests of the resists
              (Concurrent with 2).  Drawing a series of parallel lines (akin to a grating)
              separated by decreasing distances in the resist with a finely focused e-beam of
              a HRSEM will give an estimation of the resolution and, thus of the proximity
              effects in the resist.  Then a parallel broad e-beam (or X-Ray) flooding a mask
              will be used to test the resist.

A major challenge facing the
              microelectronic industry is the mass production of integrated circuits having
              sub-100 nm critical dimentsions.  A clear-cut advantage of the proposed resist
              is that it might enable sub- 100 nm resolution to be readily attained by
              electron projection lithography and X-Rays lithography without modifying the
              existing industrial machines, which considerably could save development time
              and investment.
 
