Title       : Optical/Photonic Properties of Hybrid Silicon-on-Insulator Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a9902429

Award Number: 9902429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis G. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to explore fundamental materials and optical
              engineering aspects of silicon-on-insulator (SOI) as a means to combine optical
              and electronic functions on a common silicon substrate. Although silicon is not
              an especially hospitable material for most important optical effects, the
              development and introduction of the SOI materials system may have created an
              opportunity for bringing light-based functionality to silicon. The key feature
              of the SOI system is a thin layer of single-crystal Si formed on an insulating
              silicon-dioxide (SiO2) surface. The SiO2 surface makes it possible to insulate
              from each other adjacent electronic components formed in the thin layer of Si.
              The optical opportunity arises because that thin layer of Si can function as an
              optical waveguide, trapping light by the same physical mechanism employed in an
              optical fiber. This project will investigate the optical/photonic properties of
              hybrid SOI materials, a term that refers to a family of materials formed by
              adding overlayers of nanoparticles, nanostructures, molecules, polymers or
              other materials to conventional SOI material. The basic idea is to add optical
              functionality via the overlayers, using the exponential tails of the waveguide
              modes supported by the SOI structure to couple this optical functionality to
              the interior of the Si layer. This is a surprisingly strong effect: it has
              already been demonstrated that a monolayer of noble-metal nanoparticles can
              increase the absorption in the thin SOI Si layer by approximately a factor of
              20 at 0.8 um. Measurements of the optical response of a wide range of hybrid
              SOI materials as a function of frequency (or wavelength) for continuous-wave
              and pulsed illumination in both the linear and nonlinear regimes will be
              studied to reveal the degree to which such materials might become an important
              platform for future optical/photonic and electronic technologies.
%%%
The
              project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
              having high potential technological relevance. The research will contribute
              basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important
              fabrication aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  New experimental materials
              science and optical tools are now available to allow more detailed observation
              of elementary surface and optical processes which when better understood allow
              advances in fundamental science and technology. The basic knowledge and
              understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
              the perform-ance and stability of advanced devices and circuits for computing
              and communications.  An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area.
***

