Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Genetic Analysis of Differential Gamete
               Competion in Crepidula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a9902242

Award Number: 9902242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8595               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marian R. Goldsmith mki101@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Saran Twombly  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Twombly
9902242


The proposed research seeks to quantify male reproductive
              success in order to determine the timing of sex change in a species of slipper
              snail.  This species is hermaphroditic, first male then subsequently female. 
              Sex change is thought to have evolved to occur at the point in the life cycle
              when an individual can produce more offspring as a female than as a male. 
              Environmental factors greatly influence the number of offspring fathered by a
              male, rendering the assessment of their role critical to understanding the
              timing of sex change.  The effect of the environment on male reproductive
              success will be evaluated by varying the number of males competing for
              fertilizations in laboratory mating arrays.  Offspring produced will be
              subjected to paternity analysis and results of the paternity analysis will be
              used to estimate male reproductive success under variable environmental
              conditions.  Estimates of male reproductive success will ultimately be used to
              develop a quantitative model that predicts the timing of sex change in this
              species.   

Hermaphroditism as a life history strategy has evolved in many
              commercially important species (oysters) and their pests (slipper snails) as a
              way to achieve maximum lifetime reproductive success.  Current theory states
              that female reproductive success increases with size while extrinsic pressures
              mediate male reproductive success.  Optimally, males should change sex at a
              size where female reproductive gain exceeds male reproductive gain.  To date,
              no study has attempted to measure male reproductive success under diverse
              environmental conditions.  Understanding how environmental factors affect male
              reproductive success will significantly contribute to the existing theory on
              the evolution and timing of sex change.  Such theory can be directly applied in
              the shellfish industry where the conditions that favor maximum reproductive
              output can be manipulated to increase oyster harvest yields and control pest
              populations.

