Title       : Low-Power, Wide Dynamic Range Companding Analog Signal Processors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9902781

Award Number: 9902781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yannis Tsividis tsividis@ee.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              LOW-POWER, WIDE DYNAMIC RANGE COMPANDING ANALOG SIGNAL PROCESSORS


Y.
              Tsividis, Columbia University


ABSTRACT


The context of this work is
              fully integrated systems involving a computer plus an analog signal processor.
              The latter is often a necessary part of the interface to the physical world in
              such fields as telecommunications, computers, multimedia, automotive systems,
              medical instrumentation, and robotics. When the overall requirements are
              stringent, attempts to implement the required analog signal processor using
              conventional circuits can result in very large power consumption and chip size,
              making the entire system impractical. This can be traced to fundamental
              limitations of linear circuits. To bypass such limitations, this research deals
              with input-output linear signal processors which are permitted to be internally
              nonlinear. This allows the internal signals to have, for a large input signal
              range, a magnitude well above that of noise and interference, while at the same
              time remaining safely below overload levels. The result is adequate signal
              integrity over the entire range, without requiring large power consumption and
              chip size. This approach extends the use of companding (compressing/expanding)
              techniques, commonly employed in signal transmission and recording, to signal
              processing.


The first phase of this research was a study of the signal and
              noise properties of externally linear, internally nonlinear signal processors,
              as well as of signal-noise interactions. Based on the results of this phase, a
              study of appropriate architectures and appropriate choice of internal
              nonlinearities is being undertaken, with low power dissipation and practicality
              of implementation in mind. For these architectures and nonlinearities,
              appropriate circuit design techniques are being developed. Both syllabic and
              instantaneous companding are being considered, along with combinations thereof.
              The final phase of the project will be a demonstration of the results obtained
              using test chips, meant to satisfy a relevant set of stringent specifications.
              Since the processors are internally nonlinear, special attention will be given
              to extensive measurements for their characterization, particularly of
              input-output linearity, noise, signal-noise interaction, and dynamic range. 

