Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics of the Genus Dischidia (Marsdenieae,
               Asclepiadaceae) and of the Tribe Marsdenieae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9902073

Award Number: 9902073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Luckow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902073
Luckow and Livschultz
Dischidia (Asclepiadaceae, milkweed family) is a
              genus of succulent, epiphytic vines native to Southeast Asia.  It is closely
              related to the ornamental plant Hoya (porcelain flower).   The best known
              species, Dischidia major, has pitcher leaves that are used as nesting sites by
              arboreal ants.  The ants accumulate organic debris inside the pitcher leaves
              and the plant grows adventitious roots into the leaf interior and derives
              nutrients from the accumulated debris.  Many of the other 80 or so species of
              Dischidia also occur in arboreal ant nests, and they have a variety of
              structures that may function in ant/plant interactions.  Some species have
              shell-shaped leaves that are held tightly against the bark of the host tree;
              like the pitcher leaves, these may also function as ant houses (domatia). 
              Other species have normal leaves, but have oil-rich structures on the seeds
              (elaiosomes) that are attractive to ants and may facilitate seed dispersal to
              ant nests.  There are also some species that do not occur in ant nests and do
              not have any structures that are considered to function in ant/plant
              interactions. 
	Graduate student Tatyana Livschultz, under the direction of
              Dr. Melissa Luckow of Cornell University, is conducting research on the
              evolutionary relationships of Dischidia to understand the evolution of
              structures that function in ant interactions in this genus.  Information from
              plant morphology and from nuclear and chloroplast gene sequences is being used
              to construct an evolutionary (phylogenetic) tree and retrace the sequence of
              origin of structures that facilitate ant interactions. This phylogenetic tree
              will also be used to revise the infra-generic classification of Dischidia and
              to prepare a detailed monograph of one section of this genus. Additional
              sampling of putative relatives of Dischidia will help in reconstructing
              evolutionary relationships in the tribe Marsdenieae, which comprises ca. 25
              genera and about 570 species (25% of the species in the milkweed family). This
              analysis will test the hypothesized sister-group relationship between Dischidia
              and Hoya, examine relationships among genera in the tribe, and test the
              circumscription of the tribe. The research will provide the basis for a revised
              classification of these under-studied tropical groups. This classification, a
              summary of all available information on these plants, will be available to
              others interested in their evolution, ecology, conservation, cultivation, and
              medicinal properties.


