Title       : Optimization of Photon-Assisted Microwave CVD with Application to Thin Film
               Transistors and Solar Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2001   
File        : a9902437

Award Number: 9902437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne A. Anderson waanders@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902437
Anderson

Amorphous silicon ( a-Si ) and Microcrystalline silicon
              (mc-Si) are technologically important materials for thin film transistors (
              TFT's ) used in flat panel displays and for photovoltaics ( PV ). Both
              materials are prone to degradation when subjected to light exposure or applied
              voltages.  This instability leads to non-optimum device performance, even
              though methods of partially stabilizing the material are known to exist.  This
              study will seek to improve upon these instabilities by introducing special
              processing techniques.  The improved a-Si and mc-Si will be used in fabrication
              of TFT's and PV devices.

Microwave electron cyclotron resonance ( MECR),
              proven to produce more stable materials, will be used for deposition, with an
              assist by illuminating the substrate during the deposition to improve long-term
              stability.  Further processing steps to improve upon device stability will
              include H- dilution, and special dopants.  In a preliminary sense, the PI's
              have explored these approaches with encouraging results.  The use of a Ti
              dopant has increased photoconductivity, without increasing dark conductivity,
              to give an improved ratio.  Illumination of the substrate with an intense light
              beam during MECR ( called PAMECR ) provides a material which has much improved
              stability, when later exposed to light, and greatly improved electrical
              properties.  Use of photon assist has increased carrier lifetime ten-fold in
              a-Si and doubled crystal diameter in mc-Si.  Use of this stabilized material
              should produce stabilized devices.

PA-MECR with H-dilution and various
              dopants will be thoroughly studied to produce more stable a-Si and mc-Si for
              TFT's and PV devices.  In-situ closed ion source mass spectroscopy (CIS-MS)
              will be used to correlate the composition of process gases with variations in
              process conditions.  Films will be evaluated by a variety of techniques
              including FTIK, AFM, TEM, SIMS, AES, XPS, etc.  Devices will be fabricated from
              the best materials and tested for long-term stability.  The use of stabilized
              thin-film Si should lead to TFT's with reduced voltage-induced instability and
              PV devices with reduced photo-induced instability.  Special buffer layers will
              be utilized on low-cost substrates to permit fabricating large-area devices at
              a reasonable cost.  The SUNY beamline at Brookhaven National Lab will be used
              to explore the microscopic interfacial roughness between layers by grazing
              incidence X-ray scattering ( GIXS ) and the correlation with electrical
              performance.  Thus, the primary goal will be developing improved mc-Si and aSi
              with an understanding of the role of the PA process using CIS-MS, FTIR, GIXS
              and other techniques to establish an optimum deposition procedure.  The plasma
              chemistry will be correlated with bonding information in a-Si and H-passivation
              in mc-Si which relate to electrical properties, optical properties and
              stability.


