Title       : Dissertation Research: A Phylogenetic and Biogeographic Analysis of the Tribe
               Sanguisorbeae (Rosaceae), with Emphasis on the High Andean Genus Polylepis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902313

Award Number: 9902313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9460               (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Reveal jr19@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Delwiche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902313
Reveal, Delwiche, and Hibbs
	The high Andes of South America support a
              unique flora of high endemism (restricted geographic range). However, compared
              with the lowland neotropical forest, the history and diversity of the high
              Andean paramo (or puna) vegetation have received relatively little attention
              from systematists. The biogeographic and evolutionary origin of the distinctive
              paramo flora is particularly interesting in view of the presumably recent
              geological origin (Plio-Pleistocene) of the high Andean habitats. Certain
              elements of this flora appear to have evolved in place from lowland ancestors,
              while other elements dispersed to the paramo from cool regions elsewhere, such
              as the Nearctic. The high Andean tree genus Polylepis (family Rosaceae, tribe
              Sanguisorbeae) is a major component of many paramo environments, and is thought
              to include 20-30 species in South America. The multiple layers of flaky bark
              and the small, hairy leaves are considered adaptations to harsh, cold climatic
              conditions in the Andean alpine and high-montane zones. In this project,
              graduate student Malin Hibbs, under the direction of Dr. James Reveal and Dr.
              Charles Delwiche at the University of Maryland, will investigate the
              evolutionary and biogeographic history of Polylepis and its close relatives in
              the tribe Sanguisorbeae using DNA sequence data from chloroplast and nuclear
              genes, in association with morphological studies on flowers and fruits. The
              inferred evolutionary relationships together with extant distribution patterns
              will be used to estimate a biogeographic history of the tribe, and in
              particular to assess the relative roles of elevational speciation (derivation
              of species from ancestors lower or higher in elevation) or lateral dispersal
              (derivation from stocks at similar elevations north or south along the Andean
              axis).
	Suveys of the distribution and status of the genus Polylepis are also
              of importance from a conservation standpoint because the plants are threatened
              by deforestation and introductions of foreign trees, usually members of the
              genera Eucalyptus and Pinus. In addition to the threat to Polylepis itself,
              many other species are dependent upon the habitat that Polylepis provides. Over
              a hundred species of birds have been recorded from Polylepis woodlands in South
              America, many of which are local endemics completely dependent upon this
              habitat. The taxonomic, phylogenetic, and natural-history results from this
              study will serve general biological and conservation goals.

