Title       : Dissertation Research: A Test of Metapopulation Incidence Function Parameters:
               Comparison of Predictions from Census Data and from Experimental Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902113

Award Number: 9902113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9832               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol C. Horvitz carolhorvitz@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9901928
Horvitz & Beck-King

This study investigates the effects of seed
              dispersal by bats and river meander succession on the population dynamics of a
              timber tree, Calophyllum brasiliense, in the Manu Biosphere Reserve of 
              Amazonian Peru. As a river meanders, a system of ridges and depressions
              develops that creates new open soil areas. A spatially structured landscape may
              favor a particular type of seed dispersal system. This study will combine field
              data and modeling to investigate the role of bats as dispersal agents: do they
              confer advantage by distance (colonization) or by the specificity of seed
              deposition (directed dispersal)?  Field studies will investigate: (1) spatial
              relationships of habitat types and rate of new habitat creation by the river;
              (2) recruitment requirements, rates of survival, growth and reproduction of  C.
              brasiliense, in study plots of differing habitat types; (3) seed deposition
              patterns created by bats, including direct observations and radio telemetry. 
              

The benefit that bats provide to large-seeded tropical tree species has
              never been thoroughly studied, even though many large-seeded tropical trees
              depend on bats to disperse their seeds. Tropical rainforest dynamics driven by
              river meanders have received much less study than tree-fall gap dynamics,
              although river meanders may be a predominant cause of successional processes
              throughout the Amazon basin. Understanding dispersal, recruitment and
              demography of C. brasiliense will have applications to its exploitation as a
              sustainable timber resource. 


















