Title       : Causes and Consequences of the Spread of the Early Formative Occupation of
               Pacific Coastal Southern Mesoamerica: Phase 1, the Paleoenvironmental Record
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902787

Award Number: 9902787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector Neff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Arroyo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah M. Pearsall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Hector Neff and his collaborators
              will conduct paleoenvironmental and limited archaeological research on the
              Pacific coast of Guatemala. They will sample the paleoenvironmental record by
              means of cores taken from six to ten sampling locations and analyze the pollen,
              phytoliths and sediments recovered. Extensive radiocarbon dating will be
              conducted to optimize chronological resolution and to allow for a
              reconstruction of vegetational changes from ca. 3,000 to 800 BC. Because
              anthropogenetic factors play a significant role in shaping such tropical
              regions, these data will provide an indirect proxy of human activity. It was
              during this period that human populations in this region shifted from hunting
              and gathering to settled agricultural way of life and the direct presence of 
              pollen and phytoliths from maize as well as indirect evidence of land clearance
              for fields in the cores will provide insight into subsistence change over time.
              The team will also conduct an archaeological survey and limited test
              excavations within the coastal zone to search for early period sites as yet
              undiscovered.

Archaeologists have traditionally focused on the Atlantic
              coast of Middle America in their search for the origins of civilization and
              concentrated on the emergence of Olmec peoples. However as data from other
              regions has been acquired,  it has become increasingly clear that a broader
              regional perspective is necessary. Many of the distinctive characteristics of
              Mesoamerican complex societies coalesced between about 3000 BC and 800 BC in
              the Pacific coastal region. At the beginning of this period, archaic foragers
              were collecting shellfish and other estuarine products on the lower coast and
              exploiting maize and other plants growing on higher ground. By the end of the
              period, large sites with monumental architecture and complex stratified
              societies were being constructed and people in most locations apparently
              depended heavily on maize agriculture. The fundamental shifts in subsistence,
              the increased tethering of people to specific locations, and the beginning of
              major investment in architectural infrastructure constituted the emergence of
              Mesoamerican civilization. Unfortunately this Pacific region has been
              relatively understudied and details of the developmental sequence are poorly
              known. The work of Dr. Neff and his colleagues will both establish an
              environmental context for this cultural progression and provide insight into
              the process itself.

