Title       : Contact Formation to Gallium Nitride: Interfacial Chemistry, Structure and
               Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a9902885

Award Number: 9902885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $523819             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Austin Chang CHANG@ENGR.WISC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Kuech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project represents a collaborative effort between researchers at the
              U. of Wisconsin and Hewlett-Packard Laboratories to address fundamental
              materials science issues in ohmic contacts to GaN. The project takes a
              comprehensive approach to study basic issues concerning the thermodynamic and
              kinetic stability at metal/GaN interfaces as well as the transport behavior for
              both n- and p-type GaN. Extensive electrical and metallurgical characterization
              will be performed on annealed metal/GaN contacts fabricated using selected
              metallizations as model systems. The electrical characterization will include
              current-voltage (I-V) and capacitance-voltage (C-V) measurements to determine
              such properties as the specific contact resistance, the magnitude of the
              Schottky or contact barrier height, and the changes in the space charge region
              near the surface. Metallurgical characterization of the reacted interfaces will
              be performed using a variety of techniques such as SAM, XRD, TEM, HRTEM, SIMS
              and RBS. To address initial stages of contact formation, the evolution of
              interfaces will be examined by x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS),
              utilizing synchrotron radiation. The XPS-based studies on metal/GaN will
              complement the more extensive characterization of the bulk thin films. The
              combined studies are expected to provide insight into metal/GaN interfaces not
              currently available and furnish information critical for development of
              metallizations to nitride based semiconductor devices.
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              high potential technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important fabrication
              aspects of electronic/photonic devices.  New experimental materials science and
              optical tools are now available to allow more detailed observation of
              elementary surface/interface processes which when better understood allow
              advances in fundamental science and technology. The basic knowledge and
              understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
              the performance and stability of advanced devices and circuits for computing
              and communications.  An important feature of the program is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area. The project is co-supported by the
              DMR/Electronic Materials program and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities).
***

