Title       : The Piezomagnetic Matteucci Effect in Nickel Alloys: Development of Theory and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a9902415

Award Number: 9902415
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433144             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Jiles dcjiles@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. Bulent Biner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project lays the groundwork for a description of the Matteucci phenomenon. 
              The research concentrates on one relatively simple class of materials known as
              permalloys in which magnetostriction can be controlled via the alloy
              composition.  The project includes specimen preparation, structural
              characterization, and measurements of the changes in magnetic properties under
              torsional stress at different temperatures and magnetic field strengths.  The
              work will develop a first principles, non-linear, hysteretic, theoretical model
              of the phenomenon.  Nickel is the main material of choice for providing a
              reliable set of basic data; it has many advantages over other magnetic
              materials because of its relatively high magnetostriction, low anisotropy and
              high sensitivity to applied stress.  In addition the magnetostriction
              coefficients along the <100> and <111> directions are comparable, resulting in
              a simpler dependence of magnetostriction on field.  Nickel can be alloyed with
              iron to produce a series of materials with magnetostriction coefficients
              ranging from +7 ppm to -35 ppm, so that the dependence of the response on the
              magnetoelastic properties of the materials can be tested.  All of these factors
              are an advantage in the search for a model to describe the observed behavior of
              the materials.  This work will document the behavior of a relatively simple
              magnetic system under the action of torsional stress, will examine the magnetic
              response of these materials to torque under a variety of experimental
              conditions, and will develop model equations that help us to understand the
              performance of the material. 
%%%
The Matteucci effect, that is the change of
              magnetization of a material with torsional stress, is currently of great
              technological interest because of the search for materials for magnetic torque
              sensors.  Magnetic properties of materials, particularly magnetization, are
              very sensitive to stress, and yet this behavior is poorly understood from a
              scientific viewpoint.  This is because the Matteucci effect is non-linear and
              path dependent (hysteretic).  At present there is no adequate theory that can
              be used to accurately describe this behavior.
***

