Title       : An Integrated Modeling Environment for Urban Change Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1999     
File        : a9902868

Award Number: 9902868
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steen Rasmussen steen@lanl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Fogel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Los Alamos National Lab
	      
	      Los Alamos, NM  87545    /   -

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0317000   Urban Technology                        
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9902868 
Steen Rasmussen
This Urban Research Initiative (URI) project
              will develop an integrated modeling environment (IME) for the
              cross-disciplinary study of a wide range of questions pertaining to urban
              change.  At the core of IME is a model of evolving urban spatial structure
              already successfully applied to the Baltimore/Washington and San Francisco
              metropolitan areas.  This research drastically extends the capabilities of the
              previous model by allowing it to be combined with a variety of other models of
              natural and social processes affecting the urban realm, by strengthening its
              theoretical and technical base and analytical utility, and by integrating it
              within a portable user-friendly environment for the investigation of a variety
              of urban research and policy questions. 

IME consists of two levels.  At the
              IME-1 level the focus is on the changing urban spatial structure, as in the
              earlier model, but now a much more versatile and sophisticated range of urban
              growth models can be built through the linkage with models of other natural and
              human urban subsystems.  The IME-2 level is for investigating more general, not
              directly geographic urban research and policy questions, where urban spatial
              structure is one of several key factors.  The research plan consists of four
              interrelated tasks.  Task One develops the theoretical and technical framework
              for the IME.  Task Two demonstrates and tests the validity of the approach at
              the IME-1 level through modeling and analyzing the growth patterns of selected
              metropolitan regions.  Task Three demonstrates and tests the validity of the
              approach at the IME-2 level with a study seeking to predict land use intensity
              and population distribution through coupling of several different models of
              physical and human processes, including a model of urban spatial structure. 
              Task Four focuses on the computational implementation and dissemination of the
              IME.  Dissemination plans include the development of two (one undergraduate and
              one graduate) Web-based courses on urban change. 

The project is
              multi-institutional, linking together the University of California Santa
              Barbara and two other major federally funded projects:  the Urban
              Retrospectives/Urban Dynamics initiative at the United States Geological Survey
              will provide the data for the metropolitan areas and assist with the more
              routine modeling work.  The Urban Security initiative at the Los Alamos
              National Laboratory will contribute advanced expertise on the theoretical and
              technical aspects of complex dynamic models, and on the coupling of physical
              science models with urban models.  It will also provide access to
              supercomputing resources where needed. 
***


