Title       : Integrated Circuits for Broadband Line-of-Sight RF Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9902802

Award Number: 9902802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory T. Uehara uehara@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. DeLisio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
 
The backbone infrastructure for the emerging broadband integrated
              services digital network (B-ISDN) will primarily employ optical fiber
              technologies due to the extremely high capacities of these channels. An
              attractive alternative, and in some cases companion, to optical fiber for
              giga-bit per second communications is radio frequency (RF) for line-of-sight
              wireless communication. Such channels, including both terrestrial and
              satellite, have many potential advantages over optical fiber counterparts. They
              can be deployed over a wide range of geographical areas; are flexible and can
              easily be expanded; allow rapid deployment in remote environments including
              military, disaster relief, and emergency medical applications; and finally, can
              act as a back-up for optical fiber-based networks. While "high-integration"
              implies single-chip solutions in applications where silicon technologies can
              meet system speed requirements, "high-integration" in electronics for giga-bit
              communication systems means the minimization of total chip and component count;
              i.e., a result minimizing overall board space. Typically, more than one
              integrated circuit (IC) technology will be involved. 


This research
              involves the investigation of signal processing partitioning and the
              development of integrated circuits utilizing various IC technologies including
              InP, GaAs, and silicon to implement highly-integrated portable modems for
              giga-bit per second throughput over wireless RF terrestrial and satellite
              channels. A focus of this research is the development of circuit approaches to
              implement the IF-to-baseband processing in the analog domain. An analog
              solution can potentially result in a much lower power consumption than a
              digital implementation. BPSK and QPSK receiver structures will be examined and
              methods 
to maximize integration and minimize power consumption will be
              studied. An end goal of this research is to develop a working prototype link
              including RF, IF, baseband, and error control functions with a throughput on
              the order of a giga-bit per second and a bit-error rate (BER) on the order of
              10E-12.




 




 



