Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics and Flower Development in the Milkweed Tribe
               Gonolobeae (Asclepiadaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902334

Award Number: 9902334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Schaal schaal@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Raven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Schaal, Raven, and Prinzie
	Graduate student Thomas Prinzie, under the
              direction of Dr. Barbara Schaal at Washington University and Dr. Peter Raven at
              the Missouri Botanical Garden, is studying the evolutionary relationships and
              flower morphology of a neotropical group of milkweed vines (tribe Gonolobeae in
              the family Asclepiadaceae). Milkweed flowers are highly specialized as a result
              of complex fusion between floral parts and the presence of unique corona
              structures. During field work in Texas and Southern Mexico, Mr. Prinzie has
              collected fresh flowers of some 60 species, allowing him to study their
              structure in great detail using both standard anatomical sectioning techniques
              and scanning electron microscopy. By collecting information at many stages of
              development, it will also be possible to trace the origin of the various corona
              structures, whose diversity has confused taxonomists in the past.
	A second
              component of the research consists in reconstructing the evolutionary history
              of this tribe of milkweeds, on the basis of DNA sequence data from two separate
              nuclear and chloroplast genes. The resulting phylogenetic information will
              complement other studies being performed at higher taxonomic levels in this and
              closely related families. By studying the structure and development of
              Gonolobeae flowers in the framework of an independently established phylogeny,
              it will be possible to clarify the evolutionary modifications that gave rise to
              their great diversity, and to illustrate the role of developmental changes as a
              mechanism of diversification.


