Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Effects of a Phonotactic Parasitoid Fly on Geographic
               Variation in Calling Behavior of the Field Cricket, Teleogryllus oceanicus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9902255

Award Number: 9902255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marlene Zuk marlene.zuk@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Songs of the male Hawaiian cricket Teleogryllus oceanicus attract both female
              crickets for mating and deadly parasitic flies.  Males that sing in risky ways
              (e.g., more pulses in the song) are more likely to attract both females and
              flies.  Moreover female crickets attracted to a male may themselves become
              parasitized.  The project goal is to show that the chance of attracting flies
              varies among the Hawaiian islands, and that male singing and female responses
              to song vary accordingly.  Song variables and singing schedules of male
              crickets will be characterized for each island to determine whether risky
              singing is less common where flies are more likely to attack.  Females from
              each island will be tested to see if preference for risky song is reduced on
              islands with high fly attraction.  This research, then, will examine the
              tradeoffs involved in mate attraction versus parasite avoidance.

Mating is
              paramount for animals to pass their genes on to future generations.  This
              project investigates how variation in mating behavior is associated with the
              presence of natural enemies.  This is important for the conservation of animal
              diversity because the distribution patterns of animals are influenced by
              predators and parasites.  It is also crucial for programs in which natural
              enemies such as parasites are used as alternatives to pesticides to control
              pests.  

