Title       : Visually Optimized Supra Threshold Wavelet Image Compression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9902796

Award Number: 9902796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205397             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila S. Hemami hemami@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9902796
Hemami

The increase in image transmission, currently over the
              internet and in the future via wireless personal-communication-services, poses
              new problems with respect to digital image compression.  High-quality images
              can be nearly instantaneously downloaded over a communications link with high
              bandwidth.  However, as bandwidth decreases, the download time increases
              dramatically.  At some point, the user may decide whether to continue or to
              stop the transmission based on the image information available, rather than
              waiting for the entire high-quality image.  If the transmission is stopped at
              any point, the
user should ideally have an image of the highest possible
              visual quality for that amount of data.  Generation of such images requires an
              understanding of the human visual system (HVS), and specifically how the HVS
              perceives compression artifacts in low-quality images. However, HVS research to
              date has focussed only on understanding how the HVS perceives artifacts in
              high-quality images.  The goal of this research is to quantify the perception
              of compression artifacts in wavelet-coded images with visible artifacts.  The
              resulting
algorithms will allow image recognition, object identification, and
              data extraction at lower bit rates than algorithms known to date, and hence
              imaging tasks will require that less data be transmitted or downloaded.

The
              proposed work will experimentally quantify human sensitivity to supra-threshold
              compression artifacts in wavelet-compressed images. Because sensitivity to
              visible artifacts is under evaluation, a top-down test in which actual images
              are distorted is employed, rather than the traditional bottom-up test which
              measures sensitivity to individual basis functions.  Uniform quantization noise
              is added to individual subbands and observers identify the step sizes that
              produce noticeable differences.  Fifteen images selected for their specific
              visual characteristics and over 150 subjects will provide a data set large
              enough to make general characterizations rather than producing image- and
              observer-specific results.  The effects of granular and
overload distortion
              will be separately characterized, and these experimental results will be
              incorporated into quantization strategies and compression algorithms, both for
              traditional and embedded wavelet coders.


