Title       : An Experimental and Theoretical Study of Reactive Wetting in Low Melting Point
               Alloy/Metal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9902783

Award Number: 9902783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333199             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce T. Murray bmurray@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Cotts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Singler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9902783
Murray

To enhance fundamental understanding of soldering, this
              research examines the wetting, spreading and dissolution of low melting point
              solders on metals.  A comprehensive set of experiments is planned in which the
              chronological sequence of drop spreading is synchronized with output from a
              sensitive calorimeter.  Visual data are used to establish the mobility
              relationship, a relationship between contact angle and triple line speed, for a
              particular material system.  Calorimetry data provide information on the types
              of phase changes and reaction phenomena (such as dissolution) that occur as the
              spreading progresses.  This approach should permit the first correlations
              between visual wetting data, phase changes and reactions for metal/metal
              systems.  Direct observations of solder spreading, wetting and reactions with
              metals are correlated with structural characterizations of the samples cooled
              to room temperature, or of similar samples quenched to room temperature at
              various times during the run.  These data provide powerful tests of models for
              reactive spreading.  Using these tests, quantitative mathematical models of
              solder wetting of metallic substrates with and without reaction between the
              substrate and solder are developed.  These computational models, ranging from
              one-dimensional diffusion to a two-dimensional flow model with capillary
              effects and multi-component transport, provide better fundamental understanding
              and the ability to treat different material systems whose requisite
              physicochemical properties are known.  Ultimately, the computational model will
              permit creation of a design tool that can be used to analyze new solder
              systems.
%%%
Although soldering has become a critical, widespread process in
              electronics manufacturing, solder wetting and soldering reactions are poorly
              understood.  Improved understanding is needed to develop new soldering
              procedures particularly at smaller length scales. This will allow the industry
              to meet new challenges, including stricter environmental regulations on the
              material constituents of solder alloys and the demand for the use of
              microelectronic devices in harsh surroundings.
***

