Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An Experimental Test of a New Hypothesis-Brood Parasitism
               as an Influence on Incubation Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9902125

Award Number: 9902125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9710               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin tmartin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Most young animals require extensive protection and nurturing by their parents
              while they develop. This is particularly true for young birds, because early
              development takes place within an egg. The parents (usually the female) must
              provide protection and warmth if the egg is to survive. The more time a female
              bird can spend sitting on her eggs, the better chance those eggs have of
              surviving, hatching and contributing to the next generation. However, females
              must also forage to get the food they need for continued health. This activity
              typically requires getting off the nest, thus exposing the eggs to cooling and
              possible predation. However, in many species, the females alleviate this
              tradeoff through male incubation feeding - a behavior in which the male brings
              food to the female, thus extending the time she can spend on the nest.
              Researchers have primarily considered two factors that might control patterns
              of incubation: the risk of nest predation, and the climate around the nest. 
              Where potential predators are common, females should reduce the number of times
              they go to and from the nest, and stay on the nest as long as possible.
              However, because incubation feeding by males can give away the location of the
              nest to predators, incubation feeding should be minimal. In contrast, where
              climates are very cold, females should spend as much time as possible on the
              nest, get off only for short periods, and rely heavily on incubation feeding.
              
However, there is a third factor that has not yet been considered, and which
              may cause large shifts in incubation behavior: egg removal by brood parasites,
              such as the brown-headed cowbird. Cowbirds and other brood parasites lay their
              eggs in the nests of other species, leaving these "hosts" to raise their young.
              Birds raising cowbirds typically raise fewer of their own young, partially
              because cowbirds often remove eggs from the nest of the host before or after
              they place their own egg in the nest. Egg removal may be more likely when an
              adult does not occupy the nest, thus the female should spend more time on the
              nest if she believes a cowbird knows the location of her nest and is thus
              likely to remove one of her eggs. Indeed, in previous work, the PIs found that
              parasitized females spend much more time on the nest than unparasitized
              females. The PIs will conduct tests to determine if Yellow Warblers actually
              shift their incubation behavior in response to the threat of egg removal by
              cowbirds. The PIs will use video cameras to record the incubation behaviors of
              unparasitized Yellow Warblers. In one random subset of nests, the PIs will
              attract cowbirds to the nests where they will interact with the Yellow
              Warblers, and then the PIs  will experimentally parasitize these nests by
              replacing one yellow warbler egg with an infertile cowbird egg. The PIs will
              then film nests again to see if they have changed their incubation behaviors to
              protect the nest from the perceived threat of egg removal. For comparison, in
              another random subset of nests, after initial filming, the PIs will play the
              song of a Catbird, a bird which represents no threat to the nest, and mimic the
              disturbance caused by experimental parasitism, but the PIs will not place a
              cowbird egg in the nest. In these nests, the PIs  will again film these nests,
              to determine if birds are reacting to the disturbance, rather than the
              parasitism itself. Finally, the PIs will also film naturally parasitized nests
              to compare incubation behaviors with the artificially parasitized nests. This
              experiment will allow the PIs to provide the first test of the importance of
              brood parasitism as a determinant of incubation behavior. 

