Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Hybridization in the Evolution of
               Argyranthemum in Macaronesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9902276

Award Number: 9902276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen rjansen@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902276
Jansen and Goertzen
	Oceanic islands are ideal natural laboratories
              for studying evolutionary processes.  Their isolation, environmental
              variability, and easily determined ages have aided biologists ever since Darwin
              in unraveling the forces behind evolutionary change.  Our understanding of
              natural hybridization, a potentially major force in plant and animal evolution,
              has been advanced considerably by studies of species in the Hawaiian and Juan
              Fernandez islands in particular. Under the direction of Dr. Robert K. Jansen at
              the University of Texas at Austin, graduate student Leslie Goertzen is studying
              the role of hybridization in the evolution of the plant genus Argyranthemum
              (family Asteraceae). This group of 24 species found only in the Macaronesian
              archipelagos (Canaries, Madeira, and Salvage islands) is a spectacular example
              of adaptive radiation throughout the islands' elevational zones and has many
              characteristics which make it a model system for addressing evolutionary
              questions.  This study will examine evidence for ancient introgression in the
              genus as well as the dynamics and consequences of contemporary species contact.
              A phylogenetic framework for these island plants will be constructed using
              variable nuclear DNA sequences, and a statistical comparison between these data
              and maternally inherited chloroplast DNA will be performed.  Preliminary data
              suggest significant incongruence between the two data sets for several species
              pairs, raising the possibility of introgressive hybridization during the
              evolution of these lineages. 
	Specific cases of contemporary hybridization
              will be examined by screening
natural and hybrid populations for
              species-specific nuclear and chloroplast genetic markers. This will allow the
              direction and extent of interspecific gene flow, if any, to be determined.
              Potential hybrids of species from different elevational zones are of special
              interest, for understanding factors causing shifts into new habitats. In
              addition, the analyses will provide data of relevance to conservation efforts
              for several rare species and contribute to the understanding of a theoretical
              process which threatens many organisms in isolated conditions, extinction via
              hybridization.


