Title       : SGER: In Vitro Assays for Mitochondrial Docking and Fusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9902314

Award Number: 9902314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99711              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet M. Shaw shaw@bioscience.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The establishment and maintenance of proper mitochondrial morphology involves
              regulated mitochondrial fusion events.  Although mitochondrial fusion is
              observed in a wide range of organisms and cell types, very little is known
              about the molecules or mechanisms that coordinate the fusion of the inner and
              outer mitochondrial membranes.  An important observation is that a
              transmembrane GTPase called Fzo1p regulates mitochondrial fusion in the budding
              yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  A complete understanding of the biochemical
              activity of Fzo1p as well as other proteins necessary for fusion will require
              in vitro assays for each of the distinct steps of fusion.  The purpose of this
              project is to develop in vitro assays that measure mitochondrial docking and
              membrane fusion in a reconstituted system using components isolated from yeast
              cells.  These assays will exploit novel fusion proteins which contain green
              fluorescent protein (GFP) and blue fluorescent protein (BFP) and which can be
              targeted to different mitochondrial compartments.  These proteins will be used
              to develop (1) a light microscopic assay for mitochondrial docking and
              aggregation, and (2) a complementation assay for actual fusion.  The
              complementation assay will employ a construct of BFP and GFP linked together,
              which exhibits fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), and a specific
              protease, which when fusion occurs cleaves the BFP-GFP linkage and causes loss
              of FRET.  The assays will be used to study the role of wild-type and mutant
              forms of Fzo1p.  Once developed, these assays can also be employed to identify
              and study other proteins involved in each step of the fusion process. 
              Ultimately, the assays may lead to an understanding of how the mitochondria
              coordinate the separate fusion of their outer and inner membranes.


