Title       : Housegroup Excavations at Loma Zorrillo & Tenam Rosario
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9902834

Award Number: 9902834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81501              (Estimated)
Investigator: Olivier De Montmollin olly@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Olivier de Montmollin will conduct
              two seasons of archaeological research at the sites of Tenam Rosairo and Loma
              Zorrillo followed by an additional season of laboratory analysis. Both Mayan
              sites, located in Chiapas Mexico, were occupied during the Classic period and
              thus have the potential to shed light on Mayan social organization at the
              civilization's height. Prior mapping at both sites have revealed complexes of
              structures. Loma Zorrillo has 3 domestic wards and 3 civic plazas with 159
              housemounds arranged in 90 household groups. Tenam Rosario has 4 domestic wards
              and 10 civic plazas with 239 housemounds arranged in 114 housegroups. The
              housemounds at both sites are stone-lined, some with interior features such as
              partitions or small platforms and/or exterior features such as porches. In
              addition to dwellings, other domestic housegroup features include alters,
              sub-dwellings, boundary walls, terraces bell-shaped pits and other features.
              Thus the wealth of material at both sites provide an excellent basis for
              examination of within site variation. Dr. de Montmollin and collaborators will
              excavate a series of structures to determine the degree of variation in wealth
              as measured by ceramics, lithics, shell, bone, weaving implements, figurines
              and other cultural materials. Broad horizontal exposures will allow for spatial
              analysis and for household size and degree of internal differentiation to be
              determined.

The goal of the research is to understand how Mayan civilization
              was structured and how large numbers of people were integrated into functioning
              social units. It is clear based on past work in the region that social
              differentiation existed and wealth was not evenly distributed across the
              population. However the amount of difference and whether it was in degree
              rather than kind is still unknown. Based on numerous publications by many
              authors, Dr. de Montmollin has distilled four potential models of prehistoric
              Mayan class structured social organization and the proposed research will allow
              him to select among them.

