Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Lost Herbivores: Phylogeny and Floral Host
               Preferences of Callandrena Bees (Hymenoptera: Andrenidae: Andrena)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9902301

Award Number: 9902301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9671               (Estimated)
Investigator: Beryl B. Simpson beryl@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902301
Simpson and Larkin
	Callandrena is a New World subgenus of ca. 80
              species in Andrena, the largest genus of bees, with over 1200 described species
              worldwide. Preliminary analysis of DNA sequence data casts doubt on the current
              understanding of the subgenus; species relationships are different from what
              was previously thought based on morphology, and members of other subgenera are
              apparently nested within the phylogeny of Callandrena itself. Graduate student
              Leah Larkin, under the direction of Dr. Beryl Simpson at the University of
              Texas, will be studying the phylogeny of this group of bees, emphasizing
              mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences as primary sources of data, sampled
              from as many species as can be collected from field work in Mexico and the U.S.
              The estimate of evolutionary relationships (phylogeny) which results will
              provide a better understanding of a large group of North American bees, and
              will contribute to a phylogeny, currently lacking, of Andrena as a whole.  From
              the phylogeny, one can infer which morphological characters are too variable
              for classification purposes, information which may be applicable to the study
              of other bee groups.  Additionally, the phylogeny will permit further studies
              of behavior and adaptation, including seasonal activity, nest architecture, and
              nest parasites. 
	The subgenus Callandrena has also served as a model system
              for the study of the evolution of bee diet choice in pollen foraging, but the
              evolutionary changes in these behaviors have not been amenable to analysis
              without a robust phylogeny to guide interpretation of host shifts and direction
              of change. Bees collect pollen from flowers to provision their nests, and in so
              doing exhibit a range of hostplant specificity from generalist (numerous and
              different plant species, called polylectic) to specialist (few species, usually
              within a single plant family, called oligolectic) to rare cases of monolecty
              (use of a single plant species). While this behavior is analogous to hostplant
              choice in herbivorous insects in general, its evolution is poorly understood.
              Pollen choice in numerous species of Callandrena will be studied in the field
              in Mexico and the U.S., and will be inferred from analysis of pollen loads in
              museum specimens of bees maintained in major collections. This study will be
              the first to evaluate thoroughly pollen host choice in an evolutionary context
              in bees. The study will improve understanding of the evolution of bee behavior
              and the evolution of herbivory in general. 


