Title       : New Millimeter-Wave Heterodyne Interferometric Reflectometry Technique for Fast
               and Accuraate Assessment of Pavement Surface Condition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9902024

Award Number: 9902024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180621             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cam V. Nguyen cam@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas V. Scullion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Texture and Transverse profile measurements of highway surfaces are critical for
              highway safety.  It is the texture which provides skid resistance and the
              transverse profile that dictates surface drainage.  Currently, highway agencies
              can not measure these properties in real time.  High accurancy lasers are under
              investigation but these are fragile and cost prohibitive for full-scale
              implementation.  The proposed research will focus on the research and
              development of a new fast, accurate, and low-cost technique for measuring
              pavement surface characteristics in real time, including transverse profiles,
              micro and macro textures, and detecting areas of mix segregation in newly
              constructed asphalt surfaces.  This new technology will have a major impact on
              both safety and new construction quality control.  The new technique will be
              based on the principles of heterodyne, reflectmetry, and interferometry
              implemented using millimeter waves in the very high frequency range of 90 to
              100 GHz.  Reflectometry is used in microwaves and optics for reflection
              measurement.  Heterodyne interferometry is used in optics as one of the best
              methods for accurate measurment of surface roughness of electronic materials. 
              Compared to other technologies, millimeter waves have two uniquely distinct
              characteristics, which can be explained for accurate non-destructive,
              non-contact high-resolution surface measurements:  higher frequencies and
              larger absolute bandwidths.  These characteristics together can produce systems
              that have very fine resolution and small size.  The proposed technique appears
              to be the best candidate that can meet all the key specifications required for
              the pavement problems addressed in this project, namely fast and accurate
              measurement, very fine resolution, low cost, and small size.  There are four
              major objectives in this research.  The first objective is to research and
              develop a new millimeter-wave profilometer in the frequency range of 90 to 100
              GHz.  The second objective is to analyze surface reflections and interference
              patterns.  This is needed for accurate data acquisition and processing of the
              measured results.  The third objective is to fabricate various laboratory test
              specimens needed for the evaluation of the new sensor.  The fourth objective is
              to evaluate the new sensor in both laboratory and field tests.  The proposed
              new technique has not yet been studied and developed for civil engineering
              applications.  It thus not only will provide a unique solution for the pavement
              surface problems addressed here, but also should open up a whole range of new
              applications, which have not been feasible with available techniques and
              systems.  Successful research and development of this novel technique for
              pavement applications will demonstrate feasibility of using millimeter waves in
              the 90 to 100 GHz range for high-resolution pavement surface measurements, and
              pave the way for future research and developments of advanced low-cost
              millimeter-wave sensors for civil engineering applications.  The research
              proposed should therefore have a strong impact on a number of current and
              future applications of civil engineering.
