Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics of Palm Subtribe Oncospermatinae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902082

Award Number: 9902082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Doyle jjd5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902082
Doyle and Lewis
	The palm family has been recognized as a distinct
              group of plants throughout recorded history, but taxonomic and phylogenetic
              relationships among the ca. 200 genera are still unclear and are the subject of
              continuing study by a small group of specialists worldwide.  It has been
              particularly difficult to discern reationships among the 112 genera within the
              lineage containing tribes Areceae, Cocoeae, Geonomae, and Hyophorbeae.  In
              collaboration with other researchers working on portions of this lineage,
              graduate student Carl Lewis, under the supervision of Dr. Jeff Doyle at Cornell
              University, is conducting a phylogenetic study of Areceae subtribe
              Oncospermatinae, a group of eight genera comprising an estimated 12 species
              distributed on islands and neighboring landmasses of the Indian Ocean. 
              Morphological data and DNA sequences will be used to resolve relationships
              within the subtribe, and to evaluate different biogeographic hypotheses for the
              group.  The phylogenetic position of subtribe Oncospermatinae will also be
              determined, and the findings will be integrated into emerging hypotheses of
              relationships within the entire lineage. 
	Morphological observations were
              collected from herbarium specimens and from living palms in the field, and
              these data support the hypothesis that subtribe Oncospermatinae is a natural
              lineage.  Sequence data were obtained from two different DNA regions within the
              chloroplast genome that are commonly used in phylogenetic research at low
              taxonomic levels.  Unfortunately, these regions are not variable enough to
              provide information about relationships between palm genera.  In a search for
              DNA data more suitable for this study, the investigators have developed primers
              for amplifying and sequencing a large intron of the nuclear gene encoding
              malate synthase (EC 4.1.3.2), which has not been used previously in
              phylogenetic research.  Preliminary data show the malate synthase intron to be
              a good source of phylogenetic information in palms, with sufficient nucleotide
              substitutions to discriminate among genera. A more focused investigation will
              be conducted on the important genus Oncosperma, which contains five or more
              species occurring over a broad region of coastal and insular southeast Asia,
              with one goal being a comprehensive taxonomic monograph of the group.


