Title       : Broadband Wireless ATM Local Loop Using Millimeter Wave-Band
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a9902846

Award Number: 9902846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohsen Kavehrad mkavehrad@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research aims to unite broadband communications with wireless access thus
              making possible un-tethered access to a wide range of broadband communications
              services, such as interactive multimedia communications, high resolution image
              or large file transfer, and high resolution video teleconferencing. This is
              done through millimeter wave radio technology and small high-gain antennas.
              This technology is termed next-generation local multi-point distribution system
              (NG-LMDS). This is intended to be a cost-effective competitor to all wire-line
              proposed alternative methods of broadband distribution. Broadband wireless
              access will afford potentially enormous bandwidth on demand to people. It has
              the potential to simplify access to interactive business, information and
              entertainment services by subscribers in fixed locations.

Establishment of a
              local wireless access network which integrates the most advanced
              millimeter-wave radio technology, coupled with asynchronous transfer mode
              Wireless Access Point (WAP) will provide homes, schools and businesses with the
              benefits of choice as regards the expanding list of broadcast and
              bi-directional multimedia communications services. The research structure
              involves:

Statistical analysis of interference in an ATM-LMDS cellular
              configuration.

Design of fixed-cellular ATM-LMDS architectures; with minimum
              interference by taking advantage of high-gain antennas, frequency-segmentation
              and polarization interleaving. 

Analysis of spectral-efficiency in frequency
              reuse ATM-LMDS cellular architectures. 

Extending the dynamic range of
              adaptive-coding by combining it with adaptive modulation in ATM-LMDS cellular
              architecture.

Investigating the influence of feedback channel impairments
              and transmission delay on the performance of adaptive rate systems in
              preserving an end-to-end Quality-of-Service in ATM-LMDS wireless
              loop.

Analysis of delay and throughput in ATM-LMDS fading channel, using
              adaptive rate coding techniques. 

Assessing effects of adaptive transmission
              rate on the interference level of ATM-LMDS cellular architecture.


