Title       : GOALI: Development of an Ultrasound-Based System for Dynamic Intra-Coronary
               Plaque Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9902011

Award Number: 9902011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olusegun J. Ilegbusi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Feldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Blomeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902011
Ilegbusi
Although all segments of the coronary artery tree are exposed
              to the same systemic risk factors (high LDL cholesterol, hypertension, nicotine
              metabolites, etc.), all the clinically important aspects of coronary heart
              disease are manifest as local phenomena at specific locations within the
              coronary tree.  Most notably:

   The initial atherosclerotic lesions appear
              eccentrically at bends and near bifurcations of the coronary arteries.
  
              Lesion progression is most commonly eccentric and localized, at least until the
              most advanced stages of the disease.
   Myocardial infarction (i.e. heart
              attack) occurs as a result of rupture of a specific lesion, often one that does
              not occlude more than 50% of the artery, followed by the formation of a lumen
              occluding thrombus (blood clot) over the lesion.

Extensive study of the
              post-mortem coronary arteries has made it clear that all of these phenomena are
              intimately dependent on the detailed blood flow pattern, primarily the shear
              stress exerted by the blood on the endothelial lining of the artery.  Low shear
              stress promotes initial atheroma formation and growth while high shear stress
              and (probably) shear stress gradient promote plaque rupture with subsequent
              thrombus formation on potential artery occlusion.

To date, it has been
              impossible to investigate local blood flow and shear stress patterns in vivo,
              either in humans or experimental animals, because the insertion of a measuring
              catheter into the coronary artery completely distorts the flow-field being
              measured, while current magnetic resonance imaging techniques (MRI) do not have
              adequate resolution. We propose developing an ultrasound-based system for
              determining hemodynamic characteristics and atherosclerotic plaque growth in
              real time. First, the three-dimensional anatomy of the artery will be
              determined by reconstructing the image data obtained after directional
              atherectomy ultrasound and biplane coronary angiography. This luminal geometry
              will then be processed into a grid structure suitable for use in computation.
              The detailed intravascular flow characteristics will be obtained from numerical
              solution of the transport equations governing the conservation of mass and
              momentum. The image processing and numerical models will be verified
              independently and the final results will be recorded in a database and
              displayed on the computer to follow the progression of atherosclerotic plaque.
              The long-term objective of the proposal is to provide a tool with which the
              relationship between hemodynamics and atherosclerotic plaque can be further
              investigated. We envisage that an award will provide leveraging to seek
              additional funds to test the system thus developed through animal studies.

              
This proposal is a collaborative program between Northeastern University,
              with expertise in numerical modeling and image analysis, two Harvard affiliated
              hospitals, with expertise in cardiology, ICUS and biplane angiography, and
              Quinton  Instruments Co. with expertise in medical instrumentation. Quinton
              will closely advise the project on the practical aspects of integrating our
              system with both hemodynamic and imaging systems. This will accelerate the
              time-to-market of our system and ensure that it is compatible with the needs of
              a broad spectrum of catheterization laboratories worldwide. If the project is
              successful, it will be a logical addition to the Quinton product line. Our
              collaborators at the hospitals will perform simultaneous ICUS and biplane
              angiography to provide image data. The project is expected to be completed in
              36 months.

