Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary Ecophysiology of Low Molecular Weight Heat
               Shock Protein Expression in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9902295

Award Number: 9902295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9136               (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Ackerly dackerly@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The work supported through this dissertation improvement grant will be focused
              on the ecophysiology and evolution of the heat shock protein (HSP) response in
              plants. The heat shock protein response is a ubiquitous and well-characterized
              cellular response to heat stress exhibited by all organisms. However the role
              of HSP expression in the evolution of thermotolerance is not well understood.
              The experiments the PI will conduct involves simulated heat stress treatments
              on closely related plant species from desert and coastal environments both
              under controlled greenhouse conditions and in the field. After the heat
              treatments, leaf material will be collected and analyzed for HSP expression.
              The proposed experiments are necessary for understanding the significance of
              variation in the HSP response both for the distribution and abundance and the
              evolutionary diversification of land plants in relation to climate and
              environmental stress. Understanding the role of HSPs for survival in stressful
              environments will also be useful when making predictions about vegetation
              response to global climate change. In addition, results from this research may
              be useful for genetic engineers trying produce increased thermotolerance in
              selected crop species.

