Title       : Investigating Heterochrony in the Fossil Record: A Geochemical, Morphometric,
               and Phylogenetic Study of Thecideidina (Brachiopoda), Triassic-Recent.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a9902984

Award Number: 9902984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra J. Carlson carlson@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard J. Spero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902984
Carlson

Heterochrony, the evolutionary consequences of changes in
              the rate and timing of development, is considered to be one of the most
              important means by which evolution occurs.  Documenting heterochrony fully
              requires knowledge of growth rates, phylogenetic relationships, and ontogenetic
              size and shape change for putative ancestors and descendants.  The goal of this
              study is to understand the role of heterochrony in the origin and evolution of
              thecideidine brachiopods, a poorly understood group of small, benthic,
              cemented, pan-tropical, cryptic invertebrates with a long fossil record
              (Triassic - Recent) and novel morphologies.  We will use parsimony-based,
              morphologic phylogenetic methods to develop robust hypotheses of relationship
              among thecideidine species and genera, and of thecideidines to other
              articulated brachiopods.  We will document thecideidine growth rates by
              analyzing the oxygen isotopic composition of microsamples of successive shell
              growth layers, to quantify size-age-growth relationships throughout ontogeny. 
              Finally, we will utilize multivariate morphometric methods to chronicle shape
              change that accompanies ontogenetic size increase and characterizes the range
              of observed adult morphologies.  Phylogenetic, geochemical, and morphometric
              results will be combined to test whether, and in what ways, heterochrony is
              responsible for the origin and evolution of thecideidines. The results of this
              study will provide a rare, rigorous test of heterochrony in the fossil record
              by accounting for all three primary components:  phylogenetic relationship,
              growth rate, and shape and size change. 


