Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessment of Endocrine Disruptor Effects in Anurans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9902014

Award Number: 9902014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6050               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tyrone B. Hayes tyrone@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Amphibians have been proposed as bio-indicators of environmental change.
              Amphibian populations may be in rapid worldwide decline for reasons that are
              still unclear. One proposed contributor to this decline is widespread
              contamination with chemicals that disrupt hormone systems. This study is
              designed to evaluate ways of testing the effects that eco-estrogens have on
              frogs and toads (anurans). Eco-estrogens include chemicals mostly designed for
              agricultural and industrial use and that have been proposed to mimic the
              effects of estrogens. The PIs will use anurans to examine the effects of
              naturally produced (endogenous) estrogens and compare the effects of endogenous
              estrogens to the effects of eco-estrogens. The PIs found that the endogenous
              estrogen effects vary according to species and developmental stage. The PIs are
              testing multiple species and multiple life stages to determine if specific
              eco-estrogens consistently act like endogenous estrogens throughout all of our
              tests.

Endogenous estrogens cause adult female frogs and toads to produce
              egg yolk components (vitellogenin). Males do not normally produce vitellogenin
              because they do not normally make eggs. However, vitellogenin production can be
              induced in males exposed to both endogenous and eco-estrogens. Before
              vitellogenin can be produced, the genetic instructions to produce vitellogenin
              (vitellogenin mRNA) must be made. The PIs will survey wild male frogs and toads
              at sites throughout California to determine if their vitellogenin genes are
              turned on. The PIs shall use this information as the first step in developing a
              reliable system for detecting estrogen exposure in non-laboratory animals.

