Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Spiral Galaxy Disks; Dust Control, Spiral
               Structure, and Star Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9902653

Award Number: 9902653
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosa A. Gonzalez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5950,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902653
Gonzalez
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Rosa A. Gonzalez with support
              for twenty-four months to work at the Observatoire de Geneve at the Universite
              de Geneve in Sauverny, Switzerland, with a group of researchers led by Dr.
              Pfenninger.  Twelve months is being supported by NSF's Directorate for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences' Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities.
Dr. Gonzalez will apply two original and successful photometric
              methods to address two important and outstanding questions:  the dust content
              and distribution of spiral galaxy disks, and the nature and driving mechanisms
              of spiral structure itself.  She will use a method she has developed called
              "Synthetic Field Method" to measure average total extinction through the disks
              of nearby spiral galaxies, from colors and counts of background galaxies. This
              will be the largest study to date of total extinction in spirals, and will
              allow the first assumption-free determination of the radial distribution of
              dust in galaxy disks.  By combining optical and near-infrared data into a
              reddening-free, supergiant-sensitive photometric parameter, and comparing the
              results to stellar population synthesis models, she will search for azimuthal
              stellar gradients and measure the angular velocity of the spiral pattern (in a
              different sample of galaxies).  Her goal is to secure the first statistics on
              the frequency of density waves in the stellar component of spiral
              galaxies.
The Geneva Observatory has mechanic and computer workshops,
              instrument calibration labs and a computer center.  It has an active
              participation within the European Southern Observatory (ESO) and the European
              Space Agency.  The participation in the ESO will offer Dr. Gonzalez access to
              unique telescope facilities.  Dr. Pfenniger has published extensively on galaxy
              dynamics.
***

