Title       : Adaptive Software Implemented Fault-Tolerance for Networked Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9902026

Award Number: 9902026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravishankar Iyer iyer@crhc.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Adaptive Software-Implemented Fault Tolerance for Networked Systems
           
                          (Project Summary)

This project will conduct an experimental
              study to investigate
developing a set of general-purpose, fault tolerance
              services in a
networked environment.  The research will focus on designing
              a
software-implemented fault tolerance (SIFT) layer, Chameleon,
which will
              provide fault tolerance services to user applications,
manage user processes
              across the network, provide rapid error
detection, and initiate recovery from
              errors in the hardware,
the operating system, applications, and the SIFT
              layer.  In other
words, Chameleon will protect all of the key components in
              a
distributed system, including itself.

Our primary objective in developing
              Chameleon is to define
and demonstrate the SIFT architecture, which includes
              static and
dynamic reconfigurability and an extensive suite of
              error
detection and recovery protocols in an integrated environment.

We
              will investigate ways to make Chameleon both statically and
dynamically
              reconfigurable.  Dynamic reconfigurability will allow
Chameleon to change the
              level of reliability services that it
provides during the lifetime of the
              target.  In addition,
Chameleon will be constructed to facilitate the creation
              of new
fault tolerance techniques for the hardware, operating system,
and
              applications.  For static reconfigurability, we envision
providing a library
              of fault tolerance techniques from which a
customized fault tolerance solution
              can be provided to a target
application.  A specific solution will be composed
              of a range of
distributed error detection and recovery techniques to
              provide
the level of dependability required by the application.

