Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Disease Resistance in the genus
               Lycopersicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9902342

Award Number: 9902342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10133              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Langley chlangley@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


Plant disease resistance genes encode receptors which are capable of
              recognizing different pathogens and signaling defense responses. A defense
              response triggered by the interaction between a host and pathogen limits the
              pathogen spread throughout the plant. The basis of disease resistance to the
              bacterial pathogen, Pseadomonas syringae pv tomato, has been extensively
              characterized at the molecular level within the host species of Lycopersicon
              pimpinellifolium This species is a close relative Of the edible tomato, L.
              esculentum, and breeding between these species has permitted the introduction
              of disease resistance into the crop species. Resistance is conferred by the Pto
              gene which encodes a receptor and signals a defense response to this bacterial
              pathogen. The purpose of this study is to determine whether other species of
              Lycopersicon are resistant to this pathogen and if resistance is conferred by
              the Pio gene or by different genes within these species.  Functional analysis
              of the Pto gene has identified the regions of the gene involved in pathogen
              recognition and signaling of the resistance response. These data will provide a
              basis for analyzing natural variation in Pro genes -from both resistant and
              susceptible hosts. This study will investigate the taxonomic breadth of disease
              resistance conferred by the Pio gene and also identify how amino acid sequence
              differences in this gene influence disease resistance in these species.

