Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics and Evolution of Tarasa (Malvaceae): An
               Enigmatic Andean Polyploid Genus.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9902230

Award Number: 9902230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beryl B. Simpson beryl@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902230
Simpson and Tate

	The evolution of the plant genus Tarasa
              (Malvaceae) has been influenced by polyploidy (doubling of chromosomes) and by
              the geological history of the Andean and Central American mountains.  The 30
              known species are found at elevations between 2000-4200 meters from central
              Peru to southern Chile and Argentina, and with two species disjunct in the
              highlands of central Mexico.  The species of Tarasa are either diploid (2n)
              with the normal complement of chromosomes or tetraploid (4n) with twice the
              normal complement.  Most polyploid species have larger cells (and often larger
              morphological features overall) than their diploid counterparts and are usually
              perennials rather than annuals.  The tetraploid species of Tarasa, however, are
              unusual in that all are annuals and have reduced floral features as compared to
              the diploid species.  Another interesting feature of this group is that the
              tetraploid species are all found at higher elevations in the Andes than the
              diploids.  Because of their unusual features, the species present a unique
              opportunity to study the interactions among polyploidy, life-cycle habit, and
              morphology that have led to the present disjunct geographic distributions in
              Mexico and South America.
Graduate student Jennifer Tate, under the direction
              of Dr. Beryl Simpson at the University of Texas, is studying the taxonomic
              classification and phylogenetic relationships of the species of Tarasa and
              their close relatives in the genera Sphaeralcea, Nototriche, and Acaulimalva.
              Using morphological and cytological (chromosomal) characters, supplemented with
              new molecular data from DNA sequences of nuclear and chloroplast genes, they
              plan to reconstruct the phylogeny or genealogical history of the species of
              Tarasa.  With a phylogenetic framework in place, the investigators can explore
              specific evolutionary and biogeographic questions, such as whether the
              tetraploid species are derived from a single chromosome-doubling event or
              whether they
have arisen multiple times, perhaps from different diploid
              species.  Likewise, they will be able to explore ideas about the direction of
              species migration in the Andes, for example, whether the species of Tarasa
              moved northward from southern Chile and Argentina or whether they migrated
              southward from the northernmost Mexican area of the range.  The phylogeny will
              help to determine whether the two species in Mexico represent a single lineage
              (clade) or whether they arrived independently from separate speciation events. 
              A central goal of biogeography is to find similar patterns in unrelated
              taxonomic groups that provide a guide to major historical events.  However,
              phylogenies for Andean groups of plants, based on rigorous methods and data,
              are few in number and hence limit the models necessary for explaining plant
              distributions.  This study will contribute to our developing knowledge of the
              evolution of high Andean plants. 

