Title       : Chemical Appl of Vibrational Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9902832

Award Number: 9902832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Stephens pstephen@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Philip Stephens of the University of Southern California
              will use experimental and theoretical methods to help develop vibrational
              circular dichroism spectroscopy (VCD) for applications to a variety of chemical
              systems.  Initial studies will calibrate the accuracy of Density Functional
              Theory (DFT) methodology for large molecules (80-200 atoms) and transition
              metal-containing molecules.  In addition the reliability of continuum
              dielectric methods for including solvent effects on predicted structures and
              spectra will be examined.  Specific stereochemical problems dealing with the
              determination of absolute configuration (AC) and conformational analysis (CA)
              will be addressed.  Applications of VCD will be developed in several focussed
              areas, including supramolecular structure, metal-containing molecules, chiral
              polymers, and isotopic effects.  

Vibrational circular dichroism
              spectroscopy serves as both an analytical tool and a structural tool.  That is,
              this technique can be used both to identify and characterize chemical systems
              as well as to determine the three-dimensional structure of the molecules under
              study.  A large fraction of applications to date have involved biochemical
              systems, such as peptides, proteins, nucleotides and nucleic acids.  In this
              project the use of VCD will be extended to studying other types of chemical
              systems, such as organometallic catalysts.  The results of this project will
              likely be useful in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries.

