Title       : An Architecture for A Global Internet Host Distance Estimation Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9902925

Award Number: 9902925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lixia Zhang lixia@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4095,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              It is increasingly the case that a given Internet interaction could be satisfied
              by one of a number of Internet hosts.  Examples range from short-lived
              interactions such as a single web page access to any one of multiple
              equal-content web servers to a long-term peering relationship between two news
              (NNTP) servers.                 

In any such interatction, all other things
              being equal, it is advantageous to access the "nearest" choice.  By near we
              mean in>terms of Internet performance metrics, such as low latency or high
              bandwidth.  Even when all other things are not equal, such as the case where
              different web servers have different response times, it is still useful to
              include distance to each candidate host as one of several criteria for making a
              selection.

One approach to obtaining this distance information is for the
              initiating host to measure it itself, using either unicast (ping, traceroute)
              or multicast (expanding ring search) tools.  While these tools have a wide
              range of
uses, their utility is generally limited by their overhead.  For
              instance, the cost of running a single traceroute can exceed the cost of the
              web page access itself.  More important still, a large number of hosts making
              independent and frequent measurements could have a severe impact on performance
              overall.  Ideally, measurements made by one system (host or router) should be
              made available, at low cost, to other hosts.

A useful general service for
              the Internet would be one whereby a host could quickly and efficiently learn
              the distance between any two hosts.  To be widely useful, such a service should
              provide an answer with a delay and overhead less than those of the gains
              achieved by using the service.  A simple protocol for such a service (SONAR)
              was discussed in the IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) as early as
              February 1996, and in April 1997 as a more general service called HOPS (Host
              Proximity Service).  Both of these efforts proposed lightweight client/server
              query/reply protocols along the lines of a DNS (Domain Name System)
              query/reply.  Both also required that the server be able to produce an answer
              in a very short time---preferably, though not necessarily, by using information
              already stored locally.

This proposal is concerned with the problem of how
              servers in such a SONAR/HOPS service can obtain the distance information needed
              to answer queries.  Specifically, we explore the following questions:
- Which
              systems originally produce the distance information, and how is it produced?
-
              How does the distance information get from these producing systems to the
              servers?
- What form does the distance information take, and how is it used to
              produce answers for specific pairs of Internet hosts?

After discussing basic
              aspects of the questions outlined above, this proposal presents a general
              architecture for an underlying service that provides the basic information used
              by a SONAR/HOPS service.  This underlying service is called IDMaps, forInternet
              Distance Map Service.

This work is being proposed in parallel by the PI,
              Sugih Jamin, and the co-PI, Lixia Zhang.  Sugih Jamin's prior research has been
              in Internet traffic characterization and measurement-based admission control. 
              Lixia Zhang has been an active participant in research on scalable reliable
              multicast.  The PIs will work closely with Paul Francis of NTT Software Labs
              and Vern Paxson of LBNL.  Paul Francis has been active on research in
              distributed hierarchy construction algorithms.  Vern Paxson is active in
              Internet performance measurement and is the PI of the NSF-funded National
              Internet Measurement Infrastructure (NIMI) effort.  IDMaps can be built on the
              NIMI substrate.  Letters from Paul Francis and Vern Paxson confirming
              these
collaborations are attached to this proposal.


