Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Relative Roles of Heredity and Experience in the
               Oviposition Behavior of the Black Swallowtail Butterfly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9902160

Award Number: 9902160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8466               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul P. Feeny ppf1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The choice of a host plant upon which to lay eggs is a critical decision for
              many plant-eating insects.  Throughout eastern North America, female black
              swallowtail butterflies (Papilio polyxenes) search for plants on which to lay
              their eggs. When an egg hatches, the caterpillar is too small to move to
              another plant and starves to death if the mother lays an egg on the wrong
              plant. Thus, the female's choice of plants is crucial for offspring survival.
              Potential hosts for this butterfly include many plant species in the family
              Apiaceae, including carrot, dill, and parsley. Since these plants look, smell,
              and taste very different from one another, one wonders how females use visual,
              olfactory, and gustatory cues to distinguish acceptable plants from surrounding
              unacceptable ones. Since females consistently choose the same host species
              generation after generation, the behavioral response to at least one plant cue
              must be genetically based, or innate. Which plant cues trigger innate responses
              and which trigger learned responses have not yet been determined. 
This
              project will examine each of three types of plant cue to which these
              butterflies respond and determine the relative importance of genetics and
              learning for butterfly responses to them. This will be the first study of
              innate responses to host-plant cues for a plant-feeding insect and may have
              implications for understanding the behavior of other plant-feeding insects,
              including species of agricultural pests. 

