Title       : Volatiles in the Central American Volcanic Arc: Constraints on Subduction
               Processes From I-129, C, N and Noble Gas Determinations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9902919

Award Number: 9902919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Udo Fehn fehn@earth.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Poreda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9902919
Fehn
The  subduction of oceanic crust and sediments at convergent
              plate boundaries gives rise to a variety of geologic processes including the
              accumulation of new continental crust, the development of volcanic arc systems
              and the formation of ore deposits.  Although agreement exists on the general
              outline of the subduction process, important questions such as the extent of
              sediment recycling, the origin of fluids in volcanic systems and the
              interaction between continental crust, oceanic crust and mantle at these
              locations are only poorly understood.  In order to address these questions, we
              plan to study volcanic fluids using an isotopic systems, iodine-129, which
              carries a time signal, partitions into the fluid phase and has a strong
              association with marine sediments.  These determinations will be linked to an
              investigation of the gas systematics in the same settings, in particular of He,
              N2, CO2 and CH4 concentrations and isotopic characteristics.  The combination
              of these systems provides a powerful tool to determine type and age of source
              formations for volcanic fluids.  The setting chosen for this study is the
              southern Central American Volcanic Arc, a well studied and accessible example
              of an active subduction zone.  We plan to focus the study on three volcanic
              centers, one each in Costa Rica, Nicaragua and El Salvador, with samples taken
              predominantly from geothermal wells and associated hot springs and fumaroles. 
              The goal of this investigation is to determine the amount of sediment recycling
              in these settings, the age of the sediments present, and the influence of
              continental crust, oceanic crust and mantle   on  volcanic fluids.  The results
              will give important information on principal processes associated with the
              formation of continental crust, the recycling of oceanic crust and sediments
              and the mechanics of active arc volcanism.

