Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Causes and Consequences of Behavioral Polymorphism in
               a Facultatively Social Bee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9902123

Award Number: 9902123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Thomson jt@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ever since the pioneering work of Charles Darwin, biologists have questioned the
              origin and maintenance of social behavior: why do individuals sacrifice their
              own reproductive success for the benefit of others?  Bee species that
              demonstrate both social and solitary behavior provide a unique system for
              studying the evolution of sociality in order to answer this basic question. 
              The PI will investigate the evolutionary history of Halictus rubicundus, a bee
              species that is social in areas of warm climate and solitary in areas of cold
              climate.  First, by examining the genetic relationships among social and
              solitary populations the PI hopes to determine whether there have been multiple
              origins of sociality in this species.  Second, the PI will rear social and
              solitary bees under reversed environmental conditions to determine the effect
              of climate on social behavior.  Finally, the PI will examine various aspects of
              the behavior of individuals from social and solitary populations in order to
              understand which characteristics are unique to a population, and which are
              shared among all members of the species. 

This work addresses several
              long-standing, fundamental questions in evolutionary biology:  What role do
              environmental factors play in the evolution of social behavior?  What are the
              consequences of sociality on the geographic distribution of a species? And what
              are some of the characteristics of a population that permit the transitions
              between solitary and social behavior? 

