Title       : Determining Text Databases to Search in the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a9902792

Award Number: 9902792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clement T. Yu yu@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many searchable text information sources are available in the Internet. The
              desired documents of a user are often stored in multiple heterogeneous sources,
              making it difficult for a user to find desired documents in the Internet.
              Automatic search brokers (metasearch engines) that can invoke multiple search
              engines are needed so that a user can find desired documents from multiple
              sources using a single query. This collaborative project is to develop
              techniques needed for the next generation metasearch engines. Highly scalable
              methods that can accurately estimate the usefulness of an information source
              with respect to each user query are to be developed. These methods would enable
              the metasearch engine to search only a small number of sufficiently useful
              information sources for each query, avoiding wasting resources for searching
              useless sources. Linkages among documents are to be used to improve the
              retrieval of relevant documents. A concept hierarchy is to be used to
              disambiguate the meanings of terms. Techniques that while guaranteeing the
              retrieval of all potentially useful documents from a local search engine, also
              minimize the retrieval of useless documents are to be investigated. Good
              solutions to the problem of merging results from multiple sources into a single
              ranked list are also sought. Developed techniques will be shown to
              significantly improve existing ones in both efficiency and effectiveness. A
              metasearch engine incorporating developed techniques on top of major university
              search engines will be implemented and made publically accessible. 
