Title       : Experiments on Convection and Turbulence in Earth's Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9902741

Award Number: 9902741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Olson olson@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to simulate the flow in the Earth's liquid
              outer core using laboratory fluid dynamic models.  The results of this study
              will be used, together with geophysical observations and numerical models, to
              probe the workings of the geodynamo.  Two phenomena important in the geodynamo
              will be investigated.  The first concerns the origin of large scale motions in
              the outer core and their relationshop to the three-dimensional seismic
              structure of the lower mantle.  The investigators will study experimentally the
              structure of convection in rotating fluid shells with nearly radial buoyancy
              forces, subject to patterns of boundary heterogeneity inferred from lower
              mantle seismic structure.  The results will help constrain the nature of
              core-mantly interaction, specifically how convection in the outer core is
              affected by the laterally variable conditions at the core-mantle boundary,
              including variable heat flow, topogrpahy and stable layering.  The results
              should provide a basis for identifying effects of mantle heterogeneity on the
              long-term behavior of the core and the geodynamo.  The second project is to
              apply measurements from laboratory experiments of hydromagnetic turbulent flow
              to turbulence in the outer core.  The investigators will perform an expermental
              study of tutbulence generated in a diffrentially rotatin cylinder of liquid
              gallium in the presence of uniform magnetic fields.  Properties of this
              magnetic Taylor-Couette flow will be used to estiate the turbulent diffusivity
              over the range of experimentally accessible paramenter, for extrapolation to
              conditions in the Earth's core.
