Title       : Novel Synthetic Routes to Main Group Inorganic Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9902417

Award Number: 9902417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303184             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kouvetakis jkouvetakis@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9902417
Kouvetakis
This multidisciplinary program focuses on synthesis of new
              and technologically important inorganic materials and thin films incorporating
              elements of groups 13, 14 and 15. A major part of the work involves development
              of completely novel Si-Ge-C alloys and compound semiconductors which are
              intended for silicon-based bandgap engineering and lattice matching
              applications. Wide bandgap optoelectronic nitrides and carbides (including GaN)
              are prepared from chemically designed C-H- and N-H-free precursors. The goal of
              this effort is to explore growth of defect-free materials and to develop
              unusual nanostructured morphologies (quantum dots and wires) using novel
              synthesis methods. Characterizations involving TEM, XRD, RBS and other
              techniques (including in situ methods) are used extensively throughout the
              project to provide rapid feedback about the film microstructure and the quality
              of the heteroepitaxial growth, thus ultimately leading to better design of the
              synthetic pathways. In addition, extreme-hardness diamond-like materials based
              on the Li-Be-B-C-N-O system are synthesized at high pressure using
              compositionally analogous phases as precursors. Related nanoporous framework
              systems based on new inorganic C-N compounds of B, Al, Ga, In and Tl are also
              developed via solution methods. These are expected to have useful properties in
              adsorption and catalysis. A unique aspect of the research is the design and
              synthesis of conceptually simple inorganic compounds that provide the necessary
              building blocks to develop useful solids that cannot be obtained by
              conventional methods.

The work spans a wide range of interdisciplinary
              projects which are well suited to provide broad preparation and
              state-of-the-art skills to undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
              researchers. Training of highly-qualified future scientists and engineers in
              new materials synthesis is crucial for our society to maintain its
              technological edge. We expect to provide fundamental knowledge in novel device
              chemistry and physics, and thus make important contributions to emerging and
              future technologies such as the next generation of computers, displays, and
              communication systems.


