Title       : Dissertation Research: Demographic and Genetic Analysis of Metapopulation
               Dynamics: Emerita analoga as a Model Organism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9902218

Award Number: 9902218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis W. Botsford lwbotsford@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Grosberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902218
Botsford, Diehl & Grosberg 

Many organisms are distributed as
              discrete subpopulations over space, interacting only when certain life stages
              move between them. However, we have a poor understanding of how migration rates
              and spatial structure of these metapopulations affect overall population
              dynamics, abundance, or stability. Populations of benthic invertebrates like
              lobsters and crabs are distributed along long stretches of coastline. They
              commonly do not move much as adults, but have a larval stage that can move
              about in ocean currents for thousands of kilometers. We have a poor idea of how
              far larvae move, how that varies with ocean conditions, and how these influence
              population dynamics. The sand crab, Emerita analoga, is a good model system
              because the adults and larvae are abundant and can easily be sampled without
              complicated or expensive gear. This crab is distributed along the west coast of
              North and South America. In this project genetic markers and field studies are
              being used to learn more about how ocean currents transport larvae among a
              number of adult populations along the coast from southern California to
              northern California, and how population dynamics are subsequently affected.
              

Gaining a better understanding of the dynamics of populations along
              coastlines, interconnected by dispersing larvae has practical value in managing
              fisheries, predicting responses to pollution, and anticipating the effects of
              climate change. When managing such populations, one needs to know how
              reproduction at one location contributes to populations at another location,
              and how this affects population dynamics. For example, this study will provide
              understanding of how increasing harvests of American lobsters from some
              offshore populations affects the future of nearshore fisheries. It will also
              tell us how an oil spill in Oregon would affect the crab fisheries in
              California and Washington.



















