Title       : Algorithms for Data Compression Based on Grammars and Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9902081

Award Number: 9902081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265485             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Kieffer kieffer@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Modern data storage and data transmission systems can
simultaneously process
              data of various types, including text,
audio, image, volumetric and video
              data. There is a need for
data compression in these systems, in order that
              efficient use
may be made of the limited amount of memory and bandwidth
              that
is available, while meeting the consumer's demand for
flexibility in
              data delivery services. In order to satisfy
this need, this research seeks to
              develop innovative algorithms for both lossless and lossy data compression.
              Compression algorithms are sought, which adapt themselves to general data
              structures, inferring and exploiting relationships in the data for compression
              purposes.

The research will focus upon a type of data compressor 
called a
              grammar based compressor. A grammar based compressor
represents relationships
              in the data using a grammar, so that
the production rules of the grammar
              describe how the data  
is to be exactly or approximately reconstructed. Data
              
compression is achieved by reducing this grammar or its
associated
              derivation tree to a more compact form, through the
use of reduction rules.
              The specific goals of the research are
to obtain grammar based compressors
              which are capable of
handling general data structures (including data trees,
              2-D and 3-D data, and other regular structures), which process data with linear
              time and space complexity, which provide good
maximal redundancy performance,
              and which are universal and
perform well with respect to other universal
              compressors.
Grammar based compressors with good theoretical properties
              
shall be tested by means of computer experiments on real data,
and
              comparisons shall be made with state of the art compression systems. Emphasis
              will be placed on finding robust grammar based compressors, which yield near
              state of the art 
compression performance regardless of the type of data
              to
which they are applied.


