Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of Angiotensin II and Dehydration on Regional
               Blood Flows in a Terrestrial Amphibian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9902257

Award Number: 9902257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4515               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Warburton swarburt@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Animals lose body water that must be replenished to avoid dehydration or even
              death.  Unlike humans, amphibians, e.g. frogs and toads,  have very thin skin
              and are susceptible to high rates of water loss.   Additionally, amphibians do
              not drink; instead they absord water through the skin of their belly.  Despite
              these differences, the same hormone, or chemical, in both humans and amphibians
              is involved in stimulating thirst.  This hormone, angiotensin II, is formed
              when an animal becomes dehydrated.  Angiotensin II is thus closely linked to
              thirst behavior.  Angiotensin II is thus closely linked to thirst behavior. 
              Angiotensin II has a second effect:  it decreases blood flow by constricting
              blood vessels.  Absorption of water across the skin is assumed to require
              increased blood flow, yet angiotensin II is known to decrease blood flow. 
              Thus, this hormone may stimulate conflicting responses in amphibians.   In
              amphibians as well as in humans, very little is know regarding the site where
              angiotensin II changes blood flows in terrestrial amphibians.  Specifically,
              blood flow to tissues involved in water loss and water gain will be measured
              before and after angiotensin II injections and blockade of angiotensin II
              effects.  The goal is to determine how an animal adapts to these apparantly
              conflicting effects of a single hormone.  This research will add to the PIs
              understanding of the important role angiotensinII has played in the evolution
              of dehydration and rehydration behavior in animals
