Title       : Capturing Multilayered Design Intent using Efficient Constraint Decomposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9902025

Award Number: 9902025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meera Sitharam sitharam@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project deals with the efficient generation of robust, optimal plans for
              recursively decomposing geometric constraint systems into subsystems whose
              solutions can be recombined. Primary consideration is given to constraint
              systems that arise within the context of interactive design and assembly for
              CAD/CAM. 
Decomposing a geometric constraint system is a critical and
              longstanding issue, since the overwhelming 
cost in solving the system is
              dictated by - and exponential in - the size of the largest subsystem that is
              
solved by a general algebraic/numeric solver directly, i.e, without further
              decomposition. Moreover, 
a truly interactive CAD environment allows the
              constraint model to interact with the designer as well as with downstream
              production software throughout the design process. Hence a hierarchical
              structural decomposition of the constraint system plays a key role in capturing
              design intent. Due to the lack of efficient and robust decomposition
              techniques, there are currently no effective, spatial variational 
constraint
              solvers, and assembly solvers are seriously limited. This inadequacy severely
              hinders the development of intelligent, interactive CAD systems.

Preliminary
              results provide a strong foundation for this project. More specifically: 1) We
              have isolated and precisely formalized the optimal decomposition-recombination
              ( DR) planning problem as well as several new performance measures that reflect
              the various desirable characteristics of DR plans and planners 
specifically
              for CAD/CAM. The precise formalization of the DR-problem as well as the new
              performance measures are of independent interest and have the potential to be
              widely used by the constraint solving 
and CAD communities. 2) We have
              developed the building blocks of a new DR planner, called the Modified Frontier
              Algorithm (MFA), which significantly improves on existing methods both in terms
              of several of the new performance measures, as well as in preliminary
              implementations.

The overall goal of the project is to develop and implement
              a fully-fledged prototype of a DR-planner along with the required interfaces
              built around the MFA backbone, which performs well with respect to all of the
              new performance measures. In addition, the prototype implementation will be
              incorporated into the Erep system and then evaluated by comparison with
              existing constraint solvers, sketchers and CAD systems.

Specific research
              tasks are directed towards ensuring that the new DR planner possesses various
              capabilities such as: 1)  ability to deal with nongeometric constraints,
              particularly equational and parametric constraints which reflect design intent;
              2)  ability to incorporate a multilayered conceptual decomposition 
specified
              by the designer, and robustness and adaptability to interactive changes made to
              the constraint system; 3)  optimal complexity, and guaranteed approximation
              factor of the near-optimal, output DR-plan; 
4) ability to maintain
              consistency of the CAD constraint model view with multiple, possibly
              proprietary, downstream application views of the product master model; and 5)
              modularity of the implementation, compatibility with existing algebraic/numeric
              solvers, and incorporability into existing CAD systems.


