Title       : Routing and Scheduling Issues in Support of Advance Reservations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9902943

Award Number: 9902943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roch Guerin guerin@ee.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The general topic of the proposal is advanced reservations in itegrated packet
              networks.  The ability to secure in advance the resources needed by a
              distributed application is becoming increasingly important.  This is true, not
              only for high-end scientific or medical applications which require simultaneous
              access to several facilities and pieces of sophisticated equipment, but also
              for more mundane applications such as video-conferencing, whose reasonably high
              resources requirements make it desirable to ensure that the necessary network
              resources are available at the same time as the conference participants are. 
              Support for advance reservations involves multiple aspects such as extensions
              to protocols, and in particular reservation (signalling) protocols, and
              enhanced resource management procedures, e.g., call admission.  While there has
              been a number of previous works addressing both of these aspects, the
              corresponding two sets of issues have typically been considered separately.  In
              addition, the advance reservation models that have been used, have essentially
              focused on asingle service model, i.e., the availability of a given amount of
              resources, from a given starting time, and for a given duration (with possibly
              a random component in both the starting time and the duration).  The goals of
              this proposal are, therefore , to investigate jointly protocol extensions and
              enhancements to resource management, as well as consider more general service
              models for advance reservations.  In particular, the researchers  will consider
              the problem of routing of advance reservation requests in the context of an
              extension to the OSPF protocol, where link state updates have been extended to
              carry resource availability infromation over different time intervals.  This
              allows for a distributed implementation which improves scalability by avoiding
              that all advance reservation requests be forwarded to a central server. 
              However, it introduces new problems in order to contain the corresponding
              increase in protocol traffic while ensuring adequate performance.  In that
              context, the researchers will study issues related to the trade-off between
              information accuracy and routing performance, and also investigate the use of
              mechanisms such as preemption priorities to offer applications a range of
              service options, e.g., request large amount of bandwidth at a low priority
              together with a small amount at a high priority.  In addition, the researchers
              will also consider, again jointly with the associated routing problem, various
              extensions to the advanced reservation model, such as mininmizing completion
              time, maximizing available bandwidth, etc., that are of potential interest to
              adaptive applications that can modify their behavior according to the available
              service.  The researchers believe that the joint development of the necessary
              infrastructure, e.g., extensions to the OSPF protocol, and the investigation of
              desirable extensions to the traditional advance reservation model, will allow
              them to make significant progress in both our basic understanding of the
              inherent complexity in supporting advance reservation, and our ability to
              deploy such capabilities.
