Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Ceramic Exchange and Technology in the Late Prehistoric
               Western Great Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9902836

Award Number: 9902836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Jochim jochim@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Jochim, Mr. Jelmer Eerkens will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Eerkens' goals are twofold. His is an
              archaeologist who has studied late prehistoric hunting and gathering peoples of
              the US Western Great Basin and he wishes to understand how such groups adapted
              to a harsh and unpredictable desert environment. He also plans to use ceramic
              data to understand how and to what extent it can serve useful analytic
              purposes. Because ceramics are both  common and well preserved in
              archaeological sites, they constitute an important category and prehistorians
              study them from a number of perspectives to determine what light they may shed
              on past behavior. In prehistory most ceramics were made by agricultural peoples
              who resided in villages and larger social units and who lived a fairly settled
              existence. In such groups it has proven possible to use ceramics to reconstruct
              many aspects of social stratification, economic and political organization and
              inter group relations and thus they have proven a powerful tool. Very few
              prehistoric hunter and gatherer groups however manufactured ceramics and their
              scientific potential at this level of social organization has been little
              explored. During more recent periods of time however groups in the US Great
              Basin manufactured pottery, large samples of which have been recovered in the
              course of archaeological excavations. Because it is generally crudely made,
              undecorated and lacking in detailed stylistic characteristics relatively little
              attention has been paid to it.

Mr. Eerkens will conduct chemical analyses of
              both potsherds and clay deposits from a number of Great Basin sites and
              regions. Trace element analysis will be employed to characterize deposits, to
              group sherds into chemically similar classes and to match sherds to raw
              material source. Lipid analysis will, hopefully, serve to determine the
              materials which such pots contained. On this basis it should be possible to
              trace the movement of both pottery and people across the landscape and to
              determine the nature of social relations between individual groups. It should
              also be possible to determine the extent to which pottery was traded for direct
              subsistence versus other purposes.

This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide new insight into a poorly understood period of US
              prehistory. It will help to develop methods of analysis useful in a variety of
              archaeological situations, shed new light on hunter and gatherer level social
              organization and finally assist in training a promising young scientist.

