Title       : Automatic and Adaptive Mesh Generation with Applications to Scientific Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9902091

Award Number: 9902091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Miller glmiller@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Noel J. Walkington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project combines the expertise developed in the numerical analysis
              community with that developed in algorithm design community to solve scientific
              problems governed by partial differential equations. Most of the effort will
              incorporate the analytical techniques from the numerical analysis area with the
              combinatorial 
techniques from the algorithms area.  

Central to this
              project is the design and analysis of new and novel meshing algorithms well
              suited for use with numerical techniques such as the finite element or finite
              volume methods. Special attention will be given to meshing in three dimensions.
              In particular, extension of algorithms developed under prior NSF grants will be
              constructed. These extensions include analyzable methods for both mesh
              refinement and coarsening. The more general problem of adaptive meshing for
              problems that are changing with time, such as solutions to singular and
              degenerate parabolic equations, will also be studied. The use of triangles and
              tetrahedra that may have small angles but no angles approaching 180 degrees
              will also be undertaken.  

Fundamental to the project is the development of
              good methods to estimate the eigenvalues of graphs. These tools will be used to
              estimate convergence rates for preconditioned iterative system solvers, to
              estimate interpolation error for particular mesh algorithms, to compute error
              estimates for control volume methods, and to analyze spectral separator
              methods.

