Title       : Dissertation Research: Beta Anolis Phylogenetics and Biogeography: A Test of the
               Vicariance-dispersal Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1999      
File        : a9902749

Award Number: 9902749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay M. Savage   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9902749
Savage and Nicholson
	Graduate student Kirsten Nicholson, under the
              direction of Dr. Jay Savage at University of Miami and with assistance from Dr.
              Brian Crother at Southeastern Louisiana University, is studying the
              evolutionary relationships among the numerous species of the lizard genus
              Anolis, in particular the "beta" group of these animals, distributed on Cuba
              and Jamaica and neighboring landmasses of the Caribbean. The beta anoles
              exhibit a wide array of body shapes and coloration, and occur in a variety of
              habitats from ground level to tree canopies. About 65 representative species of
              the estimated 140 species in the group will be studied for DNA sequence
              diversity in nuclear and mitochondrial genes, and for osteological variation,
              in order to construct a phylogenetic framework for the group. In turn, the
              phylogenetic information can be used to test various theories about the
              biogeographic history of migration and diversification in Anolis lizards. The
              two major theories focus either on repeated dispersal from mainland sources to
              explain the numerous island species, or on the splitting of tectonic plates
              from mainland landmasses with subsequent speciation (or adaptive radiation) of
              numerous closely related forms on each major island in the Caribbean, to
              explain the present-day distributions and ranges of the lizards.
	Preliminary
              molecular and morphological study by the student suggests feasibility of the
              project, and numerous samples have been collected for analysis from taxa in
              Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, and Central and South America. Recent published work,
              largely emphasizing the "alpha" grouping of Anolis lizards, has favored the
              "adaptive radiation" scenario for island evolution of these animals.
              Investigators have suggested that anoles exhibit morphological adaptations
              (such as color, specialized foot features that grip different substrates, limbs
              suitable for either jumping or walking) that allowed the lizards to exploit
              different local habitats, such as living in the canopy, or on tree trunks, or
              in bushes. These different "ecomorphs" are often similar on each island; that
              is, each island has a bush morph, a canopy morph, a trunk morph, etc. The
              recent studies hypothesize that these ecomorphs evolved on each major island,
              separately from other islands but in similar manner, a scenario that discounts
              dispersal as a major organizing principle in island biotas. The research to be
              conducted by Nicholson and her mentors seeks to test these ideas for the beta
              anoles of the Caribbean region, with a robust phylogenetic framework for this
              large group.

