Title       : Assessing Horizontal Strain and Deformation From Extensometer Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9902728

Award Number: 9902728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Burbey tjburbey@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9902728
Burbey

Extensometer data have been used with hydrograph data to
              determine aquifer and aquitard elastic and inelastic specific storage values. 
              A compressible aquifer experiences virgin or inelastic compression when the
              preconsolidation stress threshold exceeds the past maximum stress.  The
              component of specific storage associated with stresses less than the
              past-maximum preconsolidation stress threshold is elastic.  These specific
              storage estimates are based on the assumption that the strain associated with
              the applied stress is vertical.  Consequently any strain associated with an
              increase stress is directly related to the compaction through the vertical
              compressibility or specific storage of the hydrogeologic unit.

Field data
              and Biot's theory of three-dimensional consolidation demonstrates that
              horizontal strain may be significant, and contribute large quantities of water
              from storage.  These results suggest that the classical definition of specific
              storage may not be applicable for unconsolidated confined aquifers.  Calculated
              drawdowns associated with volume strain tend to be less than those for vertical
              strain.   Hence, estimates of specific storage from extensometer data assuming
              vertical strain conditions only will likely be too low.  

The proposed work
              involves examining stress-strain hysteresis loops from cyclically stressed
              systems where extensometer and hydrograph data are available.  Because
              extensometer data express the volume strain through the vertical component of
              deformation, it is hypothesized that the "shape" of the stress-stain loops can
              be used in conjunction with the hydrograph data to estimate or assess the
              component of horizontal strain and deformation of the aquifer system.  This
              hypothesis will be tested using both synthetic and existing data.  

The
              procedure for examining the validity of this hypothesis will be to simulate
              first the hysteresis loops with vertical stain models.  Secondly, the same
              systems will be simulated using the volume strain method.  The third approach
              will involve programming a newly developed analytic poroviscous model that
              accounts for the transient nature of storage and porosity under an applied
              effective stress.  This work will have large implications in our interpretation
              of storage coefficient from aquifer tests and will greatly help our
              understanding of aquifer deformation in subsiding basins, particularly where
              earth fissures are known to result from over-pumping

