Title       : Urban "Karst": The Impacts of Utility/Service Conduits/Ducts on Urban
               Groundwater Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9902899

Award Number: 9902899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68910              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Sharp jmsharp@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,5946,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              992899
Sharp

Urban areas are hydrologically similar to karstic settings-they
              have internal drainage (storm sewers), surface streams (paved drainage ditches)
              that flow after heavy rains, and a permeability structure that may be dominated
              by fractures, conduits, and caves (buried utility trenches, abandoned pipes,
              etc.).  Over half the world's population now lives in the urban environment. 
              This is projected to increase both absolutely and as a percentage, and the
              urban area is increasing at a greater rate than the urban population.  Recent
              studies on urbanization demonstrate signficant impacts on both the rates of
              recharge and permeability distributions within the shallow subsurface.  For
              example, leakage from water mains and sewerage systems can increase recharge
              despite increases in "impervious" cover!  Urbanization affects groundwater
              pollution and remediation, water resources, stream flows, and geotechnical
              projects.  The construction and abandonment of subsurface utility systems
              create an interconnected network in the shallow subsurface with highly
              contrasting permeabilities (up to 7-10 orders of magnitude in preliminary
              tests).

This project will: (1) examine how urban utility lines, ducts,
              conduits and their accompanying trenches alter natural permeability structure;
              (2) compare these changes between carbonate, shale/mudstone, and alluvial
              environments and with undisturbed settings; (3) predict how such changes affect
              recharge and urban groundwater contamination; and (4) test chemical tracers
              (specifically boron) to verify the models and identify the impact of trench
              networks.  We will analyze the effects of these "pathways" on groundwater flow
              and solute transport using the numerical model FAC3DVS and field studies.  We
              will predict, for representative scenarios, how the construction of trench
              networks and the leakage from water mains and sewage systems impact on urban
              groundwater systems.  Several tracers will be tested to assess the magnitude of
              any effects.   The research is a joint venture between The University of Texas
              at Austin, USA, and Royal Holloway College University of London, UK.  It will
              contrast the outcome of urban development in a young and rapidly growing city
              [Austin] and a more mature urban environment [London] where the long-term
              effects of urbanization should be more apparent.  The work in the UK is the
              subject of a separate proposal to the British Research Councils.

