Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Homeoresistance Adaptation: Does Phospholipid
               Restructuring Mediate Thermal Compensation of Membrane Proton Permeability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9902101

Award Number: 9902101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Hazel j.hazel@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Since biological function is extremely temperature sensitive, animals can
              function normally only within a rather narrow range of operating temperatures
              (e.g. mammals can function normally only at 37+ 1 *C). The temperature
              sensitivity biological function has its roots within the molecular machinery
              (e.g. membrane lipids) of the cell and is largely a consequence of the
              temperature sensitivity of intra- and intermolecular structural interactions.
              Cellular molecules are designed to operate under very specific thermal
              conditions. When thermal conditions change, molecular function becomes
              sub-optimal and this has a negative effect on cellular level physiology which
              in turn disrupts normal animal function. Unlike warm-blooded animals that
              regulate body temperature at a constant value, cold-blooded animals,
              particularly those existing within aquatic environments, must operate at
              different body temperatures as their environmental temperature changes (e.g
              seasonally). Cold-blooded animals need to "re-design' themselves at the
              molecular level to operate effectively under new thermal conditions. One way
              that they accomplish this is by adjusting the lipid composition of their cell
              membranes. Resistance to passive hydrogen ion (proton) diffusion is property of
              biological membranes that is of considerable functional importance for
              mitochondrial energy transduction. This membrane property is exquisitely
              temperature sensitive, but the PIs believe that passive proton permeability is
              regulated by adjusting membrane lipid composition. The PIs initial results for
              intact mitochondria from trout muscle demonstrate complete compensation of
              proton permeability following thermal acclimation. The PIs propose the
              hypothesis that the inner mitochondrial membrane phospholipid composition of a
              cold-blooded animals is regulated to compensate thermal perturbation of
              membrane proton resistance, a process the PIs describe as homeoresistance
              adaptation. This will be investigated using intact mitochondria and vesicles
              derived from inner membrane phospholipids. The significance of this work lies
              in better understanding how phospholipids mediate proton permeability in
              relation to other bilayer properties and has implications for clarifying both
              the structural requirements and functional significance of proton permeability
              in mitochondria.
