Title       : Study of Modern Gravelly Braided River Deposits with Special Reference to
               Spatial Variations in Porosity and Permeability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9902894

Award Number: 9902894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300051             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Bridge jbridge@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
9902894
Bridge

The nature and origin of gravelly braided-river deposits
              will be studied, with specific emphasis on spatial variations in porosity and
              permeability. Channel-belt deposits will be studied in 3-D using closely spaced
              ground-penetrating radar profiles tied to trenches, cores and wireline logs. An
              innovative aspect of this study is that the river and sediment will be frozen
              during some of the sampling (being on the North Slope of Alaska), thus
              minimizing disturbance during coring, and enabling easy access to all parts of
              the channel belt. This sampling strategy will allow description of the 3-D
              variation of the different types and scales of stratification, grain-size
              distributions, porosity and permeability, and related geophysical properties of
              the deposits. Particular attention will be paid to zones of high permeability
              (open-framework gravels) and low permeability (muds). Interpretation of these
              patterns of deposition will be attempted using: (1) knowledge of the mode of
              channel cutting, migration and filling, obtainable from sequential aerial
              photographs, and; (2) inferences about the geometry, sediment textures and bed
              forms of the channel bed during major erosional-depositional events. An
              ultimate objective is construction of a detailed, 3-D depositional model for
              gravelly braided rivers that is a major improvement over existing models,
              particularly in the description of the large-scale stratification patterns.
              Also, prediction of porosity and permeability in relation to sedimentary facies
              is important for modeling of fluid flow through aquifers and hydrocarbon
              reservoirs in analogous ancient deposits. However, there is a critical lack of
              poroperm data from gravelly braided rivers to support such modeling. The
              results of a pilot study indicate that the objectives of this project can be
              realized.


