Title       : VPW: Bio-Behavioral Processes in an East African Pastoral Population
               (Anthropology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9250104

Award Number: 9250104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rada Dyson-Hudson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1390,
Abstract    :
                    Data for an analysis of pastoral population dynamics from                
              more than two years of field research (anecological) on the                    
              Karimojong of Uganda will be analyzed and prepared for                         
              publication, as part of a long-term research project.  The study               
              group is a major social and territorial division (Ngisonyoka) of the           
              quarter million Turkana, nomadic livestock herders in northwestern             
              Kenya.  The sample, which totals about 10,000 individuals, is                  
              based on descent.  The data will be organized into 62 master files             
              (all the interview information for each descent-set) and 62 analysis           
              files (only the information amenable to quantitative analysis).  The           
              latter will be coded and aggregated into a single PARADOX file.                
              This program will be used to ascertain changes through time in                 
              birth rates, mortality, and frequencies of in- and out-migration, and          
              in the sex and age distributions of the pastoral population; to                
              determine the frequency distribution by age, sex, cause, and year              
              of post-infant mortality; to improve estimates of female fertility; and        
              to determine variations in both male and female fertility and                  
              reproductive success.  The database can be used to model                       
              population dynamics over a 50-year period, because it provides                 
              quantitative information about changes through time in all four                
              population parameters--birth rates, mortality, in-migration and out-           
              migration.  Pastoralism, an adaptive strategy used by tens of                  
              millions of people, allows human use of land where low                         
              precipitation precludes reliable agriculture.  Human ingenuity,                
              together with environmental variability, leads to a range of pastoral          
              strategies which are variably successful.  At their core are the               
              inter-related dynamics of human and livestock populations.                     
                    This effort is part of the South Turkana Ecosystem Project,              
              a long-term, multi-disciplinary study which attempts to apply the              
              research standards established by evolutionary biologists,                     
              ethologists, and ecologists in a study of the ecology and behavior             
              of a pastoral population.  By providing information on social and              
              personal as well as environmental factors which affect population              
              parameters, this study also will allow predictions about the effects           
              of social and environmental changes, and enable people to devise               
              humane and ecologically wise development policies.                             
                    The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                   
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              lecturing/teaching anthropology classes, participating in a seminar            
              series, working with persons from different departments through                
              the Populations Issues Research Center, and involving both                     
              undergraduate and graduate students in research through the                    
              study's data analysis.
