Title       : Development of an Automated Process Control and Instrumentation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9250935

Award Number: 9250935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99552              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph T. Brown jbrown@tricty.tricounty.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald N. Talley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore M. Simpkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tri-County Technical Col
	      P O BOX 587
	      Pendleton, SC  296700587    803/646-8361

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Tri-County Technical College is establishing an automated                      
              process control and instrumentation laboratory as part of a                    
              integrated, multi-level curriculum reform.  The state-of-the-                  
              art laboratory will consist of a Hampden Instrumentation and                   
              Process Control System to include the four major                               
              instrumentation and control functions:  flow, level,                           
              temperature, and pressure; plus computer interface,                            
              calibration, pneumatic utilities, and troubleshooting support                  
              modules.  This allows the College's Industrial & Engineering                   
              Technology (I&ET) Division to move from a series of islands of                 
              expertise to an integrated approach enabling students to gain                  
              the broadened perspective required in today's high tech                        
              manufacturing marketplace.  Curriculum reforms for the project                 
              include: (1) to develop and implement comprehensive automatic                  
              process control and instrumentation curriculum courses within                  
              the General Engineering Technology, Electronics Engineering                    
              Technology, and Industrial Electronics Technology programs; (2)                
              to reconfigure course content in current I&ET and Business                     
              division offerings to reflect a                                                
              multidisciplinary/interdisciplinary CIM approach; and (3) to                   
              develop process control and instrumentation curriculum modules                 
              which other academic disciplines, at both the post-secondary                   
              and secondary levels, will be able to draw upon for                            
              illustrative and/or hands-on applications.  A clear                            
              connectivity between theory and real-world application will be                 
              achieved through this project.
