Title       : VPW: Functional Cytomorphology and Phylogenetic Signifi- cance of the Coelomic
               Heart-Kidney Complex in the Lesser Molluscan Classes, Aplacophora and
               Polyplacophora(Sys Biol)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1993      
File        : a9250111

Award Number: 9250111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105075             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Patricia Morse mpmorse@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1148,9225,
Abstract    :
                    It is proposed to investigate two lesser classes of molluscs,            
              the Aplacophora and the Polyplacophora, using electron                         
              microscopy to ellucidate a new set of characters for the heart-                
              kidney complex to use in the analysis of molluscan phylogeny.                  
              Both classes have been placed near the roots of the various                    
              phylogenetic trees that depict the origin of the molluscan classes.            
              Studies proposed will include anatomical relationships not yet                 
              determined, as well as patterns of new characters.  With access to             
              living organisms and ultrastructural fixation of the heart-kidneq              
              complex, identified specific characters to be studied will be: 1)              
              heart musculature, 2) ultrafiltration sites, 3) pericardial epithelium         
              and its contractility, 4) hemocyanin blood pigment, 5) pore cells in           
              the pericardial tissues, 6) relationships of the coelomic body                 
              caviites with the coelomducts (kidneys), and 7) secretory and                  
              absorptive cells in the kidneys.  The patterns found in                        
              representatives of these two phyla will be compared to what is                 
              known in the better-studied classes of molluscs to establish                   
              character polarity between primitive and derived states.  These                
              findings, along with what is known in the out group phyla                      
              associated with the Mollusca (especially the phylum Sipuncula) will            
              contribute to the eventual formulation of a parsimonious phylogeny             
              of the phylum Mollusca.                                                        
                    This research will focus on the systematic biology of                    
              molluscs, reflecting new techniques and new thinking in                        
              approaches to investigations of the evolution of molluscs.  These              
              include analyses of data by looking for relatedness between taxa,              
              understanding and weighing whether a character is primitive                    
              (plesiomorphic) or derived (apomorphic), establishing shared                   
              characters between large and small groups of organisms, utiliizing             
              electron microscopy to investigate characters at the cellular and              
              tissue level, and seeking relatedness as expressed in the genetic              
              code.                                                                          
                    The effort furthers VPW program objectives to provide                    
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              lecturing in two undergraduate courses (an advanced                            
              undergraduate course in invertebrate zoology, and a field course               
              in natural history of the Washington coast), and interacting in the            
              laboratory component of each class; offering a seminar on Marine               
              Biodiversity for graduate students; organizing faculty/student "bag            
              lunch" meetings to highlight issues facing women in science;                   
              helping to establish a visiting woman scientist program; and                   
              working with students on research projects.
