Title       : Computer Animation and Vision Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1992     
File        : a9250188

Award Number: 9250188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16719              (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Buckalew buckalew@galaxy.calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St Univ
	      One Grand Avenue
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Rapid expansion in the areas of Computer Animation, Scientific                 
              Visualization, and Computer Vision make it desirable that                      
              students have access to appropriate laboratory equipment so                    
              that they may practice the techniques they learn in the                        
              classroom and become familiar with the use of modern animation                 
              and vision instrumentation.  This project involves acquisition                 
              of animation equipment and computer vision input devices that                  
              will update and expand the University's existing graphics                      
              laboratory. The Animation and Vision lab will allow two new                    
              courses to be taught, Animation Techniques and Scientific                      
              Visualization Methods.  It will also provide a hands-on                        
              laboratory for the current Computer Vision course.  The lab                    
              will be used for development of student assigned programs and                  
              animations in these courses as well as independent study and                   
              especially senior projects and master's theses.  The lab will                  
              also be used by instructors to develop videotapes which                        
              demonstrate various animation, computer graphics, and                          
              scientific visualization concepts and algorithms.  Course                      
              materials developed by instructors, in particular instructional                
              videos which utilize the full spectrum of graphics techniques                  
              to aid students in understanding sophisticated concepts, will                  
              be shared with other CSU campuses and additional institutions                  
              as appropriate.
