Title       : Integrated Microelectronics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9250780

Award Number: 9250780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shekar Ayyar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hong Dai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Hornfeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Electrical Engineering faculty at Lafayette College is                     
              rethinking its educational methods and philosophy toward the                   
              students' undergraduate experience.  This project provides                     
              equipment funds as part of a major upgrade to the EE                           
              curriculum.  Specifically, funds are provided for the                          
              establishment of an Integrated Microelectronics Laboratory for                 
              junior and senior classes.  This laboratory will be configured                 
              to support the current offerings in microelectronics and, more                 
              importantly, to form a major laboratory component of an                        
              innovative curriculum in integrated electronics for                            
              undergraduates.  The environment will include                                  
              workshop/laboratory experiences in integrated electronics for                  
              the EE undergraduate during all four years of the curriculum.                  
              The equipment will be targeted toward undergraduate instruction                
              to bring together effectively, analytical tools, simulation                    
              methods, and rapid  prototyping strategies needed in the design                
              of microelectronic circuits and systems.  This laboratory will                 
              be part of a major restructuring of courses and laboratories                   
              within the department.  The modernization of EE laboratories                   
              and the revitalization of pedagogical techniques is expected to                
              provide the necessary motivation for attracting and retaining                  
              the attention of electrical engineering graduates.
