Title       : Building Computational Physics Into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1992      
File        : a9250477

Award Number: 9250477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Moloney moloney@nextwork.rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              A cluster of 486/33 IBM-compatible PCs ia being used to assist                 
              Rose-Hulman physics and applied optics (PH/AO) faculty in                      
              building computational physics into all areas of the                           
              curriculum.Every Rose-Hulman freshman is now exposed to the                    
              Mathematica symbolic mathematics package for a full year.  The                 
              cluster of PCs enables PH/AO faculty to first get familiar with                
              Mathematica, and then develop regular Mathematica assignments                  
              at all course levels in the undergraduate curriculum, to                       
              reinforce and build up students' skills.  These often use the                  
              notebook feature, so students can modify a template or shell.In                
              upper level PH/AO courses, a different set of simulations and                  
              assignments are based on materials in the CUPS (Comprehensive                  
              Undergraduate Physics Software) project (available in beta                     
              version, starting in September, 1992).  This requires much less                
              effort from faculty, because written CUPS resource materials                   
              always suggest a number of ways in which students can explore                  
              the physics by modifying existing source programs.  CUPS                       
              simulations across the upper-level physics courses should                      
              generate a lot of interest in both students and faculty.  The                  
              cluster provides an accessible high-speed computing resource to                
              run and use CUPS.In addition, the machines support extensive                   
              chaos simulations, and experimental data acquisition for a                     
              course being offered on chaos in physical systems.An                           
              extracurricular software activity for PH/AO majors will be                     
              initiated, using the cluster as the main resource.  This will                  
              work in parallel with other departmental efforts to generate                   
              software demonstrations to enhance classroom teaching.  It                     
              should also increase student interest in physics or applied                    
              optics as a major.
