Title       : VPW: Qualification Match and Job Match (Economics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9250117

Award Number: 9250117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joni Hersch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1320,9225,
Abstract    :
                    This effort takes a different approach to modeling job                   
              matches than previous theoretical research.  Rather than viewing a             
              bad match as a mistake that will be corrected by turnover when                 
              more information is available, matches in which workers are either             
              over- or under-qualified may in fact be optimal, both ex ante and              
              ex post.  In particular, from the firm's point of view, although               
              turnover will be higher for an overqualified worker, hiring and                
              training costs will be lower.  Further, over-qualified workers                 
              constitute a pool from which promotions are made, thereby                      
              reducing hiring costs for higher level positions.  For under-qualified         
              workers, hiring and training costs will be higher but turnover will            
              be lower, since such workers will have fewer alternative                       
              opportunities.  Employers are aware of these tradeoffs and                     
              knowingly hire mismatched workers.  Similarly, workers realize that            
              they are in a bad match, but enter such matches knowingly due to               
              search and mobility costs and because of opportunities for                     
              promotion.  Previous empirical research has been restricted by                 
              data availability to examining only education match with the                   
              worker's current job.  The new data set used in this research is               
              unique in that it provides extensive information on match between              
              entry level requirements and worker qualifications, as well as                 
              information on promotions, training, and other information that                
              allows a more general quantification of job match quality.                     
              Consistent with the implications of the model, empirical results               
              indicate that workers who are over-qualified at hire receive less              
              training and more promotions, and that workers over-qualified for              
              their current job are more likely to quit.  Gender differences in              
              training and promotions, and working conditions as determinants                
              or job match quality, are also examined.                                       
                    The significance of the research for examining the labor                 
              market is that it explains why firms hire workers that are both                
              under- and over-qualified for jobs, and why workers accept jobs                
              for which they are either under- or over-qualified.  It adds to our            
              knowledge of the wage gap between men and women by                             
              examining gender differences in quits and promotions.  The                     
              research also contributes to public policy debate about the role of            
              higher education in the labor market since some researchers have               
              been concerned about over-education, arguing that it is correlated             
              with a number of attributes thought to adversely affect productivity.          
              This project demonstrates that there are trade-offs between                    
              education and other worker qualifications, so that concern about               
              over-education may be misdirected.                                             
                    The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                   
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:  hosting          
              a symposium on the role of women in the economics profession;                  
              teaching a course in labor economics; hosting "brown bag"                      
              lunches; meeting individually with women students in economics;                
              and presenting papers in seminars.
