Title       : FT-IR Spectroscopy and Computer Interfaced Instrumentation in the Chemistry
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1992       
File        : a9250668

Award Number: 9250668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur S. Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Oatis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy J. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Long Island U Southampton
	      Montauk Highway
	      Southampton, NY  11968    516/283-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will give students hands-on experience with                       
              computer-interfaced instrumentation by incorporating fourier                   
              transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy into six undergraduate                 
              chemistry courses.  In General Chemistry, the instrument will                  
              be used to study isotopic substitution and to correlate the                    
              spectrum of an unknown compound with those in a computerized                   
              database.  Applications in Organic Chemistry include structural                
              interpretation and identification of reaction products,                        
              compounds isolated from natural sources, and real life samples                 
              (e.g., cinnamon and mouthwash).  Polymers synthesized by                       
              students will be characterized by FT-IR.  In Instrumental                      
              Analysis, students will record IR spectra of single strands of                 
              hair in a methods development experiment and will determine the                
              percentage of ethanol in gasohol samples.  Other FT-IR                         
              experiments include a kinetics study of a ligand substitution                  
              reaction in Physical Chemistry and enzyme-substrate                            
              interactions in aqueous solution in Biochemistry.  The                         
              experience gained by students will give them skills to apply to                
              other computer-interfaced instruments and valuable training for                
              graduate school and the workforce.
