Title       : Laboratory Development for Signal Processing and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9250641

Award Number: 9250641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred T. Johnson alfred.t.johnson@widener.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              JoAnn B. Koskol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond P. Jefferis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Widener Univ Main Campus
	      14th and Chestnut
	      Chester, PA  19013    215/499-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to implement a data                           
              acquisition laboratory to be used by electrical engineering                    
              majors for experiments in signal analysis, digital filtering                   
              and digital control.  The laboratory will exploit new personal                 
              computer technology in which microcomputer and signal                          
              processing elements are integrated with software in a single                   
              commercial workstation.  This equipment provides an integrated,                
              self-networking system which contains the necessary software                   
              and hardware to provide a sophisticated, user-friendly                         
              environment for digital signal processing, system analysis,and                 
              design.  Eight NeXT computer workstations will be set up in a                  
              room specifically dedicated to the proposed laboratory.  In                    
              addition to the computer equipment, each workstation will                      
              include a signal generator, digital voltmeter, and tape                        
              recorder.  This equipment will enable students to generate                     
              analog signals, acquire them through a data port, process them                 
              digitally, and observe the processed signal in the time or                     
              frequency domain.  The Mathematica mathematics programming                     
              language will be used for computational and modeling studies                   
              associated with the teaching of control systems.
