Title       : Incorporating Object-Oriented Concepts in the Introductory Computer Science
               Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9250254

Award Number: 9250254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55803              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajiv Tewari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at a comprehensive redesign cf the                       
              laboratory component of the three-course introductory                          
              undergraduate computer science course sequence at Temple                       
              University.  The objective is to better address the fundamental                
              and recurring concepts identified in the ACM/IEEE report                       
              Computing Curricula '91, such as, complexity of large programs,                
              levels of abstraction, binding, abstract data types,                           
              information hiding and separation of concerns, evolution of                    
              requirements, and software reuse.  It is planned to introduce                  
              these topics by integrating concepts and tools from current                    
              research and practice in software engineering and object-                      
              oriented programming into the three targeted courses.It is                     
              appropriate that the laboratory environment for this project                   
              provide extensive support for the practice of modern techniques                
              in software development, graphical user interfaces, and                        
              adequate class libraries to enable student projects of moderate                
              to high difficulty.  A UNIX based workstation laboratory most                  
              closely meets the corresponding hardware and software                          
              requirements.  The equipment provided under this project                       
              consists of a SUN SPARCserver and ten SPARCstations.  The SPARC                
              platform has available public domain object-oriented software                  
              such as InterViews, NIHCL class library, and ET++.  Good                       
              software availability, excellent computing power, support for                  
              graphical interfaces, and potential for future expandability of                
              the server, are all significant components of the system                       
              planned.
