Title       : Mathematical Preparation of Elementary School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1992       
File        : a9250042

Award Number: 9250042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank K. Lester   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Consort Mathe/Its Applic
	      57 Bedford Street
	      Lexington, MA  02420    781/862-7878

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The Consortium for Mathematics and Its Applications, COMAP,                    
              requests funding for a one-year planning grant to develop a large-             
              scale, long term project which addresses the need to carefully                 
              research, and plan comprehensive systemic changes in all aspects of            
              the mathematics preparation of preservice elementary teachers, in              
              particular the mathematics content courses and faculty enhancement.            
              The proposal will also begin implementation of key goals of the                
              long term plan.  This proposal is a direct result and extension of             
              two previously funded Teacher Preparation Projects, TPE 90-54620,              
              and TPE 91-54518.  The former was a conference (3 meetings) of key             
              leaders in mathematics, mathematics education, and education,                  
              including professors, teachers, supervisors, state supervisors, and            
              researchers.  One outcome of the conference was the urgent need to             
              learn more about the current state of the mathematics preparation              
              of teachers;  this led to the second funded project to conduct a               
              survey and research this question.  With Exxon Foundation funding,             
              another meeting was held with a subset of the original participants            
              to look at the need to completely overhaul and redesign the                    
              elementary mathematics curriculum for elementary teachers with all             
              of its ramifications, in particular the role and support of the                
              mathematics community and mathematics departments.                             
                                                                                             
              The proposers request funds for a project to define and develop                
              specific mathematics content courses for preservice  elementary                
              teachers.  These courses are based on the framework defined by the             
              MAA Call For Change and the NCTM reform documents, in particular               
              the Professional Teaching Standards and the Addenda Project to the             
              Curriculum and Evaluation Standards.  The project will address four            
              major goals and plan the long range strategies to address these                
              goals:  development of a philosophical position  on the nature of              
              learning/teaching mathematics and the development of content                   
              courses for the mathematics preparation of elementary teachers                 
              based on previously developed standards;  identification and, if               
              necessary, planning the production of materials which exemplify the            
              philosophy and standards;  development of large-scale, multi-site              
              mathematics college/faculty enhancement projects; and enlisting                
              support for the project from professional organizations, state                 
              certifying agencies, supervisors at all levels, school districts,              
              and specially mathematics departments.  This project has been                  
              endorsed by the president of the National Council of Teachers of               
              Mathematics and by the Exxon Foundation which has co-funded the two            
              previous grants.  The Advisory Board is representative of the major            
              mathematics organizations:  The Mathematical Association of                    
              America, the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, and the              
              American Mathematical Society.                                                 
                                                                                             
              COMAP will cost-share the project by providing support equivalent              
              to 32% of the requested NSF funding.
