Title       : Development of Flight Controls Design Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9250646

Award Number: 9250646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6092               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Biezad DBiezad@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St Univ
	      One Grand Avenue
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project involves enhancement of the Flight Controls Design                
              Laboratory (CONLAB) to facilitate undergraduate experiments                    
              related to flight control design and testing in the general                    
              area of aeronautical engineering.  The flight control design is                
              for a small hovercraft and consists of integrating motion                      
              sensors and propulsive control with a computer so that the                     
              hovercraft is capable of autonomous flight.  The first                         
              experiment will stabilize the hovercraft using a gyro, the                     
              second will give the hovercraft directional control in heading,                
              and the third will provide navigation capability via satellite                 
              positioning.  The satellite positioning will be provided by                    
              Global Positioning System sensors which are now available at                   
              low cost to universities.  The grant is for the acquisition of                 
              major instrumentation : sensors, interface hardware, and                       
              systems software required for simulation and test.  Emphasis in                
              the experiments is on systems design and integration.  The                     
              hardware interface and software algorithms required are open-                  
              ended, iterative design tasks.  Students will work in teams and                
              observe the differences between system simulation on a computer                
              and system test using a prototype vehicle.  The purpose of the                 
              experiments is to apply the theory in a team oriented fashion                  
              allowing considerable creativity in the process.  This also                    
              will give the students exposure to the systems integration                     
              problems that they will meet in industry.
