Title       : VPW: Unofficial Markets for Foreign Currency & Goods in theFormer Soviet Union
               and Eastern Europe (Economics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1992    
File        : a9250102

Award Number: 9250102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134893             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1320,
Abstract    :
                    This research focuses on the black markets for foreign                   
              currency and goods in the former Soviet Union and Eastern                      
              Europe.  Parallel markets in goods and currency are influenced by              
              developments in the official and unofficial markets for foreign-               
              currency trade and by economic-reform initiatives.  The objective              
              of the research is to trace, both theoretically and empirically, the           
              implications of anticipated and unanticipated policy reforms for               
              hoarding of consumption goods, inflation, the black-market                     
              exchange rate, and black-market trade volumes in the former                    
              Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.  The methodological approach                  
              is drawn from the theory of exchange-rate determination, with the              
              portfolio theory of asset demands and exchange-rate                            
              determination agumented to show that when there are shortages                  
              in goods markets and individuals tend to hoard goods as a form                 
              of investment, with black-market exchange rates biased predictors              
              of the post-reform equilibrium exchange rates.  Announcements of               
              reform can lead short-run exchange rates to overshoot or                       
              undershoot (depending on the announcement) long-run                            
              equilibrium levels.  The empirical work will examine black-market              
              exchange rates (buy and sell rates) between the rouble and the                 
              dollar, as drawn from bi-weekly sampling of Moscow black-market                
              currency dealers.  The determinants of black-market exchange-                  
              rate movements will be identified empirically, as will be the                  
              determinants of the spread between the bid and ask prices in this              
              market.  If appropriate data is available, black-market prices for             
              goods also will be studied.  Exchange rate and price data for the              
              Baltic nations also may be examined.                                           
                    This research will provide insights into the distortions                 
              caused when governments use black-market rates to choose                       
              levels of official exchange rates.                                             
                    The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                   
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              teaching a course in International Finance; presenting independent             
              research on "Exchange-Rate Regimes in Transition Economies" in                 
              departmental seminars in International Economics and                           
              Comparative Economic Studies; regularly participating in the                   
              International Economics seminar program; and working to                        
              promote the achievement of women in economics by active                        
              involvement with female graduate students through the established              
              support group "Women in Economics."
