Title       : A Comprehensive and Coherent Integration of Computing Throughout the Physics
               Core Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9250659

Award Number: 9250659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Titus btitus@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9255,
Abstract    :
              Advances in computing technology continue both to bring marked                 
              changes in the skills needed for physics research and to                       
              present new opportunities for physics teaching.  A two-fold                    
              problem faces many physics departments today:  (1) how to give                 
              their undergraduate majors the computing tools and skills they                 
              will later need, such as proficiency in programming, using                     
              spreadsheets and computational packages like Mathematica,                      
              technical word processing, data acquisition and analysis, and                  
              networking;  and (2) how to make room to learn these new tools                 
              and skills by rethinking the educational use of computing and                  
              the content of the courses required for majors.  This project                  
              sets out a program to attack this problem to find a solution                   
              that can serve as a national model for other physics                           
              departments.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              With three NeXT workstations and release time provided by this                 
              grant, the entire faculty of the department will spend portions                
              of a 15-month period working on a comprehensive and coherent                   
              integration of workstations and computing in the core physics                  
              curriculum, one that will not add to the number of courses                     
              required for the major nor increase student workload.  Each of                 
              the faculty will focus on one or two courses they have recently                
              taught and for which they will be responsible the following                    
              year.  They will explore computer-based pedagogical                            
              opportunities for themselves, and devise ways to build on and                  
              extend the computing skills learned by students in prior                       
              courses.  Faculty will also be assisted by students, visit                     
              other institutions, attend workshops and conferences on                        
              curricular computing, and bring consultants to campus.  At the                 
              end of the project, the department will sponsor a one-week                     
              workshop to share what has been learned with colleagues at                     
              other institutions.
