Title       : Undergraduate Telecommunication Network Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1992     
File        : a9250974

Award Number: 9250974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Y. Hui   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will integrate the teaching of telephony, data,                   
              and optical communication for undergraduates.  The graphical                   
              object-oriented software CANeT will be used to facilitate an                   
              intuitive and experimental understanding of difficult                          
              networking concepts and analysis.  The experiments will be                     
              performed on nine SUN IPX workstations served by a SUN SPARC II                
              GX workstation.  The workstations will be networked by an                      
              ethernet network and an optical FDDI network.  The ethernet                    
              network will provide basic low-speed communication among the                   
              workstations, while the FDDI network will serve to demonstrate                 
              traffic measurements and high-speed networks for transporting                  
              graphics, data, and video.  The network, besides being the Tool                
              for experimentation, also is the Object of experimentation.                    
              Students will acquire hands-on experience on a real network by                 
              implementing and testing elementary network protocols using                    
              UNIX sockets.  Special projects following the course will train                
              students to handle real network problems.The course emphasizes                 
              the skill of analyzing a complex system into its components,                   
              solving the component problems, and then synthesizing the                      
              component solutions to meet system objectives.  Engineering                    
              iterates is a key feature of the CANeT tool for meeting system                 
              objectives.  System modeling is also emphasized, whereas                       
              sophisticated mathematical analysis is facilitated by CANeT.                   
              Programming exercises allow students to learn communication                    
              protocol by experimentation, rather than by deciphering                        
              acronyms of standards.This project will establish a modern                     
              network laboratory, with numerous exercises and projects, and                  
              plans for disseminating the laboratory software are                            
              incorporated.  An undergraduate textbook based on a new                        
              framework rather than the usual OSI 7 layer framework will be                  
              completed.
