Title       : Applied Artificial Intelligence amd Robotics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9250435

Award Number: 9250435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sam R. Thangiah thangiah@samuel.cpsc.sru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Fearday  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Slippery Rock U of PA
	      
	      Slippery Rock, PA  16057    412/794-2510

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              There is a need to expose students to practical problem solving                
              methods taught in computer science classes.  This project will                 
              create an Applied Artificial Intelligence and Robotics                         
              Laboratory for teaching undergraduate students the theory and                  
              application of artificial intelligence methods to solve large                  
              scale real world problems.  The laboratory will consist of four                
              NeXT stations, a NeXT cube, a NeXT dimension, a B12 Mobile                     
              Robot and artificial intelligence software.  The software to                   
              control the B12 Mobile robot will be developed and downloaded                  
              directly from the NeXT systems, allowing students to                           
              concentrate primarily on the practical aspects of problem                      
              solving. The laboratory will be integrated into the course work                
              by dividing the lectures into class and laboratory sessions.                   
              The class lectures will concentrate on the theoretical aspects                 
              of artificial intelligence methods and the laboratory sessions                 
              will consist of experiments that allow the students to                         
              experience the theory and its interaction with the real world.                 
              The main objectives and salient features of the laboratory are:                
              1) providing at least 40 students a year the opportunity to                    
              solve large scale real world problems using state-of-the-art                   
              systems and artificial intelligence software;  2) exposing                     
              students to theoretical and practical aspects of artificial                    
              intelligence methods for problem solving;  and 3) providing a                  
              laboratory facility for interdepartmental use of equipment,                    
              independent projects and future course development.Since all                   
              the equipment and software used in this laboratory are                         
              commercially available, these experiments can be duplicated by                 
              other institutions.  The results from this project will be                     
              reported in professional journals.
