Title       : VPW: Pattern Formation Phenomena in the Spreading of Fluids (Materials Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9250114

Award Number: 9250114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane D. LeGrange   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1762,9225,
Abstract    :
                    Pattern formation phenomena occur universally in nature.                 
              The proposed work focuses on one dimensional pattern formation                 
              which occurs in wetting, with the objective of understanding the               
              spreading of a fluid meniscus coated by a surfactant monolayer.                
              Wetting dynamics are to be studied by microscopic imaging of a                 
              vertical meniscus to view the motion of the three phase contact                
              line as it moves in response to an applied thermal gradient.                   
              Quantitative analysis of patterns forming in the spreading front of            
              the pure fluid and in the monolayer is used to elucidate the                   
              mechanisms underlying the instabilities in the wetting process                 
              causing the pattern growth.                                                    
                    The work proposed on the spreading of a fluid                            
              contaminated by a surfactant is relevant to technologies such as               
              oil recovery, chemical spraying, and coating processes.  In                    
              addition to contributing to the understanding of a complex wetting             
              problem, this work may further the understanding of the deposition             
              of an organic layer on an inorganic substrate, as is done in the               
              Langmuir-Blodgett process.                                                     
                    This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                  
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:  the              
              development and teaching of a new course in the Princeton                      
              Materials Institute; initiating a program to introduce lower level             
              undergraduates to scientific and/or engineering research as a                  
              career option; and a seminar series on organic materials which                 
              includes several women speakers.
