Title       : CARGO: Multi-Scale Topological Analysis of Time-Evolving Shapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0138420

Award Number: 0138420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jarek Rossignac jarek@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Greg Turk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Ghrist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Szymczak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0138420
Jarek Rossignac

We propose to develop the theoretical
              foundations and a 
set of practical computing tools for the automatic analysis
              
of time-evolving shapes. Given a family of surfaces that 
represent the
              boundary of a 3D shape whose geometry and 
topology change with time, we
              propose to construct a 
higher-dimensional multiresolution representation,
              which 
we have named Atlas Transition Diagram, abbreviated ATD, 
that will
              identify and track the morphological and 
topological features of the 3D shape
              as they evolve with 
time and with resolution. Our ATD will also associate a
              
chart to each feature, thus providing a surface-parameterization 
that
              naturally follows the branches and handles of each 
shape in the family. The
              charts evolve smoothly with time 
and resolution and are topologically glued
              together at 
their common boundaries to provide a continuous mapping,
              
S(r,t,u,v;f); f), that, given a feature ff, a resolution rr, 
a time tt, and
              two parameters u and v, will identify a 
unique point on the surface and will
              allow us to trace 
its evolution with rr and tt. The theoretical underpinnings
              
and algorithmic designs that will lead to a practical 
implementation of an
              efficient system for building and 
querying ATDs go far beyond simple
              extensions of Morse 
theory, of surface segmentation approaches, and of
              
multi-resolution techniques, which have so far been 
mainly explored for
              static surfaces in 3D.

Evolving surfaces are important to many scientific
              
and engineering disciplines, including medicine, 
developmental biology,
              cell biology, computational 
fluid dynamics and computer aided design. They
              may 
for example represent the growth of a tumor, the shifting 
in position
              of a vortex over an airplane wing, or the 
budding of fingers on the hand of a
              human embryo.  We 
propose to develop and integrate a collection of
              
theoretical and algorithmic tools for the analysis 
and automated
              visualization of such evolutions. These 
tools will allow us to partition the
              evolving surface 
into features upon which a high-level description of 
the
              shape of the surface and of its evolution will be 
based. Furthermore, they
              will allow us to track their 
points, and thus surface properties, through
              time and 
to better visualize their evolutions through texture 
maps that
              continuously evolve with the features and 
highlight their boundaries and
              natural orientation. 
Finally, these tools will help us support queries
              
about the time and nature of topological changes 
in the evolving surface,
              which may be important for 
the automatic analysis and retrieval of scientific
              
datasets. To achieve these results, we propose to 
build a surface
              representation that is controlled 
independently or simultaneously by time and
              resolution 
and to decompose the time/resolution domain into cells 
where the
              surface topology (number of components and 
through holes) and its partition
              into features remain 
constant. To validate our theoretical contributions
              
and to increase their impact on the community, we plan 
to develop a
              prototype implementation for animated 
objects with triangulated boundaries.
              We expect to 
make the source code of this implementation and its
              
programming interface publicly available. We envision 
exploring
              collaborations with application developers 
in Science, Engineering, Medicine
              and Biology to help 
us refine and validate this approach.

