Title       : Applied Research on Implementing Diagnostic Instructional Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0138668

Award Number: 0138668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $741863             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Minstrell jimminstrell@talariainc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela A. Kraus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Talaria Inc
	      705 Second Avenue
	      Seattle, WA  98104    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Talaria, Inc., proposes a three-year project to increase understanding of how to
              get research results on teaching and learning into teachers' minds and actions.
               To accomplish this, a teacher professional development program will be
              designed to implement DIAGNOSER, a computerized diagnostic instructional tool. 
              The DIAGNOSER is a web-delivered system in which students answer
              assignments/questions and teachers access the report on the students after they
              have completed the assignments.  DIAGNOSER focuses on physical sciences, force
              and motion at the middle-school level.  The professional development program
              will provide teachers with opportunities to use formative assessment tools,
              interpret student data, interact with and reflect on each other's practice, and
              access research and science resources.  Participating teachers include those
              involved in three middle-school Local Systemic Change Projects in Washington
              State.  The program involves one workshop, teacher networks, face-to-face
              meeting with teachers and resource teachers for in-class coaching.  The
              improvement of the program will be done through iterations
              (design-testing-redesign).  The research will focus on two questions:  What are
              the effects of the professional development and diagnostic instructional tools
              on teachers' teaching and students' learning?  What are the teacher and system
              factors related to the effective implementation of the tools?  The premise of
              the proposal is that at the end of the study there will be a prototype program
              that can be scalable nationally.  


