Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experience in Native American Archaeology &
               Heritage Preservation: A Cooperative Project of the Univ.of Arizona & the White
               Mountain Apache Tribe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0138995

Award Number: 0138995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Mills bmills@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for an Undergraduate Research Experience in Native
              American Archaeology and Heritage Preservation:  A Cooperative Project of the
              University of Arizona and The White Mountain Apache Tribe.  A major focus of
              the project will be to demonstrate, through participatory activities, the
              scientific and heritage benefits of cooperative research in archaeology.  The
              REU experience will combine the resources of the University of Arizona's
              Department of Anthropology, which has an archaeological research station in
              Pinedale, Arizona, with one of the most active tribal heritage resource
              management programs operated by the White Mountain Apache Tribe on the Fort
              Apache Indian Reservation.  Ten students will be supported for the six-week
              program each summer.  Students will be drawn from undergraduates from across
              the country, with special recruitment from Native American communities. 
              Student research activities will include mapping of Pueblo and Apache sites,
              archaeological survey, surface collections, ruins stabilization, damage
              assessment, laboratory processing and analyses, field trips, and excavation. 
              All but the excavation and field trip component will be held on the Fort Apache
              Indian Reservation in east-central Arizona.  Excavations will be conducted on
              the Sitgreaves National Forest.  A distingui8shed lecture series will be
              included as well as an ethics component.  The results of the research projects
              will be presented in a mini-symposium at the end of the project and the
              symposium proceedings will be submitted to the White Mountain Apache
              Tribe.

This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to
              attract talented students into careers in science through active undergraduate
              research experiences.
