Title       : Normal Subgroup Structure of the Groups of Rational Points of Algebraic Groups
               and of Their Special Subgroups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0138315

Award Number: 0138315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei S. Rapinchuk asr3x@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding for an investigation of the normal
              subgroup
structure of groups of rational points of algebraic groups
              over
general as well as over special (primarily, global) fields.
              The
principal investigator attempts to prove a new conjecture on
solvability
              of finite quotients of the groups of rational points of
simple algebraic
              groups over arbitrary infinite fields.
He also plans to analyze finite
              quotients of the multiplicative group
of a finite dimensional division algebra
              in order to obtain their
reasonable classification. Another central problem is
              investigation
of the Margulis-Platonov conjecture for special unitary groups
              over
global fields. The principal investigator collaborates on these
              problems
with Gopal Prasad, Yoav Segev and Gary Seitz. He also plans to
              work
with Gopal Prasad on a joint book project in the congruence
              subgroup
problem.

Questions related to the normal subgroup structure of
              linear groups
have historical roots in the 19th century (Galois, Jordan,
              Dixon),
and have been an area of active research in the 20th century.
              Recently,
new techniques for analyzing this problem for anisotropic
              groups
over general fields have been discovered in the joint work of
              the
principal investigator with Y.Segev and G.Seitz. These techniques
              enable
one to investigate groups over general fields using methods of
              the
theory of valuations, which were previously used only in
              the
number-theoretic setting of global fields. This approach fits into
the
              general area of investigation of the congruence subgroup problem,
which is
              connected with other fundamental problems in number theory,
currently applied
              in data transmission, data processing and communication
systems.
