Title       : US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement: The Evolution of Long-Tongued Fly
               Pollinators (Diptera: Tabanidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0138288

Award Number: 0138288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Sanderson mjsanderson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Cranston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1066,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0138288
M. Sanderson

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
              graduate student, Ms. Shelah Morita, working under the guidance of Professor
              Michael Sanderson, in the Section of Evolution and Ecology at the University of
              California-Davis, to conduct a study in South Africa on the coevolution of
              long-tongued horse flies (Diptera: Tabanidae) and the deep-throated flowers
              that they pollinate.

The study of coevolution can provide knowledge about
              the importance of species interactions in speciation, but present day
              associations between species may not reflect their past relationships. 
              Diptera:  Tabanidae is an ideal system for studying coevolution because their
              unusually long mouthparts are thought to covary with the morphological features
              of the flowers on which they feed, and it has already been demonstrated that
              these horse flies are closely tied to the fitness of the endemic flora of the
              South African fynbos region.  But the biogeographical distribution of this
              group of horse flies does not match the predicted biotic distribution provided
              by the current understanding of historical biogeography.  Ms. Morita hypotheses
              that: 1) Nectar-feeding Tabanidae in South Africa have coevolved with the
              plants they pollinate, and 2) Blood feeding is ancestral in female long-tongued
              horse flies within the tribe Philolichini.  She also seeks to learn if the
              current classification of horse flies correctly represents their evolutionary
              relationships.  Through a unique combination of phylogenetic approach and
              population-level studies, Ms. Morita will first study the phylogenies of both
              plants and pollinators, after which she will analyze the coevolution of
              proboscis length and nectar spur length in order to understand the evolutionary
              relationships within this group of Tabanidae.  The student will use data
              obtained from field collected samples and institutional specimens.  Dr. Steven
              Johnson, with the School of Botany and Zoology at the University of Natal, is a
              noted authority on the pollination ecology and plant systematics of this
              system, and he will provide guidance on this project to Ms. Morita. 

The
              results of this study are expected to advance the current knowledge on how
              animals and plants coevolve and new feeding behaviors are acquired.  This
              project will also support an international research experience very early in
              the career of an outstanding graduate student.

The Office of International
              Science and Engineering and the Division of Environmental Biology jointly fund
              this project.

