Title       : New Solid-State NMR Techniques for Analyzing Insoluble Organic Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0138117

Award Number: 0138117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus Schmidt-Rohr srohr@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,9197,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry and the
              Geology and Paleontology Programs, Professor Klaus Schmidt-Rohr and coworkers
              at Iowa State University, advanced solid-state NMR methodologies will be
              developed and applied to identify at least 40 specific functional groups and
              estimate their concentrations in natural organic matter. This will be achieved
              by means of a set of efficient new spectral-editing pulse sequences based on
              heteronuclear dipolar couplings or chemical-shift anisotropies.  Furthermore,
              the larger environment of a given functional group will be identified in two-
              and three-dimensional correlation experiments, and inhomogeneities on a 1- to
              50-nm scale by spin diffusion. NMR dynamics measurements will enable the search
              for soft mobile regions that have been invoked to explain the partitioning of
              organic contaminants into soil organic matter. Near the end of the project,
              improved structural models for examples of soil and marine organic matter will
              be generated. 

Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy will be used to
              elucidate the chemical and supramolecular structures of insoluble organic
              substances that are presented by the natural environment, such as soil and
              marine organic matter, kerogen, or bituminous materials. To this end, advanced
              solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance methods are being developed that can
              identify and quantify a large number of chemical groups in organic solids.  In
              addition, nanometer-scale domains will be characterized.  The NMR methods will
              be used to characterize the chemical binding sites of contaminants; to help
              understand nutrient release into soil; to indicate methods for enhanced carbon
              sequestration in soil to reduce "greenhouse gases" in the atmosphere; and to
              shed light on the chemical processes of soil, kerogen, and fossil-fuel
              formation. This will help to provide deeper insights into the chemical history
              of natural organic matter, its role in the global carbon cycle, and the results
              of human activities on the environment. 

