Title       : CARGO: Advanced Topological Methods for Robust Surface Intersection Algorithms
               and Trimmed Surface Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0138411

Award Number: 0138411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400014             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rida T. Farouki farouki@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Hass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0138411
Rida T. Farouki

Though motivated by practical engineering
              considerations, 
surface intersection problems have deep roots in diverse
              
areas of mathematics, including algebra, geometry, topology, 
analysis, and
              numerical methods.  The proposed project will 
bring the diverse expertise and
              renewed commitment of an inter-disciplinary team of mathematicians,
              computer
scientists, and engineers to bear on this critical problem. 
Since
              successful solutions will require radically new 
approaches and paradigms,
              rather than incremental advances, 
special emphasis will be placed on
              re-visiting the problem 
from first principles, seeking new insights through
              
synergistic dialog among participants with diverse areas of
expertise, and
              use of exploratory software implementations 
as research tools. A central
              theme of the proposed research 
is the ab initio incorporation of topological
              information 
into the formulation and verification of intersection algorithms.
              Although failure to guarantee topological consistency is 
the main deficiency
              of existing algorithms, this remains a 
poorly explored domain. Our initial
              line of enquiry will
focus on using the homotopy or "embedding" method to
              track 
topological changes in implicitly-defined algebraic curves, 
as they
              evolve from "simple" initial configurations into a 
prescribed intersection
              locus.

The accuracy, efficiency, and reliability of modern 
computer-aided
              design (CAD) systems has been severely 
compromised by the persistent lack of
              rigorous algorithms 
for topologically-consistent representations of surface
              
intersections and trimmed surfaces. The solution to this
fundamental problem
              can have tremendous economic impact, 
in terms of eliminating the laborious
              "geometry preparation 
and repair" task that currently precedes the use of CAD
              
data in analysis, manufacturing, and inspection applications, 
and in
              resolving data-exchange incompatibilities among 
different CAD systems. The
              ensuing productivity benefits, 
manifested in accelerated design cycles and
              greater reliance 
on "virtual prototyping" for design verification, are
              crucial 
to the maintenance of technological leadership.



