Title       : Purchase and Installation of a Compactor Storage System in the Entomology
               Research Museum, University of California, Riverside
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0138516

Award Number: 0138516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354773             (Estimated)
Investigator: Serguei V. Triapitsyn serguei.triapitsyn@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Heraty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	With some 3 million specimens, UCR's Entomology Research Museum (ERM) is one of
              the 20 largest insect collections in North America, and one of the 10 largest
              strictly University-based collections.  Given that insects represent the bulk
              of our biodiversity, and this diversity is highest in the southwest, the ERM is
              one of our nation's most important biological resource repositories.  The ERM
              is, unfortunately, operating at a significant space deficit, preventing proper
              curation of the collection and inhibiting growth, affecting its ability to
              house reference material and vouchers for field research and biocontrol work. 
              The need for additional space is immediate and compelling, but no such space is
              or will be available for the foreseeable future.  The only viable solution is
              to improve the storage capacity of the existing space.  Also, the present
              storage cabinets are inadequate; few offer an air-tight seal to deter
              destructive museum pests.  By upgrading to a space-efficient compactor storage
              system with new high-quality cabinets, as requested, the ERM can add storage
              space for over 2 million additional specimens and simultaneously improve access
              to specimens, collection workspace, physical organization, earthquake safety,
              and pest control.
	The continued maintenance and acquisition of material by
              the ERM is vital to the identification of species in support of research,
              applied science, and for the training of new students of Entomology.  The UCR
              Entomology department includes numerous faculty, staff, and students that work
              with and deposit specimens in the ERM, and the ERM participates in a global
              loan program, so its specimens are utilized all over the world.  The ERM's
              parasitic wasp collection is one of the world's most diverse and fastest
              growing, and unlike most similar collections, the majority of its over 500,000
              specimens have host records, making it one of the world's most valuable sources
              of information about beneficial parasitoids of agricultural pests.  The value
              of this reference material of biocontrol agents (and pests) to agriculture
              cannot be overestimated, since the foundation of pest control is the ability to
              accurately identify the various organisms involved, and close ties to
              California's agriculture place the ERM in a recognized position of importance
              for the state's far-reaching biocontrol research.  The ERM's bee collection is
              likewise widely recognized as one of the world's most important, with over
              200,000 specimens representing over half of the 3,000 bee species native to the
              US, several of these being pollinators important to agriculture.  The ERM's
              collections are also increasingly being used in making decisions relating to
              the environment (e.g., Multispecies Conservation Plans), including training of
              environmental consultants, plus acting as a repository and identification
              center for biodiversity surveys in California and elsewhere.  The ERM itself
              has extensive ongoing collecting efforts throughout southern California,
              including surveys of several protected and restricted areas, and is not only
              crucial in assessing the present diversity, but the past, as well, as many
              specimens are 40-100 years old, representing species or populations that are
              extinct, in decline, or have changed substantially over the last century; a
              source of irreplaceable data on Californian insects, and some of the nation's
              most unique and/or threatened habitats.  The ERM further serves as a valuable
              resource for people working with urban pest control, public health, and
              environmental biology, as well as for the general public.  It plays an
              important role in UCR's educational outreach programs, and responds to requests
              by schools and individuals.  It gathers and disseminates information, including
              through the Internet, and local and national media draw on the expertise of the
              ERM staff.  

