Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Statistical Analysis of the Location Factors
               of High-Tech Centers in the United States, 1950-1997: An Evaluation Using
               Quasi-Experimental Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a0138314

Award Number: 0138314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Gordon pgordon@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              What are the location factors that explain successful high-tech centers? Do
              previous studies of the high-tech industry shed light on this question? If not,
              how can we identify plausible factors and causes? These questions will be
              addressed in this dissertation research project through a statistical study of
              U.S. high-tech centers. High-tech industries, as a major job generator and as a
              major industrial innovator, play a key role explaining the postwar U.S.
              economic prosperity. There has been considerable discussion of how to possibly
              duplicate the success of high-tech centers such as Silicon Valley, Route 128,
              or Research Triangle Park. Research has been directed at questions on the
              pivotal location factors of the major high-tech centers, in an attempt to
              assist planners and policy makers who desire to develop similar centers of
              innovation. Previous research has focused on: (1) the role of federal support,
              (2)universities as providers of basic research and as suppliers of educated
              workers, (3)business conditions such as local industry size, patent, venture
              capital, and foreign direct investment, (4) quality of life, which includes
              climate, cost of living, crime, recreation, and education, and (5) combinations
              of factors are considered significant. Most recent studies seek to identify the
              factors that explain the robustness of established centers, but a serious gap
              in these discussions is that they focus on the performance of the group of
              high-tech centers by themselves. The plausibility of conclusions from such
              studies is limited because, to our knowledge, no control groups were used. The
              proposed research would fill this gap by first identifying suitable control
              groups and then systematically testing hypotheses on the explanation of
              high-tech center success. Until the growth and development of these centers is
              clearly understood, it will be difficult to fathom the process on which a
              successful high-tech centers growth policy can be built. Other methods such as
              shift-share, econometric analysis, and panel data analysis will also be
              required to fully test the hypotheses. This research project will necessarily
              employ statistical approaches to identify reliable location factors that
              explain successful high-tech centers. Specifically, a quasi-experimental
              control group method will be used. This involves the selection of a control
              group with similar initial conditions as the successful high-tech centers, and
              requires measuring the differences between the control group and high-tech
              centers. County-level U.S. census data from 1950 will be utilized in order to
              exclude most endogenous effects. To prevent a scale problem among variables in
              the selection process of properly paired comparisons, Mahalanobis distance will
              be adopted; this is a measure frequently used in anthropology, biostatistics,
              epidemiology, and other disciplines (Isserman 1999). Regression analysis will
              be utilized to compare and to identify significant causal factors. Competing
              hypothesis will be tested, and conclusions and policy implications will be
              suggested. The results of this study should provide a better understanding of
              the success of selected high-tech centers. The results can offer guidelines for
              high-tech center development, more so than the available high-tech centers
              literature. In so doing, the study will shed light on plausible high-tech
              location policies that many local and regional governments and planners are
              interested in.

