Title       : New Sorbents for Separation and Purification Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0138190

Award Number: 0138190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249773             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph T. Yang yang@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              New Sorbents for Separation and Purification Processes

As a means of meeting
              more stringent sulfur standards for gasoline and diesel fuels, adsorption under
              ambient conditions has become an attractive alternative (to
              hydrodesulfurization, which is a high-pressure catalytic process). In prior
              work pi-complexation has been exploited for fuel desulfurization.  Thiophene in
              benzene was used as the model system to represent sulfur compounds and
              gasoline, respectively. 
Preliminary results showed that Cu(I)Y and AgY
              zeolites both adsorbed thiophene at low concentrations much more strongly than
              NaY, which is among the best sorbents for desulfurization. Molecular orbital
              calculations showed stronger pi-complexation bonds between these zeolites and
              thiophene than with benzene.  Based on these promising results, a comprehensive
              study of both vapor-phase and liquid-phase adsorption has been undertaken.  Two
              classes of pi-complexation sorbents are used: ion exchanged zeolites and
              monolayer salts supported on high-surface-area substrates involving Cu+ and Ag+
              as
well as other promising d-block cations.  The study investigates thiophene,
              benzothiophene, and dibenzothiophene dissolved benzene and toluene.  

Also,
              the study examines the unique and promising adsorption properties of carbon
              nanotubes.  Preliminary results showed that 2.5% (wt.) of hydrogen could be
              stored in
alkali-doped nanotubes at 1 atm H2, and up to 1% (wt.) H2 could be
              stored in
Ni-containing nanotubes, also at 1 atm H2.  The project studies H2
              adsorption by multi-wall and single-wall carbon nanotubes and graphite
              nanofibers doped with alkali metals, noble metals, and transition metals. 
              Experimental conditions include hydrogen pressures up to 1000 psig,
              temperatures up to 500oC, and nanotubes of various inner diameters. The
              mechanisms of hydrogen storage in nanotubes are studied theoretically through
              molecular orbital and Monte Carlo calculations.  Multiwall nanotubes appear to
              be effective for dioxin removal from combustion gases, exhibiting much better
              capacity that activated carbon so this application is also being tested.
              

This project is aimed at developing efficient sorbents for desulfurization
              of gasoline and diesel fuels under ambient conditions.  Success of this program
              will enable refiners to meet easily the new (2006) sulfur standards.  The
              second aim of this program is to develop carbon nanotubes as sorbents for
              hydrogen storage as well as to explore other unique sorbent properties of
              carbon nanotubes.  The results of this program will make a significant advance
              in the applications of carbon nanotubes and contribute to protection of the
              environment.

