Title       : US-Benin Cooperative Research: Groundwater Characterization In Central Benin
               Using Element Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0138238

Award Number: 0138238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Silliman silliman.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 0000,5928,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0138238
Silliman

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Stephen Silliman, with the Department of Civil
              Engineering and Geological Sciences at the University of Notre Dame, and
              Professor Moussa Boukari, with the Faculty des Sciences et Techniques at the
              Universite Nationale du Benin.  The investigators will conduct a study of the
              groundwater hydrology of central/northern Benin.

Hydrogeologically Benin can
              be subdivided into three regions: southern, central/northern, and northeastern.
               The central/northern region consists primarily of fractured crystalline rock
              with water levels regularly being greater than 40 meters.  Professors Silliman
              and Boukari will collect samples of groundwater, precipitation, and host rock
              from various sites in the central/northern area.  A set of sophisticated
              analytical techniques (ICP-MS and ICP-OES) will be used to conduct geochemical
              analyses to determine: (1) if chemical signatures in the groundwater can be
              used to differentiate atmospheric sources and geologic interactions influencing
              the quality of recharge, (2) whether anthropogenic signatures are observed in
              this groundwater system, and (3) the utility of high-precision element analysis
              for groundwater characterization. This project combines Professor Silliman's
              expertise in the areas of characterization of groundwater systems and
              statistical analysis with Professor Boukari's intimate knowledge of, and
              historical research regarding, the hydrogeology of Benin. Both investigators
              have extensive experience performing field studies.

Through this project the
              investigators expect to achieve a greater understanding about the utility of
              groundwater geochemical measurements in terms of identification of forcing
              functions.  Such information will be valuable to a broad spectrum of
              scientists, including geologists and hydrological and environmental
              researchers.  It will also provide increased insight into the potential for
              development of non-coastal, western Africa, and the current chemical threats to
              water supplies in this area of the developing world.  The results are also
              expected to have applications to improved drilling and hydrofracing techniques.
               The project will include the participation of a US graduate student, who will
              gain experience in conducting field research in a developing country.

The
              Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Earth
              Sciences are jointly providing support for this project.

