Title       : Adaptive Resolution Microscope for Fast Structural and Functional Optical
               Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0138052

Award Number: 0138052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $851205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Saggau psaggau@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for development of a type of confocal microscope
              that will be able to scan samples much more rapidly than current commercial
              instruments.  Optical imaging techniques play an important role in studying
              structure and function of nerve cells, a role that has been facilitated by
              advanced techniques such as multiphoton microscopy.  This type of microscopy
              allows collection of high-quality structural images as well as high-fidelity
              transient signals from light-scattering preparations such as living tissue.
              While the spatial resolution of existing instruments of this type is
              remarkable, their temporal resolution has been limited by use of mechanical
              devices to scan the specimen. As a result, drastic sacrifices of spatial
              resolution are usually necessary when monitoring fast cellular signaling.  The
              instrument to be developed will combine the use of Multiphoton Microscopy with
              Acousto-Optic Laser Scanning. For structural Imaging, the instrument will
              permit significantly higher spatial resolution at fast frame rates. For
              observation of transient signals (functional imaging), it will allow the user
              to select points of interest from previously imaged structures and perform
              multi-site measurements at frame rates of more than 1000 per second. The
              instrument will be of great advantage for experimental work in neuroscience
              where it will allow study the computational properties of individual neurons in
              brain slices by imaging dendritic structures and their function, and to study
              processing of sensory information in intact brain. Other applications are
              likely to include imaging of structure and function in excitable non-neuronal
              tissue, such as heart, smooth and skeletal muscle, and imaging of other
              light-scattering biological preparations. 
