Title       : The First Mummy Range Workshop in Electrical Impedance Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0138498

Award Number: 0138498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Mueller mueller@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) is a medical imaging technique in
              which
low levels of current are applied through electrodes on the surface of
              the
body, the resulting voltage is measured on the electrodes, and an
              inverse
problem is solved computationally to determine the conductivity
              distribution in
the interior.  In EIT the imaged region is often a
              cross-section of the body, such as
a patient's chest.  The tissues and organs
              in the body have different
conductivities, a fact which enables one to form an
              image from the
conductivity distribution.   There is an essential interplay in
              EIT between 
engineering and mathematics.  The design of a fast and accurate
              EIT system 
poses many engineering challenges. Mathematics has helped solve
              design issues 
such as what are the optimal current patterns to apply, what
              number and size of 
electrodes should be used, and what measurement precision
              is need to distinguish
inhomogeneities. In order to image human processes in
              real time, the 
reconstruction algorithms that solve the inverse problem must
              be very efficient.  
Furthermore, for certain applications, such as
              distinguishing a breast tumor 
from a cyst, the reconstructed conductivity
              values must be accurate.  The design 
of reconstruction algorithms draws on
              many areas of mathematics including 
partial differential equations, analysis
              and complex variables,
mathematical modeling, numerical analysis, and
              scientific computation.

The goal of the Mummy Range Workshop in Electrical
              Impedance Tomography is to 
bring together mathematicians, engineers, and
              physicians working in EIT to 
increase the communication between the groups
              and address current problems in 
design issues, applications, and
              reconstruction algorithms.  To the organizers' 
knowledge, this is the first
              conference in EIT specifically designed to bring 
together these groups. The
              workshop will be held at the Pingree Park Campus of 
Colorado State
              University, a conference center located in the Mummy Range of 
the Rocky
              Mountains.  By bringing these groups together, we hope to expand the
clinical
              applications of EIT and push the technology forward in terms of system
design
              and reconstruction algorithms. Several important existing clinical
              
applications of EIT include monitoring heart and lung function, diagnosis
              of
pulmonary embolis (a blood clot in the lung), diagnosis of pulmonary edema,
              
monitoring for internal bleeding, and the early detection of breast
              cancer.
Groups attending the workshop will be presenting work on these
              applications 
and others such as imaging changes in the brain during epilepsy
              and stroke 
and monitoring of cancer tissue during hyperthermia by impedance
              spectroscopy.  
Several groups are presenting work on the design of new
              systems for specific 
applications such as  breast cancer detection, and novel
              reconstruction algorithms 
will be presented.  The workshop website is
              http://www.eitworkshop.org.

