Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Hydrothermal Alteration and Genesis of
               Halloysite Deposits Along the Active Southern Segments of North Anatolian Fault
               Zone, NW Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0138023

Award Number: 0138023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Schroeder schroe@uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,5940,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0138023
Schroeder

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Paul Schroeder, Department of Geology at the University of
              Georgia (UGA), Athens, Georgia and Dr. O. Isik Ece of the Geological Sciences
              Department of Istanbul Technical University (ITU) in Istanbul, Turkey. 
              Tectonic evolution of North Anatolian Fault zone and Neo-Tethys suture belts
              from Aegean Sea to Western Anatolia and the recent discovery of kaolin deposits
              within these tectonic belts have become a new focus of earth scientists in
              assessing resources in the global clay industry and the magnitude of silicate
              alteration effects on global climate change. The purpose of this joint research
              is to determine (1) the alteration mechanism of volcanic rocks to kaolin group
              minerals, and estimate its role in the mass-balance of global element cycles,
              (2) the distribution of parent, secondary and tertiary minerals in order to
              estimate the extent of hydrothermal alteration zones, and (3) to verify
              alteration stages and physico-chemical conditions of volcanic tuffs by
              geochemical analysis of the waters. The area selected for field research in
              Turkey has unique features of mineral occurrences and hydrothermal alterations
              associated with branches of major active North Anatolian Fault system.
              

Scope: The field setting is particularly suitable to examine the full range
              of geochemical and sedimentological conditions leading to the formation of
              economically viable deposits.  Because Turkey is on one of the most active
              fault zones, it provides an ideal setting to study hydrothermal alteration of
              primary (and formation of industrial secondary) clay minerals. The project will
              shed new light on fossil hydrothermal systems and on the occurrence of high
              quality industrial phyllosilicates from the point of view of physical features
              and crystal chemistry.  There is a possibility for the discovery of halloysite
              deposits that could serve the ceramic markets. This study could provide
              mineralogical and geochemical information that can be utilized in understanding
              the genesis of other kaolinite and halloysite occurrences.  Turkish scientists
              will utilize the X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscope and stable
              isotope facilities at UGA.  Geology students from UGA will gain valuable field
              experience and will benefit from the international collaboration.  The project
              meets INT criteria for support of cooperative projects that are mutually
              beneficial. 

