Title       : NIEE Video Project: A Sequel to Gilbane Gold
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0138309

Award Number: 0138309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265661             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy H. Smith Jimmy.Smith@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Loui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Nichols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Lawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A project team of engineer educators, engineer practitioners, and philosophers
              with international reputations in engineering ethics creates a video
              dramatizing a fictional but realistic case study in engineering ethics. This is
              a sequel Gilbane Gold; a highly successful, award-winning video. This video
              will help meet the contemporary need for effective instruction in engineering
              ethics, prompted by recent accreditation requirements for engineering curricula
              to include aspects of engineering ethics, and by increases in requirements for
              awareness of professional ethics in the licensing of professional engineers by
              states' licensing agencies. The video will reach hundreds of thousands of
              engineering students, practicing engineers, and others who work with engineers.
              It emphasizes the positive responsibilities of engineers and the resulting
              benefit to the public, rather than whistle-blowing, which was one aspect of
              Gilbane Gold. 
Because of the globalization of the economy, the new video is
              cast in an international context. The video is done in three versions to
              enhance its exposure and pedagogical effectiveness: a 20-25 minute "basic"
              story version along the lines of Gilbane Gold, a "segmented' version that can
              be viewed in parts, and an "interactive" version on DVD that allows the viewer
              to observe the consequences of different ethical decisions. The film will
              improve the ability of students and practicing engineers to: 
Evaluate
              alternatives according to basic ethical values and through simple tests
              
Identify and distinguish ethical issues, technical issues, and economic
              issues 
Identify affected parties (stakeholders) and their rights and
              responsibilities 
Identify social and political constraints on possible
              solutions 
Determine whether additional information is needed to make a good
              decision 
Formulate alternative courses of action 
Test the alternatives and
              imagine possible consequences of those alternatives. 
Also, the video will
              help the viewers become more aware that: 
Ethical considerations are an
              integral part of making engineering decisions 
A code of ethics will provide
              guidance in the decision-making process 
The obligations of a code of ethics
              do not stop at the United States border 
The obligations of engineers go
              beyond fulfilling a contract with a client or customer. 
The effectiveness of
              the video in achieving these goals is assessed through questionnaires and a
              
standard test of moral reasoning. As part of the dissemination plan and in
              order to assure its wide use in the educational environment, a free copy will
              be sent to every engineering dean in the United States who oversees
              ABET-accredited engineering programs. Free examination copies will also be sent
              to major engineering and applied ethics societies in the United States. This
              wide distribution will encourage use of the video in conveying the importance
              of ethics in  undergraduate curricula, graduate curricula, and continuing
              education programs. 

