Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates - REU: An Idaho Physics Department Based
               Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0138992

Award Number: 0138992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125475             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rex F. Gandy rfgandy@phys.uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Idaho Physics Department will host seven undergraduate physics
              students annually for a ten-week summer research experience. These students
              will closely work with Idaho faculty members and subsequently present their
              research project results at an appropriate venue (e.g. National Conference on
              Undergraduate Research). The objectives of this program are: (1) to introduce
              undergraduate physics majors to the excitement of physics research, (2) to
              train these students in the laboratory skills needed in modern physics
              research, (3) to foster student personal growth by having the students work in
              teams and by teaching them the ethical dimension of scientific research, and
              (4) to promote diversity in the field of physics by encouraging applicants and
              participants from under-represented groups. The Idaho physics faculty will
              design research projects that are challenging yet viable. The areas of research
              in the department that will be represented are condensed matter physics, plasma
              physics, astrophysics, and nuclear physics. Both theoretical and experimental
              projects will be made available. The students will be encouraged to work in
              small groups to foster teamwork skills. Weekly meetings will be held to allow
              the students to interact and to keep each other posted on their progress. The
              REU students will interact with Idaho faculty, research staff personnel,
              post-doctoral researchers, graduate students and undergraduates. Weekend
              activities will take place that revolve around the tremendous outdoor
              experiences available in Idaho. A targeted recruiting plan will be undertaken.
              Particular attention will be given to recruiting from institutions with
              significant populations of students from traditionally under-represented
              groups. The program presented herein will benefit the REU participants by
              allowing them to learn and grow in an active research environment and will also
              benefit the Idaho physics department by bringing bright, enthusiastic
              researchers from around the country into our department.
