Title       : The Chemistry of Etching: Understanding Kinetic Surface Morphologies on an
               Atomic Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0138026

Award Number: 0138026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Hines melissa.hines@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1972,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              Program, addresses the mechanism of etching of silicon surfaces.  Using a
              combination of scanning probe microscopy and kinetic Monte Carlo simulation
              methods, Professor Hines and her colleagues in the Department of Chemistry at
              Cornell University are investigating the effect of etching conditions on the
              silicon surface morphology.  Experiments are addressing the aqueous etching of
              the Si(111) surface by KOH solution, as well as the anodic etching of silicon
              surfaces used to create porous silicon materials.  The effects of step
              orientation, step density, and silicon dopant, as well as etchant composition
              and concentration are being examined.  Results of this work are important for
              the design of nanomaterial technologies, as well as for the development of
              electronic materials processing strategies. 

Information about how chemical
              etchants remove material from the surface of a silicon wafer is important for
              the design of processes to make micro-electromechanical (MEMS) devices, and for
              the production of electronic and photonic devices.  The work of this research
              project is directed to developing an understanding of the aqueous and
              electrochemical etching of silicon, with the goal of developing a microscopic
              understanding of what controls the atomic and nano-scale morphology of the
              etched surface.  With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              Program, Professor Hines and her colleagues at Cornell, are using a combination
              of microscopy and computer simulation to obtain this information. 

