Title       : Development of a Single-Photon Spectrometer/Microscope: Probing Conformational
               Dynamics of Single Biomolecules on a Photon by Photon Basis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0138028

Award Number: 0138028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $663615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoliang S. Xie xie@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the construction of a new, state-of-the-art single-photon
              spectrometer/microscope.  The instrument will enable study of the conformation
              of single molecules of enzymes and nucleic acids using photo-induced electron
              transfer techniques that have been pioneered by the PI.  In comparison to
              available instruments, the device will have an extended excitation frequency
              range and significantly improved time resolution.  The excitation makes use of
              a frequency-doubled and synchronously-pumped optical parametric oscillator. 
              Through collaboration with an Italian group, a custom avalanche photodiode with
              a very small active area will be developed.  The detector will permit the
              probing of short-distance conformational fluctuations.  Among the types of
              experiments the instrument will permit are the use of photo-induced electron
              transfer between tetramethlyrodamine (TMR) dye and guanine to probe the
              conformational dynamics of double-stranded DNA, and the use of fluorescence
              resonant energy transfer (FRET) to probe dynamics of a DNA hairpin. The new
              instrument is expected to make a variety of other new single-molecule
              experiments possible, and to improve knowledge of macromolecular dynamics and
              of the role of conformational fluctuation on macromolecular function. The funds
              provided by the award will also support multidiciplinary training of graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows working at the interface of physics,
              chemistry and biology.

