Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: West Virginia Reach Out:
               Expanding the WV-Handle on Science Project to Grades 7 and 8
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0138285

Award Number: 0138285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carole Stearns                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199595             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. A. Cook   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Goodwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Liberty State College
	      
	      West Liberty, WV  26074    304/336-5000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The West Virginia Pilot Local Systemic Change project will build upon an
              NSF-funded teacher enhancement project targeting K-6 grade teachers.  The
              proposed project will provide content enhancement and leadership development in
              science for sixteen seventh and eighth grade science teachers over a two-year
              period of time.  Two participants from each of the five counties in the region
              served by the Northern Regional Consortium for science, mathematics and
              technology, and three rural counties outside of the Northern Panhandle will
              participate in the project.  The six rural county teachers will be involved via
              distance learning technologies.  Participants will experience a 10-day summer
              workshop, on-line chat sessions, informal science workshops during the academic
              year, and ATM (asynchronous transfer mode) technology.  Four informal science
              education providers will help to expand upon the participants' content
              knowledge and to link real life experiences to the study of science.  During
              the two hundred professional development hours over two years, teachers will
              field test and evaluate modules from the STC/MS, FOSS and SEPUP curricula. 
              Appropriate teaching techniques and a redesign of the current curricula are
              required to allow all of the area's middle level students to learn concepts
              that will serve them well in their changing economy.  As a result, science
              content, especially physical science, and materials will be the primary focus
              of this Pilot LSC project.  


