Title       : Silica-Based Hybrid Media for Chromatographic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0138114

Award Number: 0138114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $413000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Colon lacolon@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award to Professor Luis Colon of the SUNY at Buffalo is supported by the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division. The
              proposed investigations are focused on the synthesis and characterization of
              silica-based organic-inorganic hybrid materials for use in high performance
              liquid chromatography (HPLC) and capillary electrochromatography (CEC).  The
              silica hybrids will be synthesized by copolymerizing alkoxysilanes with
              hydrolyzable alkoxide groups. This approach results in the production of
              chromatographic materials in different formats (i.e., films, monoliths, and
              particles), some with the potential for stability over a wide pH range. The 
              solution chemistry will be monitored with NMR; the physicochemical
              characteristics of the organic-inorganic hybrids will be assessed using ESCA,
              SIMS, FTIR, SEM and/or TEM, microbalance gravimetric analysis, and nitrogen gas
              adsorption methods.  

The proposed investigations are directed toward the
              synthesis and characterization of silica glasses. Different formats of the
              material will be synthesized, suitable for chemical separations.  The different
              parameters used during the fabrication process will be studied to establish the
              reaction conditions leading to materials with the best performance.  The
              characteristics and compositions of the synthesized glasses will be assessed
              using a variety of spectroscopic and physical probes. Fabricated materials such
              as these have potential applications to the separation and purification of a
              large number of chemicals, ranging from pharmaceutical to environmental areas.
              These investigations are part of a long-term research program focused on the
              development and study of new and improved materials for chemical separations in
              the liquid phase.  The research program mainly involves graduate and
              undergraduate in executing the experimentation, contributing to the education,
              development, and training of a new generation of scientists.

