Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: High Precision Spectroscopy of
               Lambda-Hypernuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0138152

Award Number: 0138152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joerg Reinhold reinhold@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pete E. Markowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0138152
Reinhold

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Joerg Reinhold at the Florida International
              University in Miami, Florida and Professor Satoshi Nakamura of Tohoku
              University in Sendai, Japan.  The researchers will undertake a study of the
              high precision spectroscopy of lambda-hpernuclei.  They will be looking at
              hypernuclear excitations in medium heavy nuclei.  A hypernucleus contains a
              hyperon implanted as an "impurity" within the nuclear medium.  This introduces
              a new quantum number, strangeness, into the nucleus, and if the hyperon
              maintains its identity it will not experience Pauli-blocking, easily
              interacting with deeply bound nucleons.  In this sense, it has been proposed
              that the hyperon is a good probe of the interior of a nucleus, where
              information is difficult to obtain.  The researchers will extract the
              characteristics of a hyperon embedded in a nucleus by observing the
              spectroscopy of its states.  

The project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The
              U.S. researchers will have available a new magnetic spectrometer for kaon
              detection which will significantly enhance the capabilities of their Jefferson
              Laboratory's hypernuclear spectrometer system.  For the foreseeable future,
              this instrument will be without competition and will considerably advance the
              field of hypernuclear spectroscopy.  The Japanese researchers contribute a
              significant expertise in hypernuclear spectroscopy, on the experimental as well
              as the theoretical level.  They are currently building a new facility, the
              Japanese Hadron Facility, which will be operational for this research project
              and will contribute to the next generation hypernuclear experiments.  The
              research will offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two
              countries.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  Florida International University's student body is largely
              Hispanic and a number of their graduate and undergraduate students will be
              participating in the research.  A publication committee has been formed that
              will oversee and coordinate the publication of the research results and
              presentations at conferences.  


