Title       : Genetic Control of Cerebellar Zonal Patterning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0138147

Award Number: 0138147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Oberdick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1190,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Much is known about the molecular and genetic mechanisms controlling the
              regionalization of the developing brain, but much less is known about how this
              information ultimately gives rise in maturity to unique brain regions with
              distinct functions.  One strategy to approach this is to dissect the molecular
              and genetic mechanisms controlling the expression of region-or cell-specific
              genes whose products contribute directly to a unique functional property of
              cells in the mature brain.  The rodent cerebellum is ideal for the
              understanding of these mechanisms as there is a rich historical record of
              natural mutations affecting the development and function of this brain region. 
              In addition much is known about the precise neurobiological functions of its
              constituent.  The purpose of our proposed experiments will be to determine the
              molecular mechanisms of expression of the L7/Pep-2 gene in the rodent
              cerebellum.  In the mature brain this gene is expressed only in cerebellar
              Purkinje cells and not in any non-brain tissues.  In addition, the gene is
              expressed in a transient pattern of stripes in the cerebellum during the
              development and this pattern reflects the well know-known zonal wiring diagram
              of the cerebellum.  Furthermore, the L7-Pcp-2 protein carries a GoLoco-domain
              and functions as a modulator of GDP binding to large heterotrimeric G-proteins
              suggesting a role of the protein in modulation of Ca2+channels, a major
              component of information flow in Purkinje cells.  We have combined a novel in
              vivo expression strategy using transgenic mice with comparative genomics to
              identify key DNA sequence elements within the promoter (expression control
              region) of the L7/Pcp-2 gene.  The data show very high conservation across
              species of both the sequence and spacing of seven elements within a short
              region of this promoter.  One of these elements is a binding site for the
              orphan nuclear receptor, RORa, a likely modulator of Ca2+ metabolism genes in
              bone that is also known to be expressed in Purkinje cells.  The aims will be i)
              to determine more precisely the role of these elements by expression testing in
              further transgenic mouse studies, ii) to use FPLC purification and MALDI-MS
              protein sequencing to identify the key factors that bind to these elements, and
              III) to test the effect of null mutation of these factors on the expression of
              L7/Pcp-2.  These studies provide the best opportunity to-date to identify a
              precise molecular complex controlling both cell-specific and G-protein
              pathway-specific gene expression in the brain.
