Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Investigations of the Chemistry of Carbon Vapor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0138234

Award Number: 0138234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8364               (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip B. Shevlin shevlpb@mail.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0138234
Shevlin

Description:  This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Dr. Philip Shevlin, Professor of Chemistry, Auburn University,
              Auburn, Alabama, and Dr. Fatma Sevin, Professor of Chemistry at Hacettepe
              University in Ankara.  They plan to conduct studies of the reactions of carbon
              vapor with hydroxy- and alkoxy-substituted organic species with the objective
              of having deeper understanding of both carbon atom chemistry and carbene
              rearrangements.  The chemistry of carbon vapor forms the intellectual
              foundation for topics as diverse as the formation of fullerenes / nanotubes /
              soot, combustion processes, and the reaction chemistry of interstellar clouds. 
              Carbon atoms are among the few chemical species whose reactions from several
              excited states can be studied.  These studies are intended to extend our
              knowledge of the effects of extreme electron deficiency on chemical reactivity.
               Many of the unusual molecules that are formed as products of carbon atom
              reactions, for instance the highly strained small-ring cumulenes to be studied
              in this project, are otherwise inaccessible.  Practical benefits from carbon
              vapor reaction studies include the prospects for new materials such as modified
              fullerenes and fulleroids.

Scope:  The project brings together a leading US
              expert in the field and a young energetic Turkish (female) scientist to work in
              an important research area.  Shevlin is the leading chemist in the US in
              studying the organic chemistry of carbon vapor, and will provide expertise in
              the intricacies of atomic carbon generation.  Dr. Sevin has developed some
              experimental expertise through previous collaborations in Professor Shevlin's
              lab at Auburn, and also has considerable theoretical expertise. There is a
              potential for significant educational and developmental benefits.  The
              investigation of carbon vapor chemistry involves extremely sophisticated ideas
              but the equipment required, now that it has been effectively developed by
              Professor Shevlin, is robust and transportable.  Thus it is quite feasible to
              set up a facility at Hacettepe University in Turkey for these experiments. 
              This will enable Dr. Sevin to provide cutting edge research opportunities to
              her students, and to enhance the training of young chemists in Turkey.   Dr.
              Shevlin and his university will benefit from having Turkish scientists as
              graduate students and postdoctoral research associates.  This proposal meets
              the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual
              interest.  The project is being funded jointly by the Office of International
              Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemistry.

