Title       : Novel Benchtop Bioreactor for Tissue Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0138039

Award Number: 0138039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $496338             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kaplan david.kaplan@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the development of a novel bioreactor system by
              investigators at Tufts and Harvard Universities.  The bioreactor will be able
              to provide a broad range of environmental stimuli for study of tissue
              engineering and basic aspects of tissue development. The goal of the project is
              to provide an improved reactor system that can be used to increase
              understanding of the effects of perfusion, gas transport, mechanical forces,
              and biochemical stimuli on cell and tissue differentiation in vitro. The
              proposed reactor is expected to reduce the need to develop specific reactors
              whose design is specific to the cells and tissues to be studied. This advanced
              reactor system will build upon an initial design that was intended to permit
              the application of complex multi-dimensional strain to cells growing on
              matrices in a reactor. This system was used successfully to induce
              differentiation of adult mesenchymal progenitor cells into ligament forming
              cells, without the need for exogenous cell signaling factors, a major advance
              in the field. The planned improvements include a multi-dimensional force
              monitoring system, reactor vessel position control systems to increase options
              for cell seeding, and thorough fluid mechanics characterization of the reactor
              vessel and system to explore developmental cascades for a variety of tissues,
              as well as fundamental studies of cellular and tissue responses. Software for
              user programmable features (process variables, timing, data and sample
              collection) will be included. The system has the potential to become a platform
              used widely in applied and basic investigations of the environmental and
              chemical signals that lead individual cells to form well-differentiated
              tissues.
