Title       : Re-housing and Database Development of the Primary Type Specimens in the
               Entomological Collection of the Academy of Natural Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0138649

Award Number: 0138649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon K. Gelhaus gelhaus@ansp.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A primary type specimen holds a special status in scientific research, as it is
              the name-bearer specimen on which the recognition of the species is based.  The
              International Code of Zoological Nomenclature states that institutions holding
              primary type specimens should take all necessary steps for their safe
              preservation, make them accessible for study and publish lists of the type
              specimens in their collections.  The Entomology Department of the Academy of
              Natural Sciences has holdings of over 11,000 primary type specimens of insects
              and related invertebrates.  The current housing of the primary type specimens
              is sub-standard, with antiquated metal cabinets with degraded felt gaskets that
              do little to prevent intrusions by pests and do not ameliorate greatly the
              fluctuations in room temperature and humidity.  Some drawers in the cabinets
              show significant gaps that also can allow pests to enter.  The type specimens
              of many groups of insects are stored with multiple species per storage tray,
              subjecting each specimen to unnecessary handling and causing problems in
              re-associating loose parts with the appropriate specimen.  Some of the
              collections have been exchanged with other institutions in the past, and the
              lack of available lists of type specimen holdings of the Entomology Department
              at the Academy of Natural Sciences has caused unnecessary confusion for
              researchers and hindered their scientific research.  This project will re-house
              the type specimens in state of the art cabinetry, and expand to safer storage
              of just one species per storage unit.  This project will also develop a primary
              type computer database that will be used in the re-curation process, to help in
              collection management, and most importantly, to be available to users
              worldwide, through searchable Internet access.  The entire two-year project
              will cost $124,020.  The Academy of Natural Sciences and the Bradley Bequest
              (administered through Cornell University) will provide $31,588 (35%); the
              remainder is funded through the National Science Foundation.
	Accurate species
              identification is essential in scientific research, for example, as a tool for
              understanding global biological diversity, to confirm the identify of an
              invasive or beneficial species, or to help characterize a threatened species. 
              Primary type specimens serve as the foundation of accurate identifications and
              act in an important role in stabilizing the naming system of species that is
              used worldwide by scientists, government agencies, conservationists, educators,
              and students.  The type specimens not only must be preserved for use now and
              for future generations, but the information available with the specimens must
              be available for use worldwide.  This project not only preserves the specimens,
              but the information on the specimen holdings will be available through the
              internet to users worldwide when they need to use it.  This re-housing,
              cataloging, and internet accessibility for the primary type specimens in this
              project are all necessary first steps toward subsequent digital imaging of the
              specimens and internet image access in future years.

