Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Processing for Sub-Micron Imaging in
               Supercritical CO2: An Integrated Approach to the Deposition and Development of
               Photoresists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0138283

Award Number: 0138283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. DeSimone desimone@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0138283 
DeSimone

Description: This project supports a cooperative research
              between Dr. Joseph DeSimone, Department of Chemistry, University of North
              Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill, North Carolina and Dr. Yusuf Menceloglu,
              Department of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University (SU),
              Istanbul, Turkey.  They plan to research means to improve the manufacturing of
              semiconductor devices.  A bottleneck in advancing semiconductor devices to
              sub-micron features is the development of novel resist materials that show
              nearly unprecedented sensitivity at the desired exposures and undergo a
              fundamental shift away from the phenolic resins that have been used as the
              basis for virtually all optical resist development, while improving the
              environmental conditions associated with the process. The PI and his colleagues
              will synthesize an array of fluorinated polymers that will enable photoresist
              fabrication using a supercritical CO2 process.  The two groups plan to develop
              new photoresists for 157 nm lithography.  The new resists will be transparent,
              and will be soluble at liquid and/or supercritical CO2.  Their properties will
              be evaluated by theoretical calculations, and then their synthesis will be
              conducted at SU laboratories. The research may lead to significant change in
              future microelectronic processes and could have a major impact on rendering
              photoresist production an environmentally friendly process.

Scope: The two
              groups at UNC and SU have complementary capabilities and technical resources. 
              A combination of activities will be used to facilitate communication between
              the two groups over the proposed three-year collaboration including one-month
              per year visits to SU laboratories, electronic mail, and teleconferencing. The
              two groups have collaborated in the past to develop eight US patents on
              heterogeneous polymerizations in CO2 and to produce several publications in
              important journals on polymerizations and on characterizations of polymer
              materials.  A graduate student at UNC will participate in the project providing
              him with an international experience.  Funding is provided by the Office of
              International Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemical and
              Transport Systems.

