Title       : Collaborative Research: Single Cell Proteomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0138048

Award Number: 0138048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $820721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Soper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin L. McCarley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for a joint project aimed at the development of
              aggressive new analytical strategies for protein sequence analysis based on
              mass spectrometry.  The effort involves investigators at Louisiana State
              University, who are accomplished in the manufacture of micrometer-sized
              devices, and their collaborator at the University of Cincinnati, who is skilled
              in high resolution mass spectrometry.  Microfabrication techniques will be used
              to develop integrated micro-systems expected to permit analysis of the proteins
              in a single cell.  The use of microfludics will help maintain the proteins at a
              high enough concentration to permit analysis even though the amount of each
              protein found in a cell is on the order of 3000 molecules.  The devices to be
              used in this project are built using polymers and micromanufacturing techniques
              to fabricate high-aspect-ratio molding dies for hot embossing polymers.  The
              devices will be tested and refined through studies of chloroplast-derived
              membranes thought to contain at least 150 different proteins. Within the
              context of the proposed effort, these studies will be extended to examine the
              proteome, i.e., the entire complement of proteins, of intact chloroplasts of
              Arabadopsis and of entire cells of the blue-green algae Synechocystis.  If
              fully successful, the instrumentation will allow biochemical analyses of
              individual cells and thus contribute to a better understanding of the
              relationship of gene expression and cellular phenotype.

