Title       : Computational and Algorithmic Representations of Geometric Objects - CARGO: The
               Geometry of Optical Paths: Intrinsic Properties, Complexity of Approximation,
               and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0138440

Award Number: 0138440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Arvo arvo@cs.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0138440
James R. Arvo

The most familiar principle of geometrical optics
              asserts 
that a ray of light impinging on an ideal mirror will emerge 
in
              such a way that the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.    The
              trajectory of a photon (or a billiard ball, 
using another common metaphor),
              is thus completely determined 
by its initial conditions and the geometry of
              the mirrors it subsequently encounters.  The geometry of such trajectories
              
has been of interest in numerous fields, including plane 
geometry,
              computational geometry, and computer graphics, 
yet they comprise a
              vanishingly small subset (a set of 
measure zero) within the class of all
              optical paths that 
fall within the purview of geometrical optics.  In
              particular, 
optical paths resulting from non-specular reflections
              
constitute a vastly larger class. Moreover, they are of far 
greater
              importance to image synthesis as they result from 
physically realizable
              models of reflection.  Nonetheless, 
non-specular paths have thus far been
              largely overlooked as 
a source of interesting geometrical problems. The main
              
objective of this research is therefore to launch an
initial investigation
              into the basic geometrical properties 
of non-specular optical paths, both in
              the traditional 
combinatorial  sense, such as finding a optimal paths
              
connecting two points, and in the continuous sense, such 
s finding extremal
              paths, or computing the measure of all 
k-segment paths connecting two
              regions.  A secondary 
objective is to explore connections with probabilistic
              
methods, such as standard Monte Carlo visibility techniques 
and Metropolis
              light transport, which will likely be the 
first direct beneficiaries of this
              work.

This work is expected to contribute primarily to the
mathematical
              foundations of image synthesis by identifying
optical paths as interesting
              geometrical entities in 
themselves, and by exposing some of their fundamental
              
properties in terms of density, measure, and computational 
complexity. 
              Moreover, it is expected that this new 
perspective will ultimately be
              instrumental in studying 
the accuracy and computational complexity of
              realistic 
image synthesis in general, about which very little is 
known
              currently.  While the problems investigated here 
will invariably have much in
              common with previous work on
direct and indirect illumination problems in
              computational
geometry, the approaches taken will have a distinctly
              more
continuous flavor, drawing heavily from fields such as 
measure theory,
              differential geometry, and geometric 
probability. Finally, it is expected
              that this work will 
serve as a segue into a longer-term investigation of
              
computational complexity in computer graphics by 
establishing basic tools
              and connections with other disciplines.

