Title       : Consolidation of the WIS and MAD Herbaria, and Computerization of Wisconsin
               Vascular Plant Specimens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a0138600

Award Number: 0138600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Berry peberry@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will improve the botanical collections facilities at the University
              of Wisconsin-Madison in two ways. First, it will consolidate two campus museum
              facilities into one, by incorporating the USDA Forest Products Laboratory
              Herbarium (acronym "MAD", with 45,000 specimens) into the larger UW-Madison
              Herbarium ("WIS", currently with 1,020,000 specimens). These collections are
              now located at opposite ends of the Madison campus, and their merger will
              consolidate physical, human, and computerization resources, as well as
              facilitate better research and curation of the collections. Whenever the
              incoming specimens from MAD are vouchers for actual wood specimens at the
              Forest Products Lab, they will be digitally photographed by the USDA-FPL before
              arriving at WIS, and these images will be linked to an online reference
              database. To fit the MAD herbarium into the limited space available at WIS, and
              to alleviate overcrowding and correct substandard collection storage conditions
              there, we will install compacterized and non-compacterized specimen storage
              cases in available sections of the main herbarium. The second major improvement
              entails expanding the computerized database of Wisconsin vascular plant
              specimens from the current 100,000 accessions to about 250,000, including all
              herbarium collections from the state at WIS. The Wisconsin Vascular Plants
              website (www.wisc.edu/herbarium) is currently a searchable, species-based
              checklist, with extensive supplementary information and photographs of over
              2,000 species. With the databasing accomplished by this project, we will be
              able to provide online computerized distribution maps for all 2,500 species in
              Wisconsin, as well as searchable record information from any of the 250,000
              databased specimens. 

The Wisconsin Vascular Plant website
              (www.wisc.edu/herbarium) is already a heavily consulted resource at the state
              and national levels (over one million hits in 2001), and we are proud that we
              are able to outreach to a broad public as well as to the scientific community.
              We do this by providing a simple user interface, effective search mechanisms,
              rich graphic content in plant photographs and distribution maps, and useful
              links to associated websites. Our user base includes natural resource managers,
              state and federal agencies, secondary schools and universities, and amateur
              naturalists. With the increased computerization of Wisconsin specimens, we will
              significantly expand the website's role as an effective and continually
              developing online flora. The consolidation of WIS and MAD will provide the
              infrastructure to safely and efficiently manage a combined herbarium of over
              1,100,000 specimens (incorporating some of the unprocessed collections now in
              storage). We will then be among the top five university-based plant collections
              in the country in size and a forerunner in the electronic dissemination of
              plant-related data and images designed to serve both the general public and the
              more specialized scientific community.

