Title       : Characterization of Atmospheric Moisture Transport and the Freshwater Budget of
               the Arctic with an Improved Regional Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0138018

Award Number: 0138018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Serreze serreze@kryos.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0138018
Serreze

Changes in the freshwater budget of the Arctic Basin have
              potentially large impacts on the circulation and sea ice of the Arctic Ocean,
              which is in turn coupled to the global ocean circulation and climate. However,
              the atmospheric components of the arctic freshwater budget are characterized
              relatively poorly and difficult to model. This project will utilize
              state-of-the-art computational methods to improve climatological simulations of
              the atmospheric freshwater budget of the Arctic.

The salient aspect of high
              latitude numerical modeling difficulties is the extreme range of scales that
              must be simulated adequately. Modeling moisture processes requires appropriate
              treatment of interactions at small spatial scales. By contrast, numerous
              observational studies have suggested that arctic climate variability is
              dominated by decadal time scales and planetary spatial scales.

These
              requirements necessitate a trade-off between temporal and spatial scales that
              cannot be addressed readily with current Eulerian modeling methods, due to
              computational stability constraints. This study will implement semi-Lagrangian
              transport for state and dynamical atmospheric variables within the context of a
              fully coupled atmosphere-ocean-sea ice model. This new implementation would
              allow both long-term simulations of the fully coupled arctic climate at high
              resolution, as well as increased use of ensemble techniques for an uncertainty
              analysis of crucial components of the atmospheric hydrologic cycle. Model
              experiments will be used to address the following primary research
              questions:

1. What is the sensitivity of the arctic hydrologic cycle to
              variability in the simulated atmospheric circulation?

2. To what extent does
              the Northern Hemisphere semiannual oscillation influence surface moisture
              fluxes and/or atmospheric moisture transport? What factors influence
              interannual variability and trends in the arctic semiannual oscillation?

3.
              What is the influence of anomalous sea ice and/or snow cover on the atmospheric
              moisture budget over subsequent seasons? Do anomalies in wintertime climate
              indices translate into anomalous precipitation in other seasons? What
              summertime or year-round structures in the arctic climate can be identified in
              atmospheric moisture variables?

4. Does atmospheric convection over land
              play a significant role in the arctic hydrologic cycle during the summer
              season?

