Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: RAMSys: Collaborative Metacomputing System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0138760

Award Number: 0138760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian R. Greenshields ian@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reda A. Ammar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ayman El-Dessouki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 5944,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0138760
Greenshields

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Dr. Ian Greenshields and Dr. Reda Ammar, Department of Computer
              Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut, and
              Dr. Ayman El-Dessouki, President of the Electronics Research Institute (ERI),
              Cairo, Egypt. They propose to do research, which seeks to establish the ERI in
              Cairo as a Center of Excellence in Egypt in grid computing, linking Egyptian
              and US computation resources. The project will include three phases: an
              establishment phase, in which a small US-Egyptian cluster is established at
              ERI, together with extant grid middleware; an educational phase, in which they
              will jointly create an on-line educational resource for Egyptian (and also for
              U.S.) scientists regarding grid computing; and a research phase, in which they
              will exercise the small clusters with a collaborative project in computational
              medicine to assess loading characteristics relative to time differences and the
              effect of low bandwidth network connections relative to problem granularity and
              the ratio of compute time to data transfer time.

Scope: The aggregation of
              widely distributed computing resources into a seamless massively parallel
              virtual machine (grid computer) has the potential for providing cost-effective
              supercomputing and for encouraging international scientific collaboration by
              the sharing of data in a massive virtual data space. However, scientists in
              developing countries tend not to have access either to massive grid computers
              or to the kind of IT support which allows them to exploit inexpensive clusters
              of commodity workstations as local nodes within a collaborative grid.  The
              proposed development can provide the Egyptian scientific community with a
              medium-scale Grid computer, and because of the time differences between Egypt
              and the U.S., machines at U.S. sites which collaborate with Egyptian scientists
              can be harnessed by Egypt during the off-hours at the U.S. end, and the same
              holds for U.S. use of Egyptian machines during off-hours at the Egyptian end.
              The US PI and the Egyptian collaborator have extensive experience in this area
              of research. One graduate student from the University of Connecticut will work
              on the project in Egypt.  This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
              collaborative research in areas of mutual scientific interest. 

