Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ethnoprimatology of Macaca tonkeana: The
               Interface of Primate and Human Ecology in Lore Lindu National Park, Sulawesi,
               Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0138312

Award Number: 0138312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn L. Ehardt cehardt@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In many areas of the world (e.g., Africa, Asia and Southeast Asia), human and
              nonhuman primates increasingly occur in close proximity, often exploiting
              common environmental resources.  This results in situations with strong
              potential for conflict.  Human-nonhuman primate conflict, such as crop raiding,
              often occurs in protected areas (e.g., National Parks), where villagers must
              comply with restricted use/access policies, thus perpetuating negative
              attitudes towards the protected area (and its wildlife) and potentially
              encouraging "illegal" land conversion and poaching.  It is therefore critical
              that research, which occurs within the context of these protected areas,
              address both sides of the conflict. 

Ethnoprimatology is a new area of
              interest within anthropology that addresses ecological and cultural
              interconnections between human and nonhuman primates and their implications for
              conservation.  An ethnoprimatological approach is therefore well-suited to an
              examination of both sides of human-nonhuman primate conflict.  In this research
              the primary unit of investigation will be the "human-nonhuman primate
              community" which includes human residents of the village of Tomado and the
              Tonkean macaques (Macaca tonkeana) that border this village in Lore Lindu
              National Park (LLNP), Central Sulawesi, Indonesia.  This project will
              contribute to ethnoprimatology by examining how Tonkean macaques respond to
              human-induced habitat alteration (e.g., forest use/disturbance and the
              development of agriculture) and how the behavior and ecology of these macaques,
              as well as conservation policy associated with LLNP, affect the livelihoods of
              villagers. 

The significance of this project is threefold.  First, this
              project will be the first long-term research effort to explore the ecology and
              social behavior of M. tonkeana; a little-known macaque species found only in
              Central Sulawesi.  Second, by examining patterns of feeding/foraging and
              habitat use, the researcher will determine the factors that allow these
              macaques to persist in what is becoming the dominant land type in the tropics:
              secondary forest or agriculture/forest 'scrub,' and thus contribute to our
              understanding of the ecological and behavioral flexibility of these primates. 
              Lastly, this project will contribute to the improvement of conservation
              management plans for LLNP in two ways.  First, by examining patterns of habitat
              use in M. tonkeana, the PI can help to improve the management of the area
              between agricultural lands and the forest edge, to minimize human-macaque
              conflict.  Second, the examination of aspects of local human ecology, such as
              attitudes towards conservation and patterns of resource use will inform the
              development of culturally sensitive conservation efforts. 




