Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Cranial Morphological Change in Three Regions
               of North America During the Early to Middle Holocene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0138145

Award Number: 0138145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7308               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe Powell jpowell@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The goal of this research is to obtain a better understanding of the
              evolutionary and environmental events that may have affected the biology of the
              initial migrants into the New World.  Most of the research conducted on early
              Americans (Paleoindians and Early Archaic) has tended to compare their observed
              morphology to that of modern Native Americans, effectively ignoring 8,000 years
              of potential evolution.  Additionally, the majority of the current research has
              been focused on the entire North American continent, paying little attention to
              the potential for regional variation.
	This research project will analyze the
              skeletal variation present among early to middle Holocene (10,000-2000 BP)
              skeletons from three distinct regions of North America (Great Lakes, Great
              Basin, Southeast).  The variation and potential change through time of the
              skull shape will be assessed using multivariate statistical techniques.  In
              order to help counteract small sample problems, randomization methods will be
              used.  The data will also be used in several population genetic models to help
              determine which evolutionary factors may have affected the initial migrants. 
              In addition, the parameters for several current "Peopling of the Americas"
              models will be used in population genetic computer simulations.  The results
              from the simulations will be compared to the observed results to see which of
              the several models (and their corresponding implicit parameters)  are most
              realistic considering the data.
	Data will be collected on relatively complete
              skulls from archaeological sites that date between 2000 BP and 10,000 BP and
              for which appropriate permissions have been obtained.  The skulls are currently
              housed at several institutions throughout North America.
	This research will
              quantify the variation present among the first Americans, examine the
              Paleoindian/Archaic transition from a biological perspective, and elucidate the
              morphological history of Native Americans.  Finally, by incorporating a
              regional approach, the proposed study will evaluate the potential environmental
              effects on this morphological history.


