Title       : Societal Dimensions of Engineering, Science, and Technology - SDEST: Conference
               on Patterns for Shaping the Network Society (Seattle, Washington; May 2002)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0138149

Award Number: 0138149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Schuler douglas@scn.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cptr Profess for Scl Res
	      P.O. Box 717
	      Palo Alto, CA  943020717    650/322-3778

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              "Patterns for Shaping the Network Society" is an ambitious, somewhat
              experimental program, which uses web-based technology, and in-person venues in
              order to develop a web- and print-based "pattern language."  The aim of this
              pattern language is to reflect the composite knowledge of a large, evolving,
              worldwide, highly distributed "community practice," namely those people
              pursuing the democratization and civic society uses of information and
              communication technology. The "pattern language" will be incrementally
              developed over the next year using a fundamentally open process.  A four-day
              conference will be convened in Seattle in May 2002, as an integral part of the
              process (http://www.cpsr.org/conferences/diacO2).

This program is intend to
              address the acute demand for a coherent, shared research and action agenda for
              the development and maintenance of democratic communication and information
              systems worldwide.  It builds on the increasing ubiquity of the web and the
              increasing importance and presence of civil society throughout the world. Our
              approach attempts to achieve the correct balance between technological and
              social mediation in a large collaborative project. To that end we are
              developing the web-based applications that leverage the technological
              capabilities and social processes that promote timely collaboration and human
              judgement and creativity.  The challenge is to develop a complex information
              structure using an open and participatory process that effectively balances the
              conflicting demands of inclusiveness, high quality, coherence, and timeliness. 
              The process, in other words, is as important as the product.  In spite of this
              non-trivial challenge we feel that this program addresses important goals and
              is built upon reasonable assumptions and approaches: even if this program falls
              short of its ultimate objectives, important products such as the conference,
              proceedings, submitted patterns, and analysis will be created.

This
              ambitious and unprecedented project is currently underway.  As of this writing,
              the pattern input and editing portion of the online support system is
              operational and over 50 pattern proposals have been submitted.  The proposals,
              so far, originate in Ghana, India, UK, US, Mexico, Australia, Germany, Sweden,
              Switzerland, Nigeria, South Africa, Malaysia, France, and Brazil and, hence,
              reflect the wide-ranging community that we intend to continue to engage as this
              project goes forward.

Throughout the process a large number of important
              questions come to the fore: how do ideas evolve, what roles to people assume in
              collaborative processes, what legal and other considerations are raised how is
              intellectual ownership handled, how do aynchronous (electronic) collaborative
              approaches reinforce with or detract from synchronous (face-to-face)
              collaborative approaches and vice versa is the "pattern" structure amenable to
              collective knowledge building, is this approach portable to other disciplines
              how many patterns "belong" in a pattern language, how much of the work can be
              done with the technology and how much should be accomplished with people, how
              much of the work can be done in a totally inclusive, open group and how much
              should be done with an "executive committee," etc., etc.

