Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: Lesson Study Communities in
               Secondary Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0138814

Award Number: 0138814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica M. Neagoy                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1266660            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Gorman JGorman@EDC.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Lesson Study Communities in Secondary Mathematics" is a three-year Teacher
              Retention and Renewal project proposing to provide 21 teams of teachers -- or a
              total of 114  secondary mathematics teachers from varied school settings in New
              England -- with 150 hours of substantive professional development in
              mathematics and pedagogy within the framework of "Lesson Study."  This project
              will provide training and support for novice teachers as well as quality
              renewal for veteran teachers.  Stipends of $1,000 will be offered to all
              participants, in addition to money for materials and food.

"Lesson Study" is
              a collaborative form of lesson planning and observation, central to much of the
              professional development activity in Japanese elementary and middle schools. 
              In a first phase, the school faculty selects a research theme or goal.  Small
              groups of teachers then plan detailed "research lessons" and each lesson is
              taught and observed.  Following the observations, the lesson is discussed in
              detail, improved and taught again. Finally, a detailed written record of the
              lesson is produced and shared with other teachers.

"Lesson Study Communities
              in Secondary Mathematics" will build on several prior projects, including the
              NSF-funded "Watertown Pilot," "Park City Mathematics Institute (PCMI)," and the
              NSF-funded "PROMYS for Teachers," whose results are promising regarding "Lesson
              Study's" potential as a powerful vehicle for professional development in
              American secondary schools.

Finally, recognizing that this is one of the
              first secondary-level "Lesson Study" implementations in the United States, the
              project will include a significant research component.  The project's research
              and evaluation efforts will develop images of "Lesson Study" in the American
              secondary school that will help us understand how best to implement and support
              it.

