Title       : Radiataive and Ultrafast Non-radiative Electronic Relaxation in Individual and
               Assembled Noble Metallic Nanopartiacles of Different Shapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0138391

Award Number: 0138391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mostafa A. El-Sayed mostafa.el-sayed@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to study radiative and nonradiative properties of individual
              gold nanodots and nanorods and their self-assembly properties from solution.
              One aspect is to measure properties for silver and copper individual
              nanoparticles in solution and in different liquid and solid media. The second
              is to examine the properties of self-assembled forms of either gold, silver, or
              copper nanoparticles having different shapes. Different methods for
              self-assembly of these nanoparticles from solution will be examined. For the
              individual nanoparticles, the project will address: 1) the dependence of
              electron-phonon and phonon-phonon relaxation on the atomic mass of the metal;
              2) the effect of the medium in which these nanoparticles are dissolved on the
              electron-phonon and phonon-phonon relaxation; and 3) the laser photothermal
              transformation of nanoparticles of different shapes. Because of the close
              proximity of the metallic nanoparticles they are able to couple electronically
              via the plasmon resonance, changing in turn the optical properties of the
              assembled structures compared to those of the individual particles.
              Accordingly, the proposed research will explore radiative and ultrafast
              nonradiative relaxation properties as a function of the particle type, size and
              shape of the multi-particle structure. This is very important when
              incorporating metallic nanoparticles into solid-state devices.  By using
              time-resolved femtosecond pump-probe transient spectroscopy and microscopy, the
              dynamics of heating, cooling and structural transformation will be examined for
              the assembled structures of the individual particles.
%%%
The study of the
              electron dynamics of individual metallic nanoparticles is of great importance
              to fundamental physics and for their potential use in nanotechnology.
              Understanding the electron energy conversion into lattice phonons and the
              interactions of the hot metallic nanoparticles with their surrounding
              environment is of great importance for possible future applications. These
              areas are of high interest to industry, and the proposed studies will train
              these students to contribute to materials science and engineering areas of
              significant national interest. 

