Title       : Web-Based Catalog and Mapping Application of Mexican Land Plant Collections at
               the University of Michigan Herbarium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0138621

Award Number: 0138621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449926             (Estimated)
Investigator: Inigo Granzow-de la Cerda inyigo@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Beach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anton A. Reznicek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christiane Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mexico, with nearly 30,000 plant species, represents one of the great centers of
              biodiversity in the world. Its diverse topography and climates harbor a complex
              mix of tropical, temperate, dry forest, and unique cloud forest floras. The
              Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts, and particularly the dry tropical deciduous
              forests in western Mexico support one of the world's great arid-land floras.
              These rich floras are key to understanding plant evolution and biogeography,
              but are threatened by rapid changes in land and water use. The need for
              accurate and accessible biodiversity information on Mexico's flora has never
              been greater. In the last few decades a new and critical role for specimen
              collections has emerged. Degradation of global ecosystems and the accelerated
              pace of environmental change has led to massive loss of the World's
              biodiversity. Conservation of plant and animal species has thus become a major
              reason for research museums and herbaria. Most old collections from
              biodiversity-rich tropical regions are held ex situ, in museums and herbaria
              within developed countries. As developing nations build strong conservation
              programs they need to access information about organisms from their territory.
              For this reason, and to promote biodiversity research, more conscious efforts
              have to be made by the major, well-established institutions with large holdings
              of material to make this information widely available. The Michigan Herbarium
              with its nearly 1,700,000 specimens, is the seventh largest in the United
              States and the third largest university herbarium. It contains probably the
              second largest and most important collection of Mexican plants outside of
              Mexico, with approximately 240,000 land plant specimens. The project will
              catalog some 130,000 specimens over a three-year period. The data model used is
              SPECIFY, developed at the U of Kansas under the auspices of several federal
              agencies, currently in use for cataloging Michigan plants at the Herbarium. It
              will provide, via the Internet, a digital catalog of public access with
              specimen images and mapping serving capabilities that will allow users to
              perform searches and query spatially on particular areas on a map, download
              species lists and generate distributional data.

The biological information
              contained in specimen collections constitutes an enormous but underutilized
              scientific resource. It is now possible through digital imaging and Internet
              technologies to easy and efficiently capture, store, and access specimen
              information, enormously reducing the potential damage to specimens from
              frequent loans to researchers throughout the world. This project will enhance
              the research value of Mexican plant collections at Michigan for botanists,
              ecologists, resource managers, teachers, students, institutions and Government
              agencies. The project proposed here will also enhance links between the
              University of Michigan and key Mexican scientific institutions like Mexico's
              National Commission for the Study and Use of Biodiversity (CONABIO) and the
              Instituto de Biologia at the National Autonomous University (UNAM), as well as
              other US herbaria with important Mexican collections. The database will be part
              of the REMIB (Mexican Network on Biodiversity Information, to which many
              international institutions belong) and the Species Analyst networks. 

