Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Animal Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0138729

Award Number: 0138729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235655             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Rowland rowland@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Timberlake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Animal Behavior Site Grant
              enables promising undergraduate students to participate in laboratory or field
              research projects in animal behavior.  Each year, the program awards
              internships to 10 students who experience firsthand the nature of the research
              process, the conduct of science in general, and the integrative study of animal
              behavior.  To accomplish these goals, REU pays travel expenses, room & board,
              and a stipend so that interns can spend 10 weeks in the summer on the
              Bloomington campus or at a field site conducting research with scientists from
              Indiana University's Center for the Integrative Study of Animal Behavior. 
              Participation in the research project provides the main focus of the program,
              but interns also participate in research ethics workshops, attend lectures that
              introduce them to the integrative approach to studying animal behavior, and
              write up and orally present their research findings at a final REU Research
              Symposium.  Interns also participate in social activities, field trips and
              activities that help them prepare for graduate school or other postgraduate
              training.  An important objective of the REU in Animal Behavior program is to
              provide to students from groups traditionally underrepresented in science and
              from institutions with limited research opportunities access to cutting-edge
              research and membership in a research university community.  It is expected
              that in the long term this program will help such students consider careers in
              animal behavior or related disciplines and increase their representation in
              science in general.
