Title       : Computational and Algorithmic Representations of Geonetric Objects - CARGO:
               Folding and Unfolding Processes for Polygonal Linkages, with Applications to
               Robotics and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0138374

Award Number: 0138374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99961              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ileana Streinu streinu@cs.smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Levitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonidas J. Guibas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. James Milgram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for DMS - 0138374

This incubation project plans to start an
              interdisciplinary collaboration
whose goal is the understanding of folding and
              unfolding processes for
polygonal linkages and other related structures.

We
              plan to investigate the topology and the algebraic-geometric structure
of
              configuration spaces of two- and three-dimensional serial linkages,
              via
generalizations of recent successful rigidity-theoretic approaches
              based
on pseudo-triangulation mechanisms, and to advance the understanding
              of
the global structure of the associated configuration spaces. 
              The
rigidity-theoretic techniques have allowed the definition of 2-d
              motions
that are purely expansive or contractive: the former can guarantee
              that a
chain will not self-collide.  We plan to extend these techniques to
              three
dimensions and subsequently develop efficient data structures
              and
algorithms for planning, analyzing, approximating, tracking and
              querying
such motions.

We expect that folding problems, beyond their
              intrinsic mathematical
interest, will lead to techniques that will impact
              areas such as molecular
biology, where the protein folding problem is of
              central significance, as
well as robotics and micromechanics, where modular
              kinematic mechanisms
(with possibly large numbers of links) are often
              employed.  The common
denominator of these endeavors, and our main theme, is
              the general
question of planning and reasoning about collision free motions
              for serial
linkages of various kinds. 

