Title       : Incorporation and Improvement of Collections of Marine Invertebrates into the
               Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0138674

Award Number: 0138674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel W. Martin jmartin@nhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angel Valdes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk Fitzhugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Regina Wetzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Hendler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Despite a growing interest in, and concern over, global biodiversity, many
              priceless collections of marine invertebrates (crustaceans, echinoderms, marine
              worms, molluscs, and other groups) have become "orphaned" in recent years. 
              This project will provide funds to care for several existing and diverse
              collections of marine invertebrates that have been donated to the Natural
              History Museum of Los Angeles County. New shelving will be installed on
              existing tracks, and supplies needed to care for these collections will be
              purchased.  Additionally, two persons will be hired in the Museum's Marine
              Biodiversity Processing Center to help sort, curate, and upgrade the
              collections. 

The broader scientific significance of the project is that
              these collections, and others like them, represent windows into historical
              marine diversity along the west coast.  In some cases, the collections contain
              specimens from areas that are no longer accessible.  Such collections form the
              basis for what we understand about marine biodiversity, past and present, and
              represent priceless storehouses of data on Pacific coast marine life. 
              Knowledge gleaned from these collections can form the basis for strong
              educational programs and for making sound decisions in conservation and
              resource management.  

