Title       : A New Facility for the Cornell University Museum of Vertebrates: Moving,
               Compactors, and Cases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0138123

Award Number: 0138123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $459999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy R. McCune arm2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Friel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Winkler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly R. Zamudio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project partially supports the move of the Cornell University Museum of
              Vertebrates (CUMV) to a new museum facility in a building currently under
              construction at the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology (CLO).  Cornell has
              raised over $6M (out of a total project cost of about $32M) for the new museum
              space in this building, which is on schedule for occupation in 2003.  NSF Funds
              will be used to: (1) purchase compact shelving and cases for storage of both
              fluid-preserved specimens and dry specimens (skins, skeletons, nests, and eggs)
              of vertebrates (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals) and (2) provide
              partial funding for moving the collections into the new facility.  This move
              will be the largest single enhancement to the CUMV in more than three decades:
              the new home for the Museum will relieve crowding of specimens, allow expansion
              space and safeguard the collections against a variety of problems related to
              the deterioration of the current facility. The new museum will also include a
              state-of-the art preparation facility, large teaching laboratory, radiography
              room, preparation lab, dermestid room, walk-in freezer, and molecular
              laboratory. 

The CUMV is an active university research museum of national
              importance.  Students and staff are actively engaged in original research, and
              students are trained in curatorial techniques while they help disseminate the
              information in the Museum to scientists and wildlife managers throughout the
              globe.  The CUMV contains one of the most comprehensive collections of fish,
              birds and mammals from the Northeastern United States, and its holdings are
              widely representative of the diversity of vertebrates throughout the world. 
              Museum specimens are irreplaceable sources of data documenting changes in
              ecological conditions, both through the identity of specimens collected from
              pristine localities before alteration by humans, and through the tissues that
              specimens contain, which provide a biochemical window into the genetics of
              historical populations as well as the levels of pollutants their environments
              once contained.  These collections thus provide measures of baseline conditions
              and, through continued accessions, on-going monitoring of the effects of
              environmental changes.  Staff of the CUMV will collaborate with the large
              community of vertebrate biologists at the Laboratory of Ornithology to increase
              the information stored in and interpreted from the Museum's collections, and to
              disseminate the knowledge attained through the variety of web and media
              outlets.

