Title       : The Mechanism of Oxygen Atom Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0138632

Award Number: 0138632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Bach rbach@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
              Professor Robert D. Bach, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Delaware, will continue theoretical studies of oxygen transfer processes in
              both small molecules and in biomolecules. These are systems that are difficult
              to characterize and among the most challenging both theoretically and
              computationally. While the mechanism of oxygen transfer from such classical
              oxygen donors as peracids, dioxiranes and oxaziridines to a variety of
              nucleophiles such as alkenes, amines, sulfides and phosphines in two-electron
              processes are now reasonably well understood, much is yet to be learned about
              the oxidation of saturated hydrocarbons by one-electron oxidative reactions.
              Aided by a highly accurate systematic study of O-O bond dissociation energies,
              Professor Bach has placed his conclusions about the energetics of oxygen
              transfer on a sound thermodynamic basis. The proposed work will lead to a
              better understanding of oxidation reactions using high level theoretical and
              computational methods to explicitly examine the potential role of the excited
              singlet electronic structure of peroxynitrous acid in hydrogen atom abstraction
              processes.

Professor Robert D. Bach, of the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Delaware, with the support of the Organic Dynamics Program,
              studies the mechanism of oxygen atom transfer, which is important in
              understanding the metabolism of drugs in the body. This work is especially
              important to understanding how the family of enzymes known as cytochrome P-450
              metabolizes drugs in animals.

