Title       : GOALI: Development of Transferable Force Fields for Phase Equilibria and
               Simulation Studies of Microheterogeneous Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0138393

Award Number: 0138393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joern Ilja Siepmann siepmann@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sami Karaborni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Abstract
CTS-0138393
Siepmann, Joern I.
University of Minnesota - Twin
              Cities

Accurate knowledge of the phase equilibria and other thermophysical
              properties of complex fluid mixtures are of enormous fundamental and practical
              importance.  The success of molecular simulation in predicting thermophysical
              properties an in advancing our understanding of the relationship between
              molecular architecture and macroscopic observable depends on the availability
              of efficient simulation algorithms and accurate force fields.

The goals of
              the research are to continue the development of three levels of transferable
              force fields and of biased Monte Carlo methods.  The first-level force field,
              called TraPPE-UA (transferable potentials for phase equilibria-united atom),
              employs the united-atom representation for alkyl segments and simple Lennar
              -Jones an Coulombic terms.  In the second level, called TraPPE -EH (explicit
              hydrogen), all atoms including alkyl group hydrogens and some lone-pair
              electron and bond-center sites are treated explicitly.  In the third-level,
              called TraPPE-pol (polarizable), both the van der Waals and electrostatic
              interactions can respond to changes in the environment.  Whereas the first
              level is designed for simplicity and computational efficiency with good
              accuracy, the second level is aimed at improved accuracy for mixtures of
              non-polar or apolar non-hydrogen-bonding compounds.  The third level is
              directed solely at the highest possible level of accuracy and transferability. 
              These transferable force fields will encompass linear, branched, and cyclic
              alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alkylbenzenes, alcohols, ethers, ketones, aldehydes,
              esters, carboxylic acids amines, amides, nitriles, thiols, sulfides,
              heterocycles, perfluorinated alkanes, and last, but not least, water.  In
              addition to the force field development, this proposal also addresses novel
              simulation algorithms which are targeted at efficient simulations of
              solid-fluid equilibria, spatially heterogeneous mixtures, and hydrogen-bonded
              networks.

Molecular simulations using the transferable force fields will be
              employed as engineering tool to
predict thermophysical properties of a variety
              of systems, thereby adding to the available 
experimental database.  The
              simulations will also provide a wealth of microscopic-level information for
              complex chemical systems, thereby giving new physical insight into how
              molecular architecture and composition determine macroscopic phenomena.  In
              particular, simulations will be carried out to investigate the association of
              alcohols in non-polar solvents, the influence of entrainers on structure and
              solubility in supercritical fluids, the effect of pressurization on
              gas-expanded liquids, the solute partitioning between water and octan-1-ol at
              elevated temperatures and pressures, the structures of minimum and maximum
              boiling azeotropic mixtures, the liquid-liquid equilibria of alcohol/water
              mixtures, the partial solubilities of drugs and their sodium derivatives, and
              the influence of solvents on the stability of polymorphs and on solvate
              formation.

This project will profit from extensive collaboration of a close
              university-industry team consisting
of the PI and Dr. Sami Karaborni of Merck
              Research Laboratories.

