Title       : GOALI: Aggregation of Protein Therapeutics in Aqueous Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0138595

Award Number: 0138595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore W. Randolph randolph@pressure3.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Brems  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Byeong Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brent Kendrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Therapeutic proteins provide numerous unique treatments for human diseases
              (e.g., diabetes, and cancer). However, due to their delicate three-dimensional
              structures, proteins are very difficult to keep stable during the required
              18-24 month shelf life of a pharmaceutical product. Furthermore, it is
              currently not possible to predict which solution conditions will result in
              sufficient stability.  The Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to conduct
              fundamental studies of critical physical properties of proteins to develop
              methods for predicting optimal solution conditions for long-term stability.
              This multidisciplinary project combines efforts from Chemical Engineering and
              Pharmaceutical Sciences Departments at the University of Colorado with those of
              Amgen, an industrial partner. The PIs propose to determine the effects of
              critical solution conditions (pH, ionic strength and presence of stabilizing
              excipients) on rate and pathway for aggregation of several model proteins.
              Levels, and kinetics for formation and loss (where applicable) of soluble
              oligomeric species and insoluble precipitates will be measured, and structure
              of proteins in aggregates will be determined with infrared and derivative UV
              spectroscopies.  To understand these effects, the PIs will determine the
              effects of pH, ionic strength and stabilizing excipients on protein structure
              and thermodynamic properties. Protein secondary and tertiary structures will be
              studied with circular dichroism, infrared, fluorescence and derivative-UV
              spectroscopies. The free energy of unfolding and hydrogen-deuterium exchange
              rates will be measured to test the hypothesis that increasing the thermodynamic
              stability of the native state and shifting the native state ensemble toward
              most compact species are important factors for inhibiting protein aggregation.
              The second osmotic virial coefficient will be measured by light scattering to
              assess the effects of solution conditions on the colloidal stability of the
              protein systems. High-pressure spectroscopic techniques will be used to
              complement these measurements. Finally, the effect of solution conditions on
              chemical stability (e.g., deamidation, oxidation and non-native disulfide
              formation) of the model proteins will be determined by the industrial
              collaborators at Amgen, and linkages between physical and chemical stability of
              the model proteins will be elucidated.




