Title       : Curation and Data Capture for Reptilian and Amphibian Biodiversity at American
               Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0138530

Award Number: 0138530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Cole cole@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda S. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	The Department of Herpetology, American Museum of Natural History (AMNH)
              conserves one of the world's largest, globally diverse and most broadly
              utilized scientific collections of amphibian and reptile specimens. The records
              are computerized, but servicing users is hampered by two major problems:(1)
              about half of the specimens may become dissociated from their data owing to
              past use of metal tags that are corroding; and (2) gaps in data captured occur
              in the electronic records. NSF support would allow metal tag replacement and
              completing of data capture concurrently, improving the database in preparation
              for going onto the internet, and continuing current activities in serving the
              international user community. 
	(1) Metal Tags: From 1912-1965 metal tags with
              unique catalog numbers were tied to 180,126 specimens stored in alcohol. The
              metal tags are corroding, some have become completely illegible, and some have
              fallen off their specimen. Consequently, specimens are at risk of becoming
              completely dissociated from their data, which would be a tragic loss to
              science.
	(2) Data Capture: The electronic database was compiled from the
              original hand-written catalog ledgers. We have recently discovered, however,
              that in past decades data in the ledgers were often abbreviated from other
              sources (e.g., jar labels, 3 X 5" card file). Thus, data from these other
              sources need electronic capture before they become dissociated from the
              specimens.
	The herpetological collection has accumulated for more than 130
              years, obtained by AMNH expeditions around the world, purchase of historically
              valuable collections, and donations of private or orphaned collections from
              other institutions. The collection contains 315,784 individually cataloged
              specimens. In addition, 20,000 specimens await cataloging. The collection
              includes 100% of the world's families of amphibians and reptiles, 80% of the
              genera, and about 6,800 species (over 55%). There are more than 650 primary
              types (specimens used for original descriptions of the species).  The
              collection is global in scope, with special strengths in the Western
              Hemisphere, Africa, Pakistan, China, New Guinea, Australia, and Pacific
              islands. The collections are used daily by students and professional scientists
              for global biodiversity research. For example, we provide loans involving
              2100-4100 specimens per year and 169 loans are now open to scholars in 14
              countries.  In addition, last year 39 researchers studied specimens on-site in
              the Department for 261 days. Publications based on the collections are part of
              the primary technical literature in the natural sciences concerning: (1)
              discovery of new species; (2) faunal surveys (resource inventories, economic
              development, siting of nature preserves, conservation); (3) follow-up surveys
              decades later; and (4) monographs, or other research on specific groups of
              organisms, including ones of potential medical (pharmaceutical development) or
              other importance. The collections are also used extensively in education, by
              supporting the research conducted by undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
              students at diverse universities around the world.

