Title       : Design, Synthesis, and Applications ot Tetra (2,3-thienylene) and Related
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0138143

Award Number: 0138143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Marsella michael.marsella@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9179,9239,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this renewal
              award to University of California Riverside to design and synthesize novel
              chiral macromolecular materials based on thienylenes and Dewar benzene. Primary
              focus of the proposal will be to fine tune solid-state electronic and optical
              properties of this system by permanent (non-covalent) guest inclusion.  These
              materials would have potential for applications in photomechanical actuators,
              photolithographic substrates and thermally induced chemiluminescent materials.
              Ultimate goal of the project will be to develop molecular actuators that
              function like "molecular muscles".  Planned research and education activities
              with graduate and undergraduate students including mentoring of minority
              students would prepare them for future careers and studies in science and
              engineering fields.  The proposed web based outreach programs would benefit a
              large number of students in the community and would prepare them for future
              science education.

Novel chiral macromolecular crystalline materials will be
              designed and synthesized from thienylenes and Dewar benzene, both of which
              possess dynamic topologies.  Solid-state electronic and optical properties of
              this system will be studied, and these materials would have potential
              applications as photomechanical actuators, photolithographic substrates and
              thermally induced chemiluminescent materials.  Participation of graduate and
              undergraduate students in the material chemistry related research would prepare
              them for new careers and higher education.  Planned web based programs would
              benefit the whole community, and would create awareness and appreciation of
              science related topics in the community.
