Title       : An Observational and Modeling Study of Derecho-producing Convective Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0138559

Award Number: 0138559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26964              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Stensrud   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Coniglio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the mechanisms responsible for the development and maintenance of
              widespread severe convective windstorms (derechos), that are responsible for
              numerous casualties and significant property damage each year, remains an
              important research focus.  These mechanisms have been examined with idealized
              simulations of strong, line-oriented convection (squall lines) of which
              derecho-producing convective systems are a subset.  These past studies
              emphasize the importance of environmental wind shear in controlling the
              strength and longevity of squall lines.  While recent studies describing
              observed derecho environments suggest that low-level shear is not as dominant a
              factor as some numerical simulations have suggested, the lack of a detailed
              observational baseline describing derecho environments has hindered the
              comparison of these ideas to observations.  

To address these issues three
              main objectives have been defined: 1) collect and analyze a large set of
              proximity soundings from derechos and determine the distribution of wind shear
              and other parameters associated with these events; 2) produce a set of
              idealized numerical simulations to examine the sensitivity of line-oriented
              convection to the range of environments identified in the observational portion
              of this project; 3) examine the forces responsible for maintaining the strong
              updrafts and the strong near-surface winds within the numerical modeling
              experiments. 

This study will produce a detailed classification of the
              observed wind and thermodynamics profiles in derecho environments and will
              increase our knowledge of the physical mechanisms responsible for the
              development and maintenance of the line-oriented convection and the strong
              surface winds within these types of weather systems.  Results potentially will
              lead to better forecasts of these destructive wind storms.
