Title       : Modernization of The Morton Arboretum Herbarium (MOR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0138571

Award Number: 0138571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher P. Dunn cdunn@mortonarb.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morton Arboretum
	      
	      Lisle, IL  60532    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Morton Arboretum has received a grant from the National Science Foundation
              to modernize its Herbarium.  The grant will provide for installation of a new
              compactor shelving system, thereby providing greater accessibility and use of
              the collections by scientists and public users.  The 155,000+ specimens of
              vascular plants are currently housed in 116 cabinets that are filled to
              capacity. A backlog of another 7,500 plants is stored in boxes.  Approximately
              4,500 specimens are added to the Herbarium annually.  The new system will
              guarantee long-term accessibility and improved care of the specimens and will
              increase the Herbarium's storage capacity by more than 50%.    

Increased
              pressure is being placed on the Herbarium to make specimens and herbarium data
              available owing to 1) greater use by botanists, conservation scientists, land
              stewards, and students and 2) continued and extensive vouchering of specimens
              resulting from Arboretum research in taxonomy, conservation, and arboriculture.
               To provide greater use of and access to these collections and to responsibly
              curate them, a modernized herbarium is critical.

Major plant collections
              housed in the Herbarium include: plants of the Chicago region's globally
              significant ecosystems, rare plants of the Midwest, plants of the greater
              Yellowstone area, several important historical collections, and a fine
              collection of lichens and basidiomycetes.  The Morton Arboretum's Herbarium is
              the third largest of any arboretum in North America.  This significance has
              resulted in a major National Leadership Grant from the federal Institute of
              Museum and Library Services (IMLS) to the Arboretum to develop a digital
              herbarium (www.vPlants.org) that includes Chicago regional flora housed at The
              Morton Arboretum, the Field Museum of Natural History, and the Chicago Botanic
              Garden.  The award from NSF will complement that from IMLS, resulting in a
              premier botanical resource in the mid-continent US.  

