Title       : Functional Ortho-Phenyleneethynylenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0138948

Award Number: 0138948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uwe H. Bunz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to synthesize and self-assemble a library of novel ortho
              phenyleneethynylene (OPE), compounds important to advancing the area of
              nano-materials with specific materials properties for possible applications in
              solid-state devices such as sensors. Heterocyclic modules will steer the
              self-assembly of OPEs to helically folded or linearly-extended nano structures.
              Metal ions will be utilized to make self-assembled nano grids. Depending upon
              the selected self-assembly mode, the conjugation in these OPEs can be switched
              on and off at will, without change of the primary structure of the
              phenyleneethynylene. Helically folded OPEs will have a large external surface,
              and almost no accessible interior cavity, similarly to helical proteins.
              Constituents at defined sites depending upon the utilized monomer will decorate
              the helical structures. As a consequence, helices with highly evolved outside
              surfaces, being recognition sites, are viewed as achievable. These decorated
              surfaces will provide a way to manipulate the aggregation of helices towards
              lamellar, micellar, and other super-structures. Novel luminescent
              metallosupramolecular nano-grids will be formed when metal-ions are
              successfully used to coordinate pyrazine-containing OPEs. Such hitherto unknown
              2D-conjugated nano-structures offer exciting prospects for potential
              applications in sensory, device, and semiconductor nano-memory
              applications.

This project will synthesize a class of novel ortho
              phenyleneethynylene (OPE) compounds with expected capabilities to assemble into
              extended, helical and grid-type nano-structures. The self-assembly process is
              guided by specific substitution patterns determined by the chemical
              environment. The overall goal is to develop novel conjugated oligomers
              displaying attractive emissive and sensory attributes relevant to the invention
              of efficient devices such as sensors. The proposed research is important to the
              education and training of young scientists and engineers to work in areas of
              current high national interests. This project is being co-funded by the
              Chemistry Division and the Division of Materials Research.

