Title       : Craniofacial Biomechanics of Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0138565

Award Number: 0138565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185839             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Hylander bill_hylander@baa.mc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine E. Wall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Vinyard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	
Recently there has been renewed interest in determining the functional and
              adaptive significance of symphyseal fusion of the mandible in primates and
              other mammals.  This interest is in part because symphyseal fusion is thought
              to play an important role in various adaptive scenarios of mammalian and
              especially primate evolution.

This study tests the hypothesis that jaw
              muscle force recruitment and firing patterns vary between species of
              strepsirrhines, depending on the stiffness and strength of their symphyses. 
              This hypothesis predicts that those strepsirrhine species such as the indriids,
              with their stiffer, stronger, and often partially-fused symphyses, have a
              jaw-muscle firing pattern that is similar to the derived condition found in
              living anthropoids, i.e., the "wishboning" pattern.  Furthermore, this
              hypothesis also predicts that those strepsirrhines with a completely unfused
              and highly mobile symphysis, such as ring-tailed lemurs and thick-tailed
              galagos, do not have this pattern.  Instead, they have the primitive mammalian
              motor pattern, which is also found in North American opossums and tree
              shrews.

This hypothesis will be tested by analyzing masseter, medial
              pterygoid and temporalis muscle force recruitment and firing patterns using EMG
              techniques in (1) ring-tailed lemurs (Lemur catta), (2) gentle or bamboo lemurs
              (Hapalemur griseus), (3) sifakas (Propithecus verreauxi), and (4) aye-ayes
              (Daubentonia madagascariensis).  It is predicted that EMG patterns in
              ring-tailed lemurs and aye-ayes will be more similar to patterns found in
              thick-tailed galagos, and that EMG patterns in bamboo lemurs and sifakas will
              be more similar to those patterns found in anthropoids. If the predictions for
              bamboo lemurs and sifakas are confirmed, this constitutes a refutation of the
              ontogenetic timing hypothesis regarding symphyseal fusion simply because
              strepsirrhines that exhibit late partial and/or complete fusion are
              hypothesized to not have the "wishboning" pattern of anthropoids.  Furthermore,
              these data would also indicate that the "wishboning" pattern of anthropoids
              evolved more than once within primates, and if so, perhaps it evolved
              independently several times in various primate lineages.  In summary, the main
              purpose of this project is to pursue these matters further by analyzing
              jaw-muscle force recruitment and firing patterns in various strepsirrhine
              species that have completely or partially unfused symphyses, but yet vary in
              the amount of symphyseal stiffness and strength

