Title       : Development of Nested, Autonomous Phytoplankton Monitoring Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0138036

Award Number: 0138036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Kirkpatrick gkirkpat@mote.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mote Marine Lab
	      1600 Ken Thompson Parkway
	      Sarasota, FL  342361004    941/388-4441

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Gary Kirkpatrick at Mote Marine Laboratory, Dr.
              Mark Moline at California Polytechnic State University and Dr. Oscar Schofield
              at Rutgers University to


 develop and expand the present capabilities of
              autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) to study the distribution and taxonomic
              composition of phytoplankton communities.  Traditional methods of study involve
              boats to collect water samples and then manual examination of the individual
              water samples.  The results from the traditional approach have poor spatial and
              time resolution, their quality depends on the expertise of the investigator and
              they are very costly.  The goal of this project is to develop a nested AUV
              observation capability that can provide near continuous in situ data over
              ecologically significant spatial scales.
Specifically, this work will develop
              and integrate an optically-based phytoplankton detection instrument into two
              classes of AUVs to provide an end-to-end in situ phytoplankton detection and
              mapping network.  The existing platforms for this network development effort
              include a Webb Research Corporation non-propeller autonomous glider (owned by
              Rutgers University) and a propeller driven Remote Environmental Measuring UnitS
              (REMUS) (owned by Cal Poly).  The proposed optical detection system consists of
              a capillary waveguide system, which will provide quantitative hyperspectral
              measurements of particulate light absorption which will be used to
              differentiate between phytoplankton groups.  PIs propose to test the developed
              network by detecting and mapping harmful algal blooms (HABs) along the West
              Florida continental shelf.
The proposed systems will complement the broader
              research community efforts to use satellite remote sensing techniques to
              monitor the distribution and taxonomic composition of phytoplankton
              communities.  The resulting systems will have world-wide applicability to
              monitoring and study of phytoplankton communities in freshwater and marine
              systems.  The instruments resulting from the proposed development effort will
              have value as stand-alone tools and as components of observation networks.  The
              undergraduate and graduate students to be involved in this project will gain
              insight into the scientific principals and engineering considerations
              underlying these technologies that will form the basis for future aquatic
              sciences.  Finally, the public will be involved in the information transfer
              aspects of this system through near-real-time data products available on the
              World-Wide Web and visualization of biological community structure through
              existing formal and informal public outreach programs.

