Title       : I-TANGO: Intersections --- Topology, Accuracy and Numerics for Geometric Objects
               (in Computer Aided Design)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0138098

Award Number: 0138098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Peters tpeters@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Takashi Maekawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christoph Hoffmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Patrikalakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0138098
Thomas J. Peters

The investigators will define new
              representations for 
intersecting spline surfaces within computer-aided design
              
(CAD) geometric objects.  They will also create algorithms 
to compute error
              bounds for approximated intersections 
representing topological boundaries. 
              Many modeling
techniques for geometric design depend upon reliable
              
intersection algorithms.  Intersection algorithms will be 
designed to
              deliver spline-based CAD geometric models that 
can be robustly used within a
              variety of engineering 
calculations. These intersection representations and
              error 
bounds will significantly improve robustness between engineering
              
design and computational applications for stress analysis, 
fluid dynamics
              and electromagnetics.  No single intersection representation or method will be
              appropriate for all 
intersection problems, similar to the mature view
taken
              in computational linear algebra relative to matrix 
inversion.  There, a
              matrix is first analyzed as to whether 
it is singular, ill-conditioned (as in
              the case of a Hilbert 
matrix), positive-definite, etc.  For these
              approximated 
spline intersections, new guaranteed error bounds will be
              
developed, as well as corresponding new criteria for
semantic consistency of
              the intersection boundaries formed 
within spline-based geometric
              models.

For example, the significant improvements to approximated 
spline
              models from this project will provide clear benefits 
to science, industry,
              and defense.  The delivery of the 
Boeing 777 airplane has been hailed in the
              popular press 
as the first production of a 'paperless' airplane, meaning
              
that computerized models supplanted the traditional paper
drawings of the
              engineering design room.  While an impressive
milestone, the next ambitious
              step is to eliminate many of 
the physical prototypes used for destructive
              testing
and engineering analyses prior to releasing an airplane.  
These
              tests on physical prototypes are expensive.  An 
appealing, cost-effective
              alternative is to reliably 
simulate the complex behavior of turbulence,
              stress and 
strain on computerized geometric models of these aircraft. 
              
Progress towards that goal has been delayed by inaccuracies 
introduced in
              the geometric input to these simulations, 
specifically along intersection
              boundaries, and improvement 
of such intersections is the primary focus of
              this project.  
This project will ensure relevance to these contemporary
              
aeronautical design problems by the participation of
Boeing scientists and
              engineers.

