Title       : Town and Country: A Regional Study of Swahili Village and Urban Households
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0138319

Award Number: 0138319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adria LaViolette ajl4h@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Adria LaViolette and her colleagues
              will conduct three seasons of archaeological excavations on Pemba Island,
              Tanzania, to address changes in Swahili political economy in the context of
              Iron Age urbanism.  In the first millennium A.D. Swahili society emerged based
              on farming, fishing, and trade.  By the 11th century economic and political
              centers, called stonetowns, dominated the political and economic landscape of
              the entire eastern African seaboard.  Stonetown merchants presiding over
              long-distance trade relationships to the African interior and along much of the
              Indian Ocean rim have formed the basis of reconstructions of Swahili society. 
              With a high density of stonetowns and associated countryside settlements, Pemba
              Island offers a unique location to study the dynamics of an emerging urban
              polity.  A team of American, Tanzanian, and European archaeologists will
              investigate households and domestic spaces in one Pemban polity, targeting
              non-elite households, both urban and rural, hitherto overlooked in
              reconstructions of Swahili society.  Three sites have been chosen for intensive
              testing and excavations.  These include Chwaka, a stonetown inhabited from the
              8th -16th centuries, and two villages that date to the 8th-9th centuries and
              14th-16th centuries.  At these sites, Dr. LaViolette and her collaborators will
              institute an innovative approach to locating the remains of highly ephemeral
              earthen houses.  Once identified, these household remains will be investigated
              through large-scale excavations at each site.  This will allow a comparison of
              household assemblages across economic and social classes within a regional
              polity over an 800-year period.  Close examinations of households will allow
              the reconstruction of the Swahili domestic economy including subsistence,
              manufacturing, provision of services, and local and regional movement of
              domestic goods.  Targeting the domestic economy provides a counterbalance to
              the long-distance prestige economy that has dominated the reconstruction of
              Swahili political economy.  The project will thus focus on three questions: 
              What is the pattern of production and consumption in non-elite rural and urban
              households and how does this compare to that of their elite neighbors?  If
              elites were involved in long-distance trade for the establishment and
              maintenance of social power, were they able to convert those symbols of power
              into economic wealth, and how?  And, what is the relationship between the
              domestic and prestige economies in Swahili society?
 	This project contributes
              to anthropological knowledge about the development of Swahili society; the
              range of sub-Saharan urban models and socio-economic systems; and
              cross-cultural approaches to households and regions within complex societies. 
              Within the literature on African complex societies, this study also contributes
              to a growing understanding of the uniqueness and range of African urbanisms. 
              By exploring the connection between economic wealth and social power-between
              agrarian economies and prestige economies-this project will draw non-elite
              people, places, and production into discussions of political economy and social
              complexity.

