Title       : Tests and Further Development of the Interstitialcy Theory of Liquids and
               Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0138488

Award Number: 0138488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew V. Granato granato@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The principal goals of this program are to test and develop further the
              Interstitialcy Theory of liquids and glasses.  This will be done with critical
              experiments on the interstitialcy concentration dependence of the shear modulus
              and volume, the kinetics of the non-linear, non-exponential  aging effects
              found near the glass temperature, and the Boson Peak arising from
              interstitialcy resonant normal modes.  According to the theory, liquids are
              crystals containing a few percent of self-interstitials in thermal equilibrium,
              while glasses are frozen liquids.  If the behavior predicted by the theory is
              confirmed quantitatively, the results will add to our microscopic understanding
              of liquids and glasses.  This information could be of importance to
              technologies based on amorphous materials. The post doctoral associate involved
              in this program can be expected to play a leading role in the development of
              this emerging area, while the students will be well prepared for a variety of
              career choices as a result of their training in leading-edge
              technologies.

The principal goals of this program are to test and develop
              further a recent microscopic theory of liquids and glasses with several
              critical experiments. For this work, the extraordinary sensitivity of
              measurements of the shear modulus, which plays a central role in the theory,
              will be exploited. If the behavior predicted by the theory on the temperature,
              concentration and aging dependence of the thermodynamic and kinetic properties
              is confirmed quantitatively by these experiments, the results would add
              considerable to our microscopic understanding of liquids and glasses. This
              could provide information relevant to many fields of science (physics,
              chemistry, materials science, geology and biology) as well as technologies
              based on amorphous materials. The post doctoral associate involved in this
              program can be expected to play a leading role in the development of this
              emerging area, while the students will be well prepared for a variety of career
              choices as a result of their training in leading-edge technologies.

