Title       : Nanometer Resolution Spectral Self-interference Fluorescence Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0138425

Award Number: 0138425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna K. Swan swan@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Karl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Selim Unlu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Cantor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bennett B. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nanometer Resolution Spectral Self-interference Fluorescence Microscopy

A
              grant has been awarded to Dr. Anna Swan and collaborators at Boston University
              to develop spectral self-interference fluorescent microscopy, a new technique
              capable of optically resolving in the sub-20 nm range. In comparison to
              confocal fluorescence microscopy, where depth resolution is achieved by
              focusing at different levels in the sample and the axial resolution is ~1
              micron, spectral self-interference will achieve an improvement by a factor of
              50 or better axial resolution. The grant provides funds for instrumentation
              development to create a platform to perform the spectral self-interference
              microscopy. It will consist of a microscope, spectrometer, laser, associated
              optics, control, data acquisition and data inversion, as well as specially
              designed and fabricated micromirrors and positioners to scan the standing wave
              and control the emission interference. The developed instrument will be a
              stand-alone, user-friendly system, and will be used to examine subcellular
              dynamics in a variety of biological systems.

Throughout the history of
              biological and medical sciences, advances in imaging have lead to revolutionary
              advances in understanding. The next great revolution in understanding the
              mechanisms of life will occur when it is possible to observe real-time
              molecular activity within living organisms. While nanoscale resolution is
              routinely achieved in a variety of microscopic techniques including scanned
              probe, electron and ion beam, and single molecule or bead microscopy, none of
              these techniques can provide three-dimensional intracellular molecular imaging
              within living organisms. Self-interference fluorescent microscopy can provide
              the resolution necessary, and this project will develop the instrumentation and
              analysis to make it a versatile and widely useful tool for sub-cellular
              functional biology.
