Title       : ESIE: NAEP Mathematics Assessments: Interpretive Analyses and Materials
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0138733

Award Number: 0138733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1304388            (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Rubillo jrubillo@nctm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank K. Lester  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Kloosterman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Council Tchrs of Math
	      
	      Reston, VA  22091    703/620-9840

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) proposes a three-year
              project, the goal of which is to prepare reports on the 8th grade NAEP
              mathematics assessment conducted in 2000, any NAEP items to be released in 2002
              and several earlier NAEP assessments.  The project concentrates on two issues: 
              (1) Focus 1 which will be the preparation of the interpretive reports that
              include content and process analyses, comparison studies and trend analyses;
              and (2) Focus II which will be the creation of materials for teachers. 
              Products for Professional Development and Teaching will be:  (1) three sets of
              materials based on 4th grade, 8th grade and 12th grade student responses.  The
              first set will be directed toward teachers of grades 3 through 5, the second
              toward middle school teachers and the third toward high school teachers. 
              Materials will be organized around the five NAEP content strands (i.e., number
              sense; properties and operation; measurement; geometry and spatial sense; data
              analysis, statistics and probability; and algebra and functions) to correspond
              with the framework used for Focus I; and (2) facilitator's guides that will
              contain suggestions and strategies to be used by the workshop leaders. 
              Materials for professional development will be piloted in the NCTM meeting and
              through the Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators (AMTE).  Data will be
              collected in the form of surveys and interviews with participants, as well as
              copies of participants' work.  In addition, case studies of teachers sampled
              from elementary, middle and high school levels will be conducted in order to
              obtain a sense of the impact of the materials on teachers' instruction. 
              Evaluation will focus on the progress of Focus I and the impact of materials on
              teachers' classroom practices (Focus II).  An advisory board will oversee the
              analyses, process and products.
