Title       : Design and Fabrication of Gradient Generating Microfluidic Micro-Incubator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0138055

Award Number: 0138055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233323             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noo Li Jeon njeon@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Design and Fabrication of Gradient Generating Microfluidic Micro-Incubator

	A
              grant has been awarded to Dr. Noo Li Jeon at University of California, Irvine
              to develop a microfluidic device that can generate gradients of biological
              molecules and is capable of culturing cells in well-controlled environments. 
              Chemical gradients of biologically active molecules on surfaces and in
              solutions play important roles in many biological processes such as
              development, wound healing, and cancer.    
Recent advances in the field of
              microfabrication and soft lithography enable the fabrication devices that have
              structures of submicron dimensions.  The purpose of this proposal is to develop
              a microfluidic device that is capable of generating gradients of active
              biological molecules that are controlled both spatially and temporally.  This
              device, a microfluidic micro-incubator will be compatible with microscopy
              techniques and will allow long-term cell culture of a variety of cell types. 
              By significantly improving the resolution and stability of gradients and
              actively controlling both the temporal and spatial gradients, the microfluidic
              micro-incubator developed in this study will provide new capabilities for
              in-situ observation and quantification of biological phenomena such as
              chemotaxis (neutrophils, T-cells, and metastatic cancer cells) and growth cone
              guidance of neurons.  
		The ability to expose cells to both temporal and
              spatial gradients of growth factors and other biologically active compounds
              will be broadly useful in a number of biological research applications.   The
              gradient generating microfluidic micro-incubator can be used in understanding
              how cells navigate in complex tissue environments and specifically in
              investigating the processes behind tumor metastasis, wound healing, and other
              biological processes.  With further development, it is envisioned that the
              micro-incubator will find applications in development and testing of new drugs
              for wound healing, breast cancer metastasis, and others.  

