Title       : US-Tunisia Cooperative Research: Vibration Confinement in Seismically Excited
               Linear and Hysteretic Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0138083

Award Number: 0138083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali H. Nayfeh anayfeh@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1058,5928,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0138083 
Nayfeh

Description: This award supports a cooperative research
              project between Professor Ali
Nayfeh, Department of Engineering Sciences and
              Mechanics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VA Tech.),
              Blacksburg, Virginia and Dr. Sami El-Borgi, Department of Engineering, Ecole
              Polytechnique de Tunisie (EPT), Tunis, Tunisia. The investigators will examine
              the control of a seismically excited linear elastic or hysteretic structure by
              passive confinement of vibrations. The objectives of the research are: a) to
              develop a passive control strategy which allows the transfer of the vibrational
              energy from the structure to added passive elements, such as diagonal bracing
              elements, resulting in reducing the vibration amplitudes of the structure and
              bringing it down to its desired equilibrium state more rapidly at the expense
              of slowing down the convergence of the passive elements to their initial state;
              b) to ensure the sensitivity robustness of such a strategy against parameter
              uncertainties related to the mass, damping, and stiffness of the structure; and
              c) to preserve the vibration confinement in the passive elements for various
              types of seismic loadings.

Scope: The protection of structures from harmful
              earthquake and/or wind vibrations is a worldwide issue. The control of
              seismically excited structures by confinement of vibrations with the aid of
              passive elements is a novel design methodology in civil engineering
              applications.  The idea is relevant to various fields, such as mechanical
              systems and multi-floor buildings.  Dr. Nayfeh has been quite active in
              research on linear and nonlinear control of dynamical systems. He will
              collaborate with Dr. El-Borgi and two other Tunisian faculty members.  Dr.
              El-Borgi has been quite active in nonlinear analysis and control of seismically
              excited structures and experimental testing of large civil engineering
              structures.  Funding is provided by the Office of International Science and
              Engineering and the Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems.

