Title       : US-West Africa Workshop: Scientific Data for Decision Making Toward Sustainable
               Development: Senegal River Basin Case Study; Dakar, Senegal, March 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0138247

Award Number: 0138247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Uhlir puhlir@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5928,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0138247
Uhlir

This award supports 17 participants (11 from the United States
              and six from West Africa) in a US-West Africa Workshop on Scientific Data for
              Decision-Making Toward Sustainable Development: Senegal River Basin Case Study,
              scheduled for March 2002 in Dakar, Senegal. The co-organizers are Dr. Paul
              Uhlir, with the US National Committee for the Committee on Data for Science and
              Technology (CODATA) at the National Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Abdoulaye
              Gaye, of the Senegal National Committee for CODATA.  There will be a total of
              approximately 35 participants, who will be drawn from academia and governmental
              and nongovernmental organizations in the United States, Senegal, and other West
              African countries.  Multidisciplinary discussions will focus on biodiversity
              and ecosystem assessment, as well as remote sensing and public health issues. 
              The purposes of the workshop are to: 1) Identify all types of existing
              scientific and technical data and information sources relating to the Senegal
              River basin; 2) Examine how these data and information sources have been used
              for research and decision making regarding the environment and people in the
              Senegal River basin area; and 3) Determine the technical, scientific,
              management, and policy barriers encountered in both the creation of these
              databases and in their use for decision making, and how they might be overcome.
               Site visits will be made to the Diama Dam on the Senegal River and to two
              research institutions. 

Scientific databases relating to the environment,
              natural resources, and health on the African continent are, with few
              exceptions, very difficult to create and manage effectively.  Yet the creation
              of these and other types of databases-and their subsequent use to produce new
              information and knowledge for decision makers-is essential to advancing
              scientific and technical progress in that region and to its sustainable
              development.  This meeting will help identify local and foreign scientific
              databases related to the ecology and environment of the Senegal River system,
              as well as the related human health of its populations.  The compilation of
              information on these databases will help policymakers and citizens make better,
              scientifically based decisions about activities in the region.  The meeting
              will also afford the US participants a unique view of an African science and
              technology data program, and the co-organizers expect it to promote the
              development of linkages which will lead to future cooperative research
              activities.  Workshop results and information on the databases will be made
              available through an online report, and will also be presented at the Summit on
              Sustainability in September 2002 in South Africa. The project supports the
              participation of two graduate students from the United States.

The Office of
              International Science and Engineering and the Division of Biological
              Infrastructure jointly support this award.

