Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: Assessing Technological Literacy
               in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0138715

Award Number: 0138715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel L. Householder                   
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $651312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Pearson gpearson@nae.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi Chudowsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Academy of Engineering and the National Research Council Center for
              Education propose a two-year project, the goal of which is to determine the
              most viable approach or approaches for assessing technological literacy. 
              Technological literacy, as defined in the proposal, includes an understanding
              of the nature of technology, the design process and the history of technology;
              a capacity to ask questions and make informed decisions about technology; and
              some level of hands-on capability related to the use of technology.  The
              project will focus on three distinct populations in the United States:  K-16
              students, K-16 teachers and out-of-school adults.  It is to be overseen by a
              committee appointed by the National Research Council in consultation with the
              National Academy of Engineering which is to be comprised of experts in such
              fields as cognitive science, assessment, curriculum development, technology
              education and teacher education.  The committee will collect and analyze
              relevant literature and get information through workshops and commissioned
              papers prior making a recommendation for assessing technological literacy.  The
              primary product will be a report that describes the committee's work, findings
              and conclusions, and then presents its recommendations.  The outcome will be a
              widely disseminated, visible, well-supported document that will: (a) increase
              the ability of educational researchers and policy makers to critically evaluate
              established and new methods for assessing technological literacy; (b) encourage
              the inclusion of technology-related items in established assessments (e.g.,
              NAEP); and (c) help develop new approaches for determining what various subsets
              of the U.S. population know about technology.  



