Title       : Improving Alaska Native Elementary Students' Math Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0138920

Award Number: 0138920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1228673            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry Lipka rfjml@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This three-year Teacher Retention and Renewal project seeks to improve the
              mathematics performance of Yup'ik Eskimo and urban Native students through four
              basic strategies:  (1) improving teachers' content and pedagogical knowledge,
              (2) involving teachers in action research, (3) recruiting (and retaining)
              mentor/novice Alaska Native teachers, and (4) researching teacher training
              effects and its relationship to teachers' knowledge and student performance.
              The principal vehicle to accomplish these goals is a National Science
              Foundation sponsored curriculum, "Adapting Yup'ik Elders' Knowledge."  This
              curriculum includes culturally relevant topics such as salmon fishing,
              kayaking, orienting and navigating.  Including Native knowledge in the
              classroom may decrease the long-standing tension between school and community,
              which often leads to high teacher turnover.

The instructional components of
              the project include three-week Summer Institutes, follow-up workshops in the
              communities, online support and community math activities. The Summer
              Institutes are devoted to the integration of culture, pedagogy and content
              knowledge through the use of the Adapting Yup'ik Elders' Knowledge curriculum. 
              Through hands-on and inquiry-oriented sessions, participants generate
              questions, work in peer-assisted groups and keep journals as they explore
              mathematics, teaching and culture.  As a teaching tool, the project uses
              videotapes from Alaskan classrooms, from other classrooms using
              culturally-based math programs and from international studies on math teaching
              and learning.  Participants of the Summer Institutes receive credit for three
              University courses:  Geometry and Spatial Reasoning; Algebraic Thinking; and
              Pedagogy, Content and Culture.  The follow-up workshops occur in each community
              and involve teachers, elders, students and families.  To further support the
              mentors and novice teachers, there are three audio conferences during the
              school year and on-line support via the use of Blackboard.  
The project also
              involves a large research study.  The Principal Investigator uses both
              quantitative and qualitative research methods to investigate (a) the
              relationship between the teacher training component and teacher knowledge,
              attitude and performance, and (b) the effects of these processes on Alaska
              Native and Yup'ik student mathematics learning.


