Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: Developing Leadership and Support
               for Professional Learning Communities for Urban Science Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0138945

Award Number: 0138945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Clark                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2308267            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail Richmond gailr@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Retention and renewal of accomplished science teachers in urban schools depend
              on opportunities and support for learning.  This project will establish and
              maintain Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) focused on disciplinary
              knowledge of core scientific theories and models, on scientific ways of
              generating and validating knowledge; on students' understanding and ways of
              learning; on standards and research based teaching; and on qualities of
              exemplary curricula that support teaching/learning.

In Phase I, Michigan
              State University (MSU) science education faculty and graduate students will
              work intensively/collaboratively each summer and school year with a core group
              of 48 K-8 science teachers and principals from the Lansing School District
              (LSD).  These individuals will become master teachers and co-leaders for Phase
              II. 

In Phase II, teacher leaders and principals will coach and mentor 45
              new teachers and teachers new to standards-based, inquiry-oriented teaching,
              each year.  It is expected that 200 new teachers will be mentored during the
              life of the project.   Lansing School District will contribute $25,000 each
              year of the grant for teacher stipends, principal release time, meetings and
              coaching.

Documentation of inquiry in Phases I and II will provide resources
              for the district's work with other teachers focused on inquiry into
              challenging, high-quality teaching and learning; exemplary curriculum matched
              to state and national standards, revised for local urban contexts; and
              experienced mentors and coaches for supporting teachers new to the district. 
              Project impact will be assessed by student performance on district, state and
              national assessments; quality of units and assessments developed by teacher
              participants; quality of support provided by school administrators; and
              additional professional development opportunities sought by participants.    

