Title       : Partial Differential Equations and Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0138519

Award Number: 0138519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Conlon conlon@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Joseph G. Conlon, University of Michigan
DMS-0138519

ABSTRACT
         
                       
   This project is concerned with elliptic and parabolic partial
              differential 
equations and their applications in statistical mechanics. The
              first part of the
proposal is concerned with elliptic and parabolic equations
              in divergence form 
where the coefficients are random variables. The author
              intends to study the 
regularity properties of the expectation value of the
              Green's function, and the 
rate of convergence of the solution of the equation
              to the solution of the 
homogenized equation. The second part of the proposal
              is concerned with the 
application of ideas from the theory of divergence form
              parabolic equations with
random coefficients to Euclidean field theory. The
              relationship between elliptic
and parabolic equations with random coefficients
              and Euclidean field theory was
discovered recently by Helffer and Sjostrand.
              It was then more fully developed 
by Naddaf-Spencer. The author intends to
              apply some ideas he and Naddaf have 
developed for random elliptic equations
              to the Euclidean field theory situation.
In the third part of the proposal 
              the author proposes to study nondivergence 
form elliptic equations with
              random coefficients, in particular an
equation corresponding to Brownian
              motion with a random drift. It has been
shown by Sinai that in one dimension
              diffusion with random drift is strongly
subdiffusive for large time. It has
              been conjectured that in dimension larger 
than 2 the scaling limit of
              diffusion with random drift is Brownian motion. The 
author has found a
              connection between this conjecture and certain combinatorial
problems
              concerning the existence of cycles in graphs. He plans to continue his
program
              to solve these combinatorial problems. The final part of the proposal
              is
concerned with uniformly elliptic equations with deterministic
              coefficients.
The coefficients can oscillate arbitrarily rapidly however. The
              author plans to
continue his work to obtain estimates on the underlying
              diffusion which are
independent of the degree of oscillation of the
              coefficients. This part of the
proposal is related to the previous parts since
              random equations have
coefficients which are rapidly oscillating.
   The goal
              of the proposal is to understand properties of the solution to a
partial
              differential equation when the only information one has is that
              the
coefficients of the equation are bounded in some  way. Within this goal
              there
are two sub-themes: (a) understanding worst possible behavior,
              (b)
understanding "on average" behavior -given our knowledge of the
              coefficients.
The sub-theme (a) is the subject of the final part of the
              proposal. It is
intimately related to problems of stochastic control theory.
              Examples of
stochastic control theory abound in the world of engineering and
              finance. To 
take a financial example, consider the problem of valuing a stock
              option. The
classic work of Black and Scholes shows that the value of the
              option depends
only on the stock volatility. For a stock with constant
              volatility they have a
formula for the value of the option in terms of the
              volatility. The formula is
the solution to a partial differential equation in
              which the volatility is a
coefficient. (a) is therefore related to the problem
              of estimating worst
possible scenarios for option values when one can only
              assume some bounds on 
stock volatility. The sub-theme (b) has similar
              applications to (a). The most
exciting of these to this author is that it
              offers a way of beginning to
understand the problem of turbulence in fluids.
              Turbulence is roughly speaking
the onset of random behavior in the velocity of
              a fluid.  It is well known that 
a fluid will undergo turbulent behavior when
              subject to a sufficiently large
disturbance. The mathematical problem of
              understanding turbulence is well
defined. One simply needs to understand the
              solutions of a partial differential
equation known as the Navier-Stokes
              equation. To date there is not even the
beginnings of an understanding how to
              derive turbulence in a mathematically
rigorous way out of the Navier-Stokes
              equation. The reason is that the fluid
velocity is a coefficient of the
              equation. In the turbulent regime therefore
the Navier-Stokes equation is like
              a partial differential equation with a
random coefficient. The sub-theme (b)
              is then concerned with the "typical"
behavior of the fluid velocity in this
              situation. 
  




