Title       : ITR: Modeling Domain Independent Planning to Advance Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0138690

Award Number: 0138690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adele E. Howe howe@cs.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will contribute to the field of automatic planning by developing
              methods to determine what planner works well under various sets of conditions. 
              It will construct a metaplanner that will be able to test performance of
              existing and hybridized planners on a suite of domains, especially more
              realistic domains than have been used commonly before. Based on the results of
              initial studies, predictive models of planner performance will be developed
              that translate problem and domain features to estimates of how much time would
              be needed by a given planner to solve the problem. The models, in turn, will be
              operationalized in the metaplanner.  There are three steps to the work: 1)
              collect and develop applications and realistic domains to assemble a
              challenging benchmark set of problems; 2) modeling the performance of several
              state of the art planners, and 3) developing a metaplanner which is directed by
              the models to select a planner to solve problems in a particular domain.
              

Planning underlies any complex human endeavor, from organizing a busy life
              to operating a large airline or testing large software systems. In each case,
              people need to track an enormous number of details, marshal resources and
              ensure that actions necessary to achieve their goals can be taken in a timely
              matter. However, automated planning has had little effect on how planning is
              actually accomplished.  This research seeks to improve that situation through
              new methods to decide which planner is appropriate for a given task.  The
              metaplanner can be used by both people learning about planning and new
              application developers who may not know which planner would be best for their
              application.

