Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Relativistic Effects in the Photoionization of
               Free and Confined Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0138115

Award Number: 0138115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Manson smanson@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0138115
Manson

Description:  This award supports a US-India collaboration
              entitled Relativistic Effects in the Photoionization of Free and Confined
              Atoms.  US PI Steven Manson, Georgia State University (GSU) and Pranawa
              Deshmukh, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras will continue to develop
              theoretical methodologies and perform calculations that explore ionizing
              collisions of electromagnetic radiation with atoms and ions.  They will develop
              the relativistic random phase approximation (RRPA) methodology and apply it to
              a number of diverse problems in the area of ionization of free and confined
              atoms and ions by electromagnetic radiation.  The investigators will work
              closely with experimental groups to insure quantitative accuracy of the newly
              developed methodologies.        

Scope:  This research will provide further
              insight into the nature of fundamental atomic processes. By extending atomic
              theory methodology to confined atoms, the PI brings the expertise of atomic
              physics to bear on the broader fields of chemistry and condensed matter. 
              Additionally, greater understanding of the properties of confined atoms may
              yield insight into the new physics of a largely unexplored area and possibly to
              the development of a whole new class of devices.   The PIs have a highly
              productive collaboration and many joint publications to their credit.  This
              project will enable a US graduate student to do research at the Indian 
              collaborating institution and will contribute to internationalizing students at
              both universities.  Additionally, it will facilitate the build-up of an
              internationally competitive research program at the IIT, Madras.       

