Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: CourseMap: On-line Courses to
               Enhance Precollege Mathematics Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2002  
File        : a0138587

Award Number: 0138587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica M. Neagoy                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $845372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon Garfunkel sol@mail.comap.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila Sconiers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Consort Mathe/Its Applic
	      57 Bedford Street
	      Lexington, MA  02420    781/862-7878

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project "CourseMap: On-line Course to Enhance Precollege Mathematics
              Teaching" proposes to create and disseminate a new set of on-line teacher
              development courses to enhance the skills and subject-matter understanding
              needed in our nation's mathematics classrooms.  Over the proposal two-year
              period the PIs plan to create 8 one-credit-hour graduate courses, four at the
              middle school level and four at the high school level.  Understanding that the
              distinction between content and methods can be artifical, they intend that all
              methods courses will reinforce important new content, and similarly, the
              presentation of content courses will model best pedagogical pratice. 
              Consequently, there will be significant integration of the standards-based
              content and methodologies across the courses.

This proposed project looks at
              new and emerging technologies to begin to address these concerns, with a team
              of some of the most prominent mathematics educators in the country.  More
              specifically, the design and production teams comprise leading mathematics,
              educators, technology specialists and instructional video
              specialists.

Moreover, Teachers College Columbia will offer the courses for
              graduate credit, with Lesson Labs to provide an authoring system, and with
              WebCT to provide expertise in course management and on-line community building,
              as well as to promote and host the courses.  Their goal is to reach the largest
              possible in-service teacher audience.
