Title       : Improvements to the Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyological Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0138633

Award Number: 0138633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374513             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Albert albert@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Burgess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1197,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract. A grant has been awarded to Dr. James Albert and Mr. George
Burgess
              at Florida Museum of Natural History to improve the Ichthyological
Collection.
              Species are in decline around the world as we pass through a
wave of mass
              extinctions due to human activities. While the biodiversity
crisis accelerates
              efforts are being made to preserve our genetic heritage
for future
              generations. The Florida Museum of Natural History
ichthyological collection
              is a significant national resource, with
principal strengths in western and
              eastern Atlantic shelf and deepwater
marine fishes, western Atlantic reef
              fishes, and freshwater fishes from the
Southeastern United States, Central and
              northern South America, and the
West Indies. The UF collection continues to
              grow and is used by researchers
throughout the nation and the world. The
              Florida Museum ichthyological
collection presently contains about 216,000
              identified lots (jars) bearing
close to 2.2 million specimens ascribed to
              approximately 6,600 species. Of
these about 150,000 lots are electronically
              catalogued. Among the
uncatalogued materials are an estimated 73,000 lots of
              specimens identified
to species acquired from orphaned collections. These
              uncatalogued lots
include some of the Florida Museum's most valuable
              materials. At present a
large number of these specimens are not electronically
              catalogued, greatly
restricting their use and access. The lack of availability
              to these
substantial resources on electronic databases dramatically reduces
              their
utility and represents a significant loss of research
              opportunities.

This project will electronically catalogue and physically
              integrate
orphaned lots into the existing Florida Museum collection in newly
              provided
facilities. The specific goals are to: 1: Install mobile, high
              density
shelving units in the newly allocated space. 2. Electronically
              catalog
46,500 identified lots. 3: Physically integrate these materials into
              the
existing catalogued collection on newly purchased and existing
              compactor
shelving units. All lots will receive new labels, be topped off or
              receive
new alcohol as needed, receive new closures or be rebottled if
              appropriate,
and be shelved with conspecifics on compacted shelving units. To
              facilitate
continued safety and access throughout the cataloguing process
              all
materials will be maintained in phylogenetic order by family
              in
air-conditioned facilities provided with access aisles. To
              expedite
incorporation of new collections we will minimize new
              taxonomic
identifications. Specimens representing highly redundant taxa or
              those
terminally damaged will be recorded and discarded.

Electronic
              cataloguing of the orphaned materials will substantially
increase the flow of
              information into and out of the Florida Museum
collection as a whole.
              Cataloguing and integrating orphaned ichthyological
collections will provide
              visiting scholars, students and users of the
Florida Museum and Internet
              databases access to these important data.
Achieving the project objectives
              will facilitate long-term growth of the
collection, promote research into the
              catalogued materials, and greatly
increase the long-term management and public
              outreach capabilities of the
Florida Museum and its information resources.
              These results will enhance
the role of the University of Florida as a center
              for the education and
training of a new generation of scientists in aquatic
              biodiversity.


