Title       : RUI: Subordinates' Information Inquiry in Turbulent Environments: Cross-Cultural
               Differences Between the U.S. and the European Union
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2002  
File        : a0138077

Award Number: 0138077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57909              (Estimated)
Investigator: Svjetlana Madzar smadzar@gustavus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will offer new insights into cross-cultural differences in
              superior-subordinate interaction in rapidly changing organizational settings in
              three countries of the European Union (EU) and in the U.S. The study will
              challenge the traditional assumption from U.S. research findings that managers
              are seen as subordinates' major link to their information environment. In this
              light the subordinates' information inquiry process will be explored in terms
              of frequency, types of information sought, other relevant information sources,
              and their information seeking tactics. Based on interview and survey data, the
              study will provide useful information on the underlying dynamics of
              superior-subordinate relationships in terms of: 1. the level of subordinate
              pro-activity in soliciting different types of information; 2. the differences
              in tactics used to solicit various types of information; 3. the effect of a
              superior's leadership style on the extent and nature of information inquiry;
              and 4. the influence of organizational norms/rules on inquiry patterns. Upon
              exploring such dynamics within each of the four countries, cross-country
              comparisons will be made, looking at the moderating effect of major relevant
              cultural dimensions such as vertical individualism and power distance.

The
              study will make a contribution to the field of organizational behavior through
              a distinctive inquiry into subordinate information seeking patterns in the
              context of both organizational turbulence and of cross-cultural comparison.
              This information is crucial in times of rapid organizational change and
              international interdependence, when information inquiry in the midst of such an
              environment is of strategic importance.
