Title       : Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0138477

Award Number: 0138477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vasant Waikar waikarvb@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick N. Dowling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Science Research Institute (SUMSRI) is a
              program conducted under the guidance of Miami University's Department of
              Mathematics and Statistics. We seek talented undergraduate students in the
              mathematical sciences who are interested in pursuing advanced degrees.  Because
              of the shortage of minorities and women mathematical scientists, we are
              especially interested in, but not limited to, African Americans and other
              underrepresented minorities and women.  

The main goals of SUMSRI are: 
              

-Address the shortage of minority mathematical scientists by encouraging
              minority students and women to become mathematical research scientists.
              

-Provide the students with a research environment and improve their
              research abilities.

-Improve the students' ability to work in groups and
              give them a long term support group. 

-Provide professional role models.
              

-Improve the students' technical writing skills. 

-Give the participants
              an opportunity to write a technical research paper and present a talk at a
              mathematics conference. 

-Inform the participants of available financial aid
              and opportunities for graduate school. 

-Make the students aware of career
              opportunities in the mathematical sciences.
 
-Prepare the students for the
              GRE. 

To accomplish these goals, SUMSRI will run from June 2 to July 19,
              2002, on Miami University's campus in Oxford, Ohio. During these seven weeks,
              students will participate in problem seminars in mathematics, statistics, or
              computer science. The program will also include a technical writing seminar, a
              GRE preparation workshop, two short courses on algebra and real analysis, and
              colloquium talks given by well known mathematical scientists.

There will
              also be panel discussions to present information on graduate school and career
              opportunities in the mathematical sciences. SUMSRI will pay for the students
              travel, room, board, and supplies. Each student will
also be given a $2,500
              stipend. Funds may also be available for travel and support to some selected
              national meetings. 

The ideal candidate will have completed the calculus
              series and at least one proof-based mathematics or statistics course with
              distinction.  The candidate should be entering their junior or senior year
              after attending SUMSRI. All candidates must be returning to their home
              institutions as undergraduates after the SUMSRI experience.  SUMSRI is not
              currently funded to support international students.
