Title       : Neutron Scattering Studies of Magnetic Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0138195

Award Number: 0138195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bellave S. Shivaram                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek K. Furdyna Jacek.K.Furdyna.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Rhyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on an understanding of the magnetic structure and
              exchange interactions present in hybrid magnetic semiconductor materials. 
              Semiconductor superlattices consisting of conventional II-VI materials in which
              alternate layers are antiferromagnetic and non-magnetic exhibit interlayer spin
              correlations of a surprisingly long range comparable to that in metallic
              systems.  Neutron scattering is used as a probe of the magnetic structure,
              order parameter, and correlation range in these systems as a function of
              semiconductor doping.  The results indicate that a magnetic interaction other
              than conventional superexchange is dominant.  One of the present research
              objectives is to investigate in detail this exchange coupling and its
              dependence on electronic structure, strain effects, and types of doping.  In
              addition to the II-VI materials, the research will focus on a detailed
              investigation of new ferromagnetic III-V systems, including the unusual
              dependence of the ferromagnetic transition temperature on composition and on
              the effect of thermal annealing.  Neutrons will also provide direct information
              on the formation of ferromagnetic clusters or other nanoscale inhomogeneities
              that may affect the onset of infinite-range ferromagnetism.  Finally, neutron
              reflectivity will be used to investigate the spatial dependence of the order
              parameter, and to investigate proximity effects between a hybrid III-V
              ferromagnetic semiconductor and an adjacent II-VI antiferromagnetic
              layer.

Semiconductor and magnetic materials both play essential, but
              distinct, roles in many common electronic devices.  Examples are computer
              memories made of semiconductors and hard disk drives utilizing magnetic
              materials.  Recently the potential has arisen for a marriage of semiconducting
              and magnetic properties in a single material utilizing the concept of
              "spintronics." This research program is designed to use the powerful technique
              of neutron scattering to probe the magnetic state of materials that are both
              semiconducting and magnetic.  The neutrons can be scattered by interacting with
              nuclei inside these systems, and in addition, since neutrons possess a magnetic
              moment, they can interact with magnetic fields inside materials.  The result of
              such scattering provides direct information about the magnetic structure inside
              a material and over what distances the individual magnetic moments are coupled
              together.  This type of information on the magnetism can be correlated with
              changes in the semiconducting properties of the materials as the system is
              "doped" with various chemical elements.  The result provides necessary
              information to simultaneously optimize both the magnetic and the semiconducting
              aspects of these new compounds for future hybrid spintronic devices.


