Title       : US-Pakistan Cooperative Research: Magnetic Nanoparticle Synthesis and
               Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0138151

Award Number: 0138151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39500              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Ismat Shah ismat@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5943,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0138151
Shah

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project
              by Dr. S. Ismat Shah, Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the
              University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware and Dr. S. Khurshid Hasanain,
              Magnetism and Superconductivity Laboratory, Physics Department, Quaid-i-Azam
              University, Islamabad, Pakistan.  They plan to study the magnetic behavior of
              nanometer sized magnetic particles by the techniques of DC and AC
              magnetometry.
Dr. Shah's team will synthesize nano magnetic particles to be
              characterized by the team of Dr. Hasanain.  The initial work will focus on
              nanoparticles of iron.  The area of nanoparticles in general, and magnetic
              nanoparticles in particular, is rapidly growing due to the numerous potential
              applications. The development of the experimental framework will have broader
              application to magnetic systems. The study of the magnetic properties of
              nanometer sized iron particles will provide much needed information on the
              novel properties of these systems, and will also contribute greatly to our
              fundamental understanding of the behavior of magnetic nanoparticles. The work
              will help establish the framework for the analysis of magnetic properties of
              newly prepared samples of metallic nanoparticles.

Scope: The University of
              Delaware has good programs and good equipment for magnetic nanoparticle
              research.  The two scientists have complementary expertise, as Shah is an
              expert in the synthesis and characterization of these systems, and Hasanain has
              broad expertise in the area of superconductivity and thin-film magnetism. Some
              preliminary collaboration has already begun with encouraging results, and the
              proposed experimental techniques are already available in Dr. Hasanain's
              laboratory. The project will optimize interaction among scientists and graduate
              students from each of the participating universities. The students will be
              provided training in an international setting in one of the leading edge areas
              of research in the field of nanotechnology.  The project meets INT criteria for
              support of cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial.  Support for this
              project is provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering and
              the Division of Materials Research. 


