Title       : US-Algeria Cooperative Research: Limestone Concrete Durability Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0138306

Award Number: 0138306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston O. Soboyejo soboyejo@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 5928,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0138306
Soboyejo

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Dr. Winston Soboyejo, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
              Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, Dr. Alfred Soboyejo,
              Department of Aerospace Engineering, The Ohio State University and Dr. Said
              Kenai, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Blida, Blida, Algeria.
              The research will focus on developing a basic understanding of the effects of
              limestone content on the fracture and fatigue behavior of limestone cements. 
              The manufacture of limestone concrete and the characterization of their basic
              properties (composition, structure, strength and permeability) will be done in
              Algeria.  Electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction techniques will be used to
              further characterize the structure of the cementious materials at Princeton
              University and at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 
              Fracture behavior studies will be carried at Princeton University, including
              the crack-microstructure interactions and the process zone development
              associated with resistance-curve behavior. The crack-tip shielding mechanisms
              observed during the resistance-curve experiments and fatigue crack growth will
              then be modeled.  The effect of relative humidity and temperature on fatigue
              crack growth will be investigated, and will be modeled.   A U.S.-Algeria
              workshop on the durability of limestone cements will be held in Algeria during
              the final year of the program, to introduce state-of-the-art concepts on
              limestone cement concrete to graduate students, industrial representatives and
              researchers from Algeria and the U.S.

Scope: This project deals with a
              problem of significant value to most developing countries and also of
              significance to the United States.  Limestone cements are considerably less
              expensive and more environmentally friendly to produce than existing cements. 
              The project will investigate the value of these materials as structural cement
              for static and dynamic loads.  Limestone is readily available in Algeria and
              most Middle East countries and if it can be used in cements would help increase
              housing availability to the growing populations.  In the U.S. such materials,
              if proven successful, would help reduce the environmental impact of producing
              cement.  The project will initiate a US-Algeria collaboration in the area of
              science and technology.  One US graduate student from the Princeton University
              will participate in the project in Algeria.  This proposal meets the INT
              objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual scientific
              interest.

