Title       : Tunneling and Transport in Ordered and Disordered Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0138209

Award Number: 0138209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen M. Goldman goldman@physics.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Superconductor-insulator (SI) transitions in ultrathin metal films and organic
              crystal field effect transistor configurations can be tuned by external control
              parameters and are believed to be zero-temperature quantum phase transitions,
              driven by quantum rather than thermal fluctuations.  The nature of the
              underlying physical models of SI transitions is uncertain, as existing
              experiments do not distinguish between competing fermionic and bosonic
              descriptions, and there may be a distinct metallic phase separating the
              superconducting and insulating ground states.  This individual investigator
              award will support a research project that will attempt to resolve these
              outstanding questions in our understanding of SI transitions.  Keys to
              resolving the issues are the extension of the parameter space to very low
              temperatures to insure measurements in the critical regime, careful shielding
              from both external noise and thermal noise generated in electrical leads, and
              determining the structure of samples.  The super-electron density critical
              exponent will be determined by measuring the penetration depth, avoiding the
              pitfalls of finite-size scaling in determining exponents. Transitions will also
              be tuned by applying magnetic fields, and by controlling dissipation.  In
              addition, the SI transition will also be tuned by changing the carrier
              concentration of organic superconducting two-dimensional electron gases. This
              fundamental work is potentially significant for far-reaching technological
              applications of superconductivity at the nanoscale.  It serves as an important
              training ground for doctoral students in physics, providing them with an
              extremely broad range of research skills. 

Phase transitions tuned by an
              external control parameter such as pressure, magnetic field, or carrier
              concentration, rather than temperature are called quantum phase transitions.
              These zero-temperature transitions are driven by quantum fluctuations governed
              by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, rather than by thermal fluctuations, as
              when water changes to steam or ice.  Systems that exhibit quantum phase
              transitions include two-dimensional superconductors, 4He adsorbed on random
              substrates, high-mobility two-dimensional electron gases, various
              strongly-correlated magnetic systems, and high-Tc superconductors.  This
              individual investigator award supports a project that is focused on studying
              superconductor-insulator transitions in two-dimensional superconductors in the
              form of granular and homogenous metallic films, and in truly two-dimensional
              field-effect transistor configurations of organic crystals. The issues that
              will be addressed include the nature of the underlying physical models and
              whether there is a distinct metallic phase separating the superconducting and
              insulating ground states. This fundamental work is potentially significant for
              far-reaching technological applications in both nanotechnology and
              high-temperature superconductivity.  The program breaks new ground
              technologically in the fabrication and characterization of samples, and
              provides important training for doctoral candidates in physics by developing an
              extremely broad range of research skills.   
