Title       : Storage Equipment for New Vertebrate Paleontology Acquisitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0138662

Award Number: 0138662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Czaplewski nczaplewski@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Cifelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     The vertebrate paleontology (VP) collection of the Oklahoma Museum of
              Natural History (OMNH), University of Oklahoma, constitutes a major,
              international resource of vertebrate fossils, with over 61,000 specimens. The
              collection is particularly strong in Permian vertebrates, Jurassic dinosaurs,
              Cretaceous faunas, and Miocene mammals.  The core of the collection, amassed
              during the 1930s-40s, remained largely uncurated and fell into disuse and
              inaccessibility. In 1987, the institution began a multi-phased program of
              collection renovation. Two initial phases focused on specimen curation,
              preparation/restoration, and storage; a third phase, data verification and
              computerization (including web access to specimens data and images), is in
              progress. Successful completion of the first two phases has led to a dramatic
              increase in collection activity and utilization, documented by sharp rises in
              visiting researchers, outgoing loans, and publications. In 2000, OMNH opened a
              comprehensive new building with vastly expanded and improved resources for
              research, exhibits, and education. The resultant expansion of the VP program
              assures a strong potential for substantially higher utilization in the
              foreseeable future. However, current collection use is tightly constrained by
              available storage cabinets.  This problem will be addressed through (1)
              purchase of additional storage equipment and (2) curation of these new
              acquisitions and rearrangement (decompression) of the collection. Within the
              context of our overall plan for collection improvement, the proposed project is
              timed to coordinate with a major, related initiative: specimen inventory and
              data verification. The recent move of OMNH natural history collections into a
              single building has brought new standards and concerns in collection
              management. Existing wooden pallets that hold oversized specimens pose a threat
              (pest infestation) to other collections now housed in the same facility. We
              propose to address this issue through replacement of wooden with archival
              plastic pallets.
       With the recent hiring of new curators and collection
              support staff, OMNH is poised to emerge as a major center for research and
              education in paleobiology. The VP collection is a fundamental resource to this
              fledgling program and to the biological community in general. Given this
              environment, demand for use of the collection will continue to increase
              sharply. Completion of the proposed project will permit proper housing, logical
              arrangement, and ready access to the entire holdings, thereby permitting us to
              meet the demands of increased utilization.


