Title       : Studies with Liquid Helium Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0138009

Award Number: 0138009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Hallock hallock@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This low temperature project seeks to understand the unique properties of helium
              films and to use these films to address problems of interest in Condensed
              Matter Physics. A primary objective is to study new aspects of the He-3-He-4
              mixture film system.  This work would include confirmation of two-dimensional
              Fermi liquid parameters and a search for a new superfluid state in the two
              dimensional 3He atop a 4He film at very low temperatures.  Experiments are also
              conducted with helium films on patterned substrates in one and two dimensions. 
              Topics of interest include two-dimensional localization and a possible shift of
              universality class due to an implied film flow.  Experimental techniques
              include quartz crystal microbalance resonance, heat capacity studies of the
              thermal properties of He-4 and He-3-He-4 mixture films, and third sound studies
              of helium films on patterned substrates.  In addition to contributing to
              progress in understanding the behavior of helium films themselves, the work has
              relevance to phenomena such as Fermi systems, localization, and two-dimensional
              phase transitions.  It also provides excellent training for graduate students
              and undergraduates.  The students gain experience in cutting edge technology
              and fundamental concepts that prepare them for careers in academe, government
              or industry.

This research investigates the remarkable properties of liquid
              helium.  Such study provides unique insights into nature that are not available
              by the study of any other substance.  Study of the wave character of thin
              helium films on surfaces, that have been deliberately patterned, allows an
              enhanced understanding of how waves can be trapped in novel environments and of
              how an imposed flow can modify this behavior.  The study of thin film mixtures
              of the two naturally occurring forms of helium is motivated by theoretical
              suggestions that a new kind of superfluid film may be found.  These studies
              with mixture films also allow insight into the physics of two-dimensional
              systems.  Students involved in this work gain hands-on research experience with
              sophisticated instrumentation.  This training prepares them for careers in
              academe, government or industry.

