Title       : Spectroscopy of Single Molecules at Specific Sites on Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0138409

Award Number: 0138409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry W. Hipps hipps@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The chemical identification of nanometer sized features and individual molecules
              on solid surfaces is the focus of this research project.  With the support of
              the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Hipps and his
              colleagues at Washington State University, are using orbital mediated tunneling
              spectroscopy in combination with scanning tunneling microscopy to examine the
              electronic structure of large organic and organometallic molecular layers on
              metal and graphite surfaces.  The role of intermolecular packing and interface
              structure in determining the electronic transport properties of these layers is
              being examined.  The information gained from these studies will provide
              fundamental design information for molecule based electronic and
              opto-electronic devices. 

As electronic devices shrink to the nanoscale and
              molecular scale, more fundamental information about the electronic structure of
              these molecular electronic devices is needed.  This research project, in the
              laboratory of Professor Hipps at Washington State University, uses orbital
              mediated tunneling spectroscopy to obtain this electronic structure information
              about well characterized molecular overlayers on metal and carbon surfaces.  In
              addition to the fundamental understanding obtained by these studies, an
              improved tool for the electronic characterization of molecular electronic
              architectures will result. 




