Title       : US-South Africa Workshop: Space, Race and Urban Development; Durban, South
               Africa, August 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0138349

Award Number: 0138349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald F. Abler rabler@aag.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Gaile  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helen Aspaas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Amer Geographers
	      1710 16th St. NW
	      Washington, DC  20036    202/234-1450

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000908   Urban Problems                          
              0511603   Societal Aspects                        
Program Ref : 0000,1066,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0138349
Abler/Gaile/Aspaas

This award supports 30 participants (15 from the
              United States and 15 from the Republic of South Africa) in a US-South Africa
              Workshop on Space, Race and Urban Development, scheduled for August 8-10, 2002
              in Durban, South Africa.  The co-organizers are Drs. Ronald Abler, Gary Gaile,
              and Helen Aspaas with the International Research and Scholarly Exchange
              Committee in the Association of American Geographers; Dr. Christopher Rogerson,
              in the Department of Geography and Environmental Studies at the University of
              Witswatersrand; and Dr. Etienne Nel, in the Department of Geography at Rhodes
              University.  There will be a total of approximately 38 participants, who will
              be drawn from academia and governmental organizations in the United States, the
              Republic of South Africa, Canada, and the United Kingdom.  Workshop discussions
              will be organized around three themes: 1) Urban Dynamics, 2) Local Economic
              Development, and 3) Race and Space.  The major goal of the workshop is to
              establish linkages between the geography communities in the United States and
              the Republic of South Africa for the development of collaborative research and
              education programs.  An additional goal is to identify ways that geographers
              can help policymakers make better, scientifically-based decisions in order to
              contribute to the sustainability of democratic and fair economic/urban
              systems.

The United States has also experienced many changes that can be
              linked to the issues of "Space, Race, and Urban Development," but these changes
              and major policy shifts have occurred much more rapidly in the Republic of
              South Africa.  This changing urban situation in South Africa provides US
              geographers an opportunity to contrast and compare the urban situations in the
              two countries.  At the same time South African geographers and policymakers
              will be able to learn from US experiences in more mainstream local economic and
              other urban development issues.  A virtual conference will be conducted, via
              e-mail, one week prior to the workshop so the participants can become familiar
              with the agenda and begin to develop some ideas for cooperative research
              projects.  Workshop results will be disseminated through professional journals,
              meetings, and a web site.

The project supports the participation of five
              junior investigators from the United States. 

The Office of International
              Science and Engineering and the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences
              jointly support this award.

