Title       : Evolutionary Synthesis Center Conference Workshop II, January 31- February 3,
               2002, Belmont, Md
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0138157

Award Number: 0138157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Riley margaret.riley@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Evolution has long served to unify the study of biology, but now it has acquired
              a more central role. Today evolution serves to inform data acquisition,
              analysis and interpretation in all of the life sciences. This transformation
              comes in part from the explosion of raw data, from sources as far ranging as
              genome sequences, functional genomics, ecological genomics, large-scale
              ecosystem studies, long-term behavioral studies and phylogenetics. There is no
              institution or funding agency dedicated to the consolidation, synthesis and
              dissemination of this broad sweep of evolutionarily relevant information. NSF
              sponsored a workshop in Spring 2001 to address the need for an evolutionary
              synthesis center (ESC) and to develop an action plan to meet this need (award
              DEB-0120472; draft report at http://frog.biology.yale.edu/esc). The
              participants unanimously agreed that there is a clear and compelling need for a
              center to promote and facilitate evolutionary synthesis. Although the first
              workshop made impressive progress in the development of an ESC working model,
              it became clear that a second workshop would be required to address several
              topics in more detail. The goal of this proposal is to hold a second ESC
              workshop to address the following issues. First, if a center is to be embraced
              by the diversity of the evolutionary community, it is critical that comments
              and suggestions from that community be incorporated into the earliest possible
              phase of ESC development. Thus a draft report from the first workshop was made
              available to the relevant scientific communities and comments and endorsements
              were solicited. One focus of the second workshop is to address all of the
              concerns raised. Second, the participants of the first workshop were chosen for
              their ability to represent the diversity of evolutionary research. The
              resulting group did not have adequate strengths in the areas of bioinformatics,
              information technology, statistics, and mathematics to determine the needs of
              the proposed Evolutionary Informatics Division (EID) of an ESC. An appropriate
              group of such specialists will be invited to participate in the second workshop
              to consider the goals, content and capacities of the EID more carefully.
              Finally, because in the first workshop little attention was paid to how to
              achieve the goals of the Outreach Division of an ESC, this will be another
              focus for the second ESC workshop.


