Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Hydrogen Production by Photovoltaic Powered
               Electrolysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0138182

Award Number: 0138182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Olusegun J. Ilegbusi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 5940,9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0138182
Ilegbusi 

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project between Dr. Olusegun Ilegbusi, Department of Mechanical, Industrial and
              Manufacturing Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts and
              Dr. Mahmut Mat, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nigde University, Nigde,
              Turkey.  This project is a combined theoretical and experimental study to
              understand hydrogen development and the hydrodynamics of bubbles in an alkaline
              electrolyzer. Other parameters to be investigated include current density,
              applied potential, electrolyte and electrode materials, spacing between the
              anode, cathode and membrane, and temperature and ambient pressure.  A two-phase
              mathematical model will be developed for the electrolytic process. The model
              will consider heat and mass transfer, concentrations and ion transport,
              electricity field, and chemical reaction occurring at the anode and the
              cathode.  Experiments will be designed and performed to validate and improve
              the mathematical model. The fluid velocity, gas fraction, and bubble growth
              rate will be measured using Laser Doppler Velocimeter (LDV) at Northeastern
              University.  The ultimate goal of this research is to investigate and develop
              methods to increase the efficiency of electrolytic production of hydrogen by
              means of hydrodynamic enhancements. 

Scope: Hydrogen is one of the promising
              alternative sources of energy. There is limited systematic investigation on how
              to quantify and efficiently exploit this energy.  The two collaborators plan to
              combine their expertise in experimental work and mathematical modeling to study
              this interesting scientific problem. The US PI has considerable experience and
              has access to extensive facilities at Northeastern University.  The Turkish
              scientist has strong experience in mathematical modeling of two phase heat
              transfer.  This research should improve our understanding of the processes
              involved in electrolysis to produce hydrogen using water and photovoltaic solar
              energy. The research will help in establishing the technical framework for
              cost-effective production and usage of hydrogen energy in Turkey and
              potentially for other developing countries.


