Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0138553

Award Number: 0138553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Laybourn laybourn@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman P. Curthoys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Biochemistry and molecular biology employ methods from chemistry, physics, cell
              biology, microbiology, and genetics to study the structure and function of
              complex biomolecules.  These functions include how they operate in living
              organisms and how alterations in these molecules perturb the living state. 
              Biochemistry and molecular biology research integrates didactic and
              experimental material learned in many basic courses.  This REU Site Program in
              Molecular Biosciences will continue to enable qualified undergraduates to do
              independent research projects using a variety of experimental approaches.  The
              program is designed to offer the participants a variety of research areas from
              which to choose a meaningful and exciting independent study project.  Students
              will learn how to formulate and test hypotheses and develop the ability to
              troubleshoot and problem-solve when confronted with the unexpected.  They will
              have access to and training in the use of state-of-the-art instrumentation. 
              Through weekly meetings and a research poster presentation, students will
              develop the ability to communicate their results to their peers.  The program
              will provide appropriate role models for these students to reinforce their
              excitement for a scientific research career and will emphasize to all
              participants the gender and diversity issues that impact research careers in
              science.  For the past two years, through International Internships, the
              program has provided and will continue to provide the opportunity for
              undergraduates who demonstrate superior research aptitude to work in a foreign
              host laboratory on a collaborative research project for which they have
              received prior training.  These students have learned to appreciate scientific
              research as an international endeavor and have helped strengthen international
              collaborative research projects.  The program will assist participants in
              preparing applications to graduate schools and graduate fellowships.
