Title       : Workshop on Dynamics and Control, August 19-21, 2002, Los Angles, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0138560

Award Number: 0138560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Firdaus E. Udwadia fudwadia@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The rapid development of technology and its by-products require
              increased
precision in mathematical modeling of the relevant phenomena to make
              the
models more realistic and more readily applicable. This has required
              some
basic changes in the direction of research in many fundamental areas.
              The
scientists concerned have been involved for some years now in promoting
              the
use of advanced methods in Analytical Dynamics and Control, and in
              the
Control of Complex Nonlinear Systems. The workshop will involve experts
              both
in the purely dynamical aspects of such systems so that improved models
              with
more realistic predictions can be generated and experts in
              Lyapunov
formalisms for handling bounded uncertainties in system parameters so
              that
control actions can be made in the face of uncertainties. A range
              of
application areas is also intended to be broached, so that a crossover
              of
information between various disciplines that have the same types
              of
fundamental problems can be effected. Past experience has shown that
              such
crossover of information has led to new ideas and new collaborative
              research
projects among attendees of the workshop.

	Eleven workshops have
              been held to date between 1986 and 2000. The first
five were held in the US at
              the University of Southern California, and they
helped to get together
              scientists and engineers mainly from the US and the
Pacific Rim, with
              occasional participation from scientists from other
countries. In an effort to
              initiate a technical exchange between US and West
European scientists and
              engineers who are working in this area, the next two
workshops were held in
              Vienna (Austria) and Ulm (Germany). The East European
scientific community was
              drawn into the following workshop in Sopron
(Hungary), which was co-sponsored
              by NSF and the Hungarian Academy of
Sciences. The 1997 workshop was held in
              Rio de Janeiro and was sponsored by
the Brazilian Ministry of Science. This
              workshop indicated that there were
numerous scientists working in the area of
              Dynamical systems and Control in
South America. The tenth workshop was held in
              Lambrecht (Germany) and was
co-sponsored by the Volkswagen Corporation and the
              National Science
Foundation. The large community of scientists and engineers
              working in South
America caused the International Organizing Committee to
              select Brazil yet
another time, and the 11th workshop was held in Brazil in
              2000.

	It has been decided by the International Organizing Committee to have
              the
next workshop in the US, in Los Angeles, bringing the venue after an
              entire
decade back to the location from which the workshops initiated. The
              workshop
will be held at the University of Southern California. One of the
              main
thrusts of this particular workshop is to focus more on bringing
              junior
faculty (especially women-faculty) and graduate students, so that they
              can
have a greater chance of increased exposure to the more
              established
community in the area of dynamics and control, and so that they
              can have an
opportunity to interact with their counterparts who are working
              outside the
US.

These workshops, each of whose proceedings have been
              published either as
special journal issues or as books, have led to the
              realization that there
are today a large number of scientists who are working
              in South America, the
former USSR, as well as both West and East European
              countries like Germany,
France, Russia and the Ukraine, in similar areas of
              dynamics and control. In
particular the last three meetings have clearly
              pointed out the need for
increased interaction between scientists from Europe,
              South America, and the
former USSR. There appears to be a substantial body of
              information gathered
in these countries that is yet unknown to US scientists
              and engineers. An
exchange of information in this important area with our
              colleagues in these
countries will be beneficial to the engineering and
              scientific community
here in the US. These workshops have led, in the past, to
              collaborative
research projects, not only among  the US attendees but also
              between
investigators from the US and those from different countries; some of
              these
joint research projects have been funded by NSF. We therefore expect,
              as
before, that the forthcoming workshop will open up new avenues
              for
collaborative research and sustained long-term cooperation among
              scientists
and engineers through joint research projects. This, we hope, will
              be more
so true for this particular workshop, since its focus will be more on
              junior
faculty who may be more active and enterprising.
