Title       : Kinetics and Mechanisms of Main-Group Redox Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0138142

Award Number: 0138142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Stanbury Stanbdm@mail.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Stanbury of Auburn University is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic,
              and Organometallic Chemistry program for research on kinetics and mechanisms of
              reactions in solutions (mainly aqueous) that involve redox changes of elements
              of the main group of the periodic table. One main aim of the research is to
              clarify the mechanisms of aqueous solution reactions that involve oxidation of
              thiols by direct ('outer sphere') electron transfer from oxidants. A second
              main area will involve outer sphere oxidation of iodide ion in aprotic
              non-aqueous solvents. A third problem area involves investigations of aqueous
              outer-sphere oxidation of hydroxlyamine and thiocyanate ion. Spectroscopic
              (including stopped flow) and electrochemical techniques will be
              employed.

The proposed research deals with the fundamental processes that
              determine whether the reactions of rather simple main-group element compounds
              that occur in aqueous media are fast or slow. Although such reactions have been
              studied for more than a century, many fundamental aspects of their reaction
              dynamics have only recently become accessible, through the use of recently
              developed techniques and instruments. Reactions of such species as iodide ion
              are involved in vast numbers of processes of the highest industrial and
              biological importance, but the subtle factors that determine the kinetics of
              these reactions are for the most part quite obscure. Research carried out under
              this program has high intrinsic interest, and will also lead to understanding
              that will be applicable in many related research areas.

