Title       : Collaborative Research: Laurentide Ice Sheet Dynamics: Applying Cosmogenic
               Exposure Dating to Constrain Chronology and Glacial Style in the Eastern
               Canadian Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0138586

Award Number: 0138586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gifford H. Miller gmiller@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
OPP-0138586
Miller
This is a collaborative proposal by Principal
              Investigators at the University of Colorado and Bentley College.  Over the past
              half century, the perception of the Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) has developed
              from a thick monolithic dome with a relatively stable central core, to a
              thinner, multi-domed and more dynamic system with inherent instabilities. The
              role of the ice sheet in the climate system includes perturbations to
              atmospheric flow as its height increased and altering the planetary energy
              balance due to albedo changes. In addition, through massive ice-berg and
              meltwater discharges, the ice sheet was a determinant on North Atlantic
              thermo-haline circulation, the greatest non-linearity in the climate system.
              Primary information on the timing and style of continental glaciation has
              played a key role in this conceptual evolution. Along the northeastern margin
              of the LIS, extensive series of moraines provide a direct record of past
              ice-sheet behavior.  Early studies were limited by an inability to date these
              deposits directly. Consequently, arguments were advanced for both a similar
              timing and magnitude of glacial advances along all margins of the ice sheet,
              and for fundamentally asynchronous responses between different sectors of the
              former ice sheet. With the development of cosmogenic exposure dating, it is now
              possible to date the moraines directly and resolve much of this debate.  
              Recent studies establish the utility of the method at Clyde and provide the
              basis for two competing, but testable hypotheses of the glacial history. 
              Hypothesis 1 predicts that one of the moraine systems preserved on the Clyde
              and Cape Aston forelands is the last glacial maximum (LGM) marginal position,
              and that highlands above the moraines and coastal forelands outside the
              moraines remained beyond the limit of continental ice throughout the LGM.
              Implicit is the recognition that more extensive glaciations occurred earlier in
              the last glacial cycle. For hypothesis 2, preliminary results suggest that an
              alternative model might also be plausible: complete inundation of the region by
              non-erosive ice early in the LGM followed by a reorganization of the ice sheet
              later to a configuration similar to that projected in Hypothesis 1. Resolving
              these two hypotheses is probably the single most important step to understand
              the behavior of the LIS through the last glaciation. In addition to resolving
              the LGM ice limits and glacial style, the Principal Investigators will produce
              a detailed chronology of dated moraines from Clyde and Inugsuin fiords.
