Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Theory of Pi-Conjugated Photonic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a0138051

Award Number: 0138051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sumitendra Mazumdar sumit@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0138051
Mazumdar

Description:  This award supports the US-India cooperative
              research project entitled Theory of Pi-Conjugated Photonic Materials.  The
              investigators, Sumitendra Mazumdar,  University of Arizona and Suryanarayana
              Ramasesha, Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore will undertake
              theoretical studies on the photophysics of pi-conjugated oligomers and
              polymers.  These materials are of high current interest for their applications
              in photonics. The PIs will study the optical properties of conjugated organic
              polymer materials with a focus on interpreting experimental results, developing
              mechanisms for photophysical processes, and predicting optical properties of
              new materials.  The goals are to develop a comprehensive theory of
              charge-transfer and collision processes important in organic light emitting
              diodes and to develop a density matrix renormalization technique capable of
              calculating energies of low band gap polymers.         

Scope:  This project
              extends research funded under grant, DMR-0101659 to Mazumdar and continues a
              highly successful collaboration with Ramasesha.  Their work on organic light
              emitting diodes was published in Nature this year.  The PI is a leading
              theorist in the area of excited states and optical properties of conjugated
              polymers.  The research is expected to lead to greater understanding of
              correlated electron physics and to significant advances in the development of
              new concepts and methodologies for organic semiconductors and low dimensional
              correlated electron systems.  Due to the technological importance of the
              materials and methodologies under study, this research is likely to strongly
              impact the development of this rapidly evolving field over the next few years. 
              It extends DMR funded research and provides mutual benefits to students and
              junior colleagues in both countries.  The project is supported by the Office of
              International Science & Engineering and the Division of Materials Research.  In
              India, it is supported by the Department of Science and Technology. 


