Title       : US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Borehole Paleoclimatology and Heat Flow in
               Jordan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0138475

Award Number: 0138475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8360               (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Gosnold will_gosnold@mail.und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 1324,5988,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0138475
Gosnold

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor William Gosnold, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks,
              North Dakota and Dr. Abdallah Al-Zoubi of the Geophysics Department of the
              Natural Resources Authority, Amman, Jordan.  They plan to conduct exploratory
              research in Jordan by making geothermal measurements in existing boreholes,
              made for purposes such as mining and oil drilling. These data would then be
              used to determine the terrestrial heat flux from the crust, and to reconstruct
              the ground surface temperature history for the past 500-1000 years. Subsurface
              temperature bears importance to our understanding of the climate history at the
              Earth's surface and the tectono-thermal structure and evolution of the
              lithosphere. Understanding the terrestrial heat flux at various places in
              Jordan has the potential to shed light on the tectonic development of the Dead
              Sea Rift, as a part of the larger Red Sea rift system.  The paleoclimate of the
              area over the past millennium may help explain the spatial transition from
              Mediterranean climate to desert climate in this region.  The scientists will
              assess data quality to determine the feasibility of making extensive data
              collection through a full-scale collaborative research project.

Scope:  In
              this project the collaborators plan to combine their expertise to explore the
              soundness of using existing boreholes to make paleoclimatology and heat flow
              measurements. The two scientists have complementary expertise. The US PI is
              experienced in borehole measurements and in paleoclimatology.  The Jordanian
              scientist has experience with the field research area and has produced strong
              publications on that area. The US PI will include a graduate student from U.
              North Dakota in the field research thus giving him experience in an
              international research setting.  The project meets INT criteria for support of
              cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial.  

