Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Extracting Gravitational Wave Signals of
               Inspiraling Compact Binary Stars from Laser Interferometric Data.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0138459

Award Number: 0138459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Lazzarini lazz@ligo.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee S. Finn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0138459
Lazzarini 

Description:  This award supports a US-India cooperative
              research project entitled Extracting Gravitational Wave Signals of Inspiraling
              Compact Binary Stars from Laser Interferometric Data.  US PIs Albert Lazzarini,
              California Institute of Technology and Lee Finn, Pennsylvania State University
              will collaborate with Sanjeev Dhurandhar and two young scientists from his
              group at the Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA),
              Pune.  The aim of the research is to advance gravitational wave physics by
              raising the efficiency and probability of detecting gravitational waves.  The
              first task is to devise computationally efficient signal extraction techniques
              for detecting inspiraling binary signals; the second is to increase the
              likelihood of wave detection by analyzing how these signals can be identified
              using a network of detectors. 

Scope:  The Indian collaborators have
              complementary skills and the expertise to ensure a successful collaboration. 
              Theoretical analysis, algorithm design, and simulations are the vital
              components from their side.  Professor Dhurandhar and the IUCAA group, which he
              heads, is internationally recognized for theoretical work on extraction of
              inspiraling binary signals from detector data.  The participation of two young
              scientists from India has the potential to be a valuable contribution to the US
              effort in gravitational wave detection.  The US PIs are leading researchers in
              this field.  The newly established Center for Gravitational Physics (CGWP) is
              dedicated to the physics and phenomenology of gravitational wave astrophysics
              and funded under the Physics Frontier Center Program.  The CGWP will host the
              visits of the Indian researchers.                   

