Title       : Spin Filter with Polarized Superfluid: Effects of Surface and Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0138598

Award Number: 0138598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haruo Kojima kojima@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on experimental investigations of the spin fluid
              dynamics in ferromagnetic superfluid He-3.  The spin-polarized He-3 constitutes
              a pure, nearly ideal, material system for studying fundamental processes
              governing spin transport, diffusion and relaxation.  Earlier experiments
              indicated that an "interface" between the magnetic and non-magnetic fluid He-3
              could present a new channel for spin relaxation.  It is proposed to provide a
              direct test of the importance of the interface by eliminating the interface
              altogether.  A new spin filter experiment is proposed to create a much greater
              polarization than heretofore possible by inducing ferromagnetic fluid flows
              through a "superleak".  The hydrodynamics and spin dynamics properties of such
              a fluid state with large non-equilibrium polarization will be studied for the
              first time.  Experiments will be carried out with liquid He-3 cooled down to
              0.5 mKelvin, in magnetic fields up to 15 Tesla.  These studies of spin fluid
              dynamics are closely related to current research in the field of "spintronics".
               The proposed research has certain advantages, in that simpler macroscopic
              structures are involved, it is relatively easy to alter material conditions and
              parameters, and the relaxation or decoherence time scales are longer.  The
              proposed work will be carried out in collaboration with the Institute for Solid
              State Physics of the Tokyo University.  The graduate students will participate
              in international cooperative research.  They will gain experience in the
              state-of-the-art technology in ultra low temperature physics and in materials
              physics.  They will acquire a solid foundation for scientific careers in
              industry, academia or government laboratories.  Undergraduate students will
              also participate in the research.

This project is directed at understanding
              of the nature of ferromagnetic fluid dynamics.  The ferromagnetic fluid state
              occurs when an isotope of helium, He-3, is specially cooled to ultralow
              temperatures.  The motivation for the experiments is that novel changes in the
              magnetic fluid properties may occur when the fluid is made to flow through a
              small structure called a spin filter.  The model material system is
              ferromagnetic liquid He-3 cooled to nearly absolute zero: about 0.0005 degrees
              Kelvin.  In addition, a very large magnetic field, up to 15 Tesla, is required.
               These "extreme conditions" are only available in ultra low temperature
              laboratories.  The work will be carried out via an international collaboration
              involving the Institute for Solid State Physics of the Tokyo University.  The
              ferromagnetic He-3 is attractive because it is an ideal pure substance, free
              from impurities, and its magnetic relaxation properties can be related to more
              common or "spintronic" materials.  The spin fluid dynamics provides a novel
              analog for spintronics device research where the spin degree of freedom of the
              electron is used to carry information.  Hence the proposed research may
              ultimately contribute to spintronics device technology.  The graduate students
              participate in international cooperative research and gain experience in the
              state-of-the-art technology in ultra low temperature physics and materials
              physics.  They receive rigorous training that prepares them for careers in
              industry, academia or government. Undergraduate students will also participate
              in the research.

