Title       : Giving to the Family Versus Giving to the Community: Private Transfer Networks
               In Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0138341

Award Number: 0138341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Una Osili uosili@iupui.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding what leads individuals to transfer resources to others, outside
              one's own family is fundamental issue within economics, and other social
              sciences. This planning grant pursues research that investigates two related
              questions using a new longitudinal household survey from Indonesia.  First,
              what is the relationship between transfers to family members, and transfers to
              community organizations?  Second, are there intergenerational linkages between
              transfers to family, and transfers to community institutions?  The theoretical
              approach used in this project models the individual's decision to participate
              in a transfer network within the context of an overall utility-maximizing
              strategy.  Family and community networks can provide important economic
              benefits such as insurance and credit, mutual labor exchange, as well as
              non-economic benefits such as caring, social status and group membership.  An
              individual will choose to participate in a given network when the expected
              benefits outweigh the expected costs.  

     The results from this research
              can inform important policy debates.  Understanding which individuals and
              communities lack access to formal and informal mechanisms for
              consumption-smoothing, risk sharing and organizing economic production may
              improve the ability to target vulnerable groups within poverty alleviation
              programs.  In addition, identifying the relationship between family and
              community networks can improve the effectiveness of public policy towards
              community organizations, so as to avoid unintended crowding out effects.  If
              family networks and community-level networks are close substitutes, then the
              expansion of community organizations may displace family-level mechanisms for
              providing credit, insurance and mutual labor exchange. 
 

