Title       : REU SITE: Interactions Between Algebra, Computation, and Mathematical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0138991

Award Number: 0138991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward S. Letzter letzter@math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yury Grabovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This REU features simultaneous subprograms in algebra and applied mathematics. 
              The unifying theme is the interplay between algebraic methods, computational
              techniques, and mathematical physics. Throughout,
there is an emphasis on
              computer-aided experimentation in a collaborative environment.

Students in
              the algebra subprogram learn to develop -- and prove --mathematical conjectures
              based on extensive studies of specific examples.  The primary mathematical
              focus is on (finite dimensional) algebraic
representation theory -- that is,
              the study of matrix solutions to systems of polynomial equations in
              noncommuting variables. Investigations along these lines have played, and
              continue to play, a key role in modern physics. Moreover, solutions to these
              systems correspond to objects in ``noncommutative geometric spaces.'' The
              particular systems considered in this subprogram are mostly composed of
              quadratic and cubic polynomials in two or three (noncommuting) variables. These
              systems typically define more abstract algebraic objects whose structures can
              form the basis for deeper investigations. The use of advanced symbolic
              computation software plays an important role throughout.

Students in the
              applied mathematics subprogram are introduced to the three components of
              applied mathematics research: modeling, analysis, and computation. The focus is
              on two topics arising in materials science:  complex electro-magnetic
              permittivity of dielectrics, and exact relations for fiber-reinforced
              composites. Students working on complex electro-magnetic permittivity develop
              mathematical stratgies for
predicting how much electro-magnetic energy a
              material will absorb, in a given frequency, if data for other frequencies is
              already known; such prediction techniques have the potential to reduce the cost
              of
experimental measurements drastically. Students working on exact relations
              mathematically analyze the influence of composite microstructure on macroscopic
              properties; understanding this influence is crucial to
developing new
              materials with various desired properties -- potentially applicable industrial
              products include skis, golf clubs, and aircraft parts.
