Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Magnetic Evaluation of Fatigue Damage and
               Deformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0138400

Award Number: 0138400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Jiles dcjiles@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chester Lo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0138400
Jiles  

Description:  This award supports the US-India cooperative
              research entitled Magnetic Evaluation of Fatigue Damage and Deformation. 
              Collaborators David Jiles, Iowa State University and Amitava Mitra, National
              Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur will conduct advanced Non-Destructive
              Evaluations (NDE) to obtain measurements on the structure of materials at the
              micrometer scale by using magnetic force microscopy and scanning Hall sensor
              microscopy. These will improve understanding of the relationships between
              microstructure and magnetic properties, which can then be used to interpret the
              results of traditional magnetic NDE measurements.  The measurement data will be
              analyzed through mathematical modeling of the magnetization processes in
              materials using a new approach to the magnetic Preisach model.  The research
              goal is to obtain specific details on how magnetic inspection methods can
              reliably be used to infer changes in structure and stress states during fatigue
              and deformation processes.  This will greatly enhance the predictive
              capabilities of magnetic inspection techniques for estimating the remaining
              lifetime of components.

Scope:  The idea that magnetic measurements could
              determine fatigue damage and deformation in materials has great potential and
              high relevance for the scientific community of engineers and materials
              scientists.  For society, detection of impending failure in components could
              have significant impact for civil, aerospace, and mechanical structures.  Jiles
              is the authority in the United States on using magnetic methods for NDE.  The
              collaboration with the Indian scientists at National Metallurgical Laboratory
              will leverage the strengths of both laboratories.  Under this grant, two US
              graduate students will have the opportunity to participate in the experimental
              work at the National Metallurgical Laboratory in Jamshedpur. This project is
              supported by the Indian Department of Science and Technology (DST) and by NSF's
              Office of International Science & Engineering and the Division of Civil and
              Mechanical Systems.    

