Title       : Thermochemistry of Noncovalent Metal-Ligand Bonds of Biological Relevance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0138504

Award Number: 0138504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Texter                             
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary T. Rodgers mrodgers@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Mary T. Rodgers of Wayne State University is funded for her research on
              thermochemistry of noncovalent metal-ligand bonds of biological relevance by a
              grant in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division. She will
              advance her work in the areas of mass spectrometry, chemical reaction dynamics,
              and gas-phase ion chemistry using the combined techniques of flow tube ion
              generation coupled with guided ion beam tandem mass spectrometry (GIBMS). These
              advances include: 1) development of an electrospray ionization (ESI) source
              coupled with an ion funnel to enable production of nonvolatile and thermally
              fragile ions in the gas phase and production of multiply charged species; 2)
              construction of an upgrade of her neutral reactant inlets for both the flow
              tube and the reaction region; 3) enhancement of computational resources. The
              proposed research emphasizes three related areas: 1) the determination of
              absolute bond energies for metal-ligand interactions of biological relevance;
              2) development of a thermochemical database of noncovalent metal-ligand
              interactions of biological relevance; 3) development of threshold
              collision-induced dissociation and related methods as means to measure accurate
              thermochemical data on increasingly larger systems.  Experimental studies will
              be supported and enhanced by complementary theoretical work. A prime motivation
              for this program is to make better correlations between the detailed
              information provided by gas-phase studies with those of functional biological
              systems.  The pedagogical approach taken, i.e. starting with model systems and
              gradually increasing the complexity of the systems under investigation was
              chosen to maximize the probability that thermodynamic information on biological
              polymers can be obtained with accuracy and precision. 

Metal ions are
              involved in all biological processes that nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), the
              molecules of life participate in.  The effects of binding a metal ion to a
              nucleic acid vary from stabilization of the molecular structure to cell death. 
              This variation in effect results from several possible sites where the metal
              ion can interact with the nucleic acid: at the phosphate backbone, at the sugar
              moiety, or at the base.  The work is designed to provide fundamental
              information about the strength of the interactions of metals with the
              constituents of nucleic acids to elucidate the contributions of particular
              functional groups to bio-interactions. In this work, a technique that has been
              specifically designed for the accurate determination of reaction
              thermochemistry and known as guided ion beam tandem mass spectrometry will be
              utilized to examine metal ion interactions with chemical species of biological
              relevance. A coupling of experimental work with theory provides additional
              insight and also enhances predictive capabilities.
