Title       : US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Bifurcation and Chaos Theory as Applied To Power
               Electronic Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0138275

Award Number: 0138275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Issa E. Batarseh batarseh@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 5988,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0138275 
Batarseh

Description: This project supports a cooperative research
              project between Dr. Issa Batarseh, School of Electrical Engineering and
              Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida and Dr. Ahmad
              Harb, Department of Electrical Engineering, Jordan University of Science and
              Technology in Irbid, Jordan.  This project deals with bifurcation and chaos
              theory for power electronic circuits.  Most of today's dynamic modeling methods
              applied in power electronic converters is based on either linear ripple
              approximation, assuming that the natural frequencies of the converter are well
              below the switching frequency, or on time-averaging the output or the duty
              ratio function, effectively eliminating the sampling effect of the switch.
              These methods fail to predict the system behavior at high frequencies. The
              accuracy of these models degrades as the modulation frequency approaches
              one-half the switching frequency; hence they fail to predict the instability
              occurring in this region of frequencies.  The objective of this joint research
              project is to investigate the application of bifurcation theory to newly
              developed modern high frequency dc-dc converters. The project will focus on two
              groups of power electronic circuits: I) parallel-input/series-output two-module
              boost-derived DC-DC converter with mutually coupled output filter inductors,
              and II) Single-stage Power Factor Correction (PFC) circuits. 

Scope: This
              project enables the US and Jordanian scientists to pool their complementary
              expertise and resources in providing a new approach to analyzing the behavior
              of power electronics converter systems.  One US graduate student from UCF will
              participate in this international collaborative project. The project meets the
              INT objective in supporting workshops where mutual benefits and dissemination
              of information is likely to result.   This project is funded by the Office of
              International Science and Engineering and the Division of Electrical and
              Communications Systems.

