Title       : Collaborative Research:Development of Molecular and Biochemical Signatures for
               the Detection of Toxin Production in Pseudo-nitzschia spp. Under Nutrient
               Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0138544

Award Number: 0138544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $511460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raphael M. Kudela kudela@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan P. Zehr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The two intertwined goals of this project are to determine the suite of genes
              expressed by Pseudo-nitzschia under toxin-producing conditions, and to acquire
              a better understanding of the connections between environmental conditions and
              physiological responses leading to toxin production. A set of physiological
              experiments will permit evaluation of molecular probes generated from gene
              expression studies. In turn, the molecular probes will be used to
interrogate
              natural populations and help determine the physiological status of
              Pseudo-nitzschia in the field. The ultimate goal is to find a specific gene
              transcript or a pattern of gene expression that is correlated with toxin
              production in the field. The following hypotheses will be tested: 
H1: There
              are genes or a suite of genes whose expression pattern is highly correlated
              with toxin production in Pseudo-nitzschia. 
H2: A primary trigger for toxin
              production in Monterey Bay is silicate limitation, so that certain
              oceanographic conditions permit bloom development. 
H3: Silicate limitation
              may sensitize cells to trace-metal (e.g. copper) stress and the toxin (domoic
              acid) can function as a metal ion buffer.

Batch and continuous cultures will
              be stressed with silicate, copper, and iron. Growth, substrate utilization, and
              physiological parameters (variable fluorescence, nutrient quotas, amino acid
              pools, including domoic acid) will be assessed. Cells will be harvested for
              development of cDNA subtraction libraries under different stressors. Gene
              arrays developed from these libraries will provide molecular probes for field
              testing.  Identification of genes related to toxin production, but not general
              metabolism, will be facilitated by information generated by the physiology
              experiments.  The laboratory work will be combined with a limited field program
              for assessment of environmental triggers (e.g. copper, silicate, iron stress)
              and for testing of the molecular probes.  Results from the molecular expression
              and physiological assays will permit an initial description of the cellular
              pathways mediating environmental triggers (e.g silicate and metals) for
              production of toxin.


