Title       : US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Hazardous Waste Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0138328

Award Number: 0138328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra R. Reinhart reinhart@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manoj B. Chopra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,5988,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0138328
Reinhart 

Description: This award is to support a cooperative
              project between Dr. Debra R. Reinhart, Associate Dean for Research, College of
              Engineering, Professor Manoj Chopra, Department of Civil and Environmental
              Engineering, University of Central Florida (UCF), Orlando, Florida and
              Professor Wa'il Abu-El-Sha'r, Director, the Center for Environmental Sciences
              and Technology (CEST), Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST) at
              Irbid, Jordan.  They plan to gather and exchange information and to identify
              common environmental concerns related to hazardous waste management. They will
              focus on the phosphate mining industry, a major industry in both the US and
              Jordan. The objectives of this research are to: collect and review information
              available on the phosphate mining industry in the US and Jordan, identify
              methods to minimize water consumption and environmental impact of byproducts,
              conduct site visits in both countries, identify training needs for regulatory
              personnel, identify methods to increase awareness for waste generators
              concerning waste minimization and regulations, and plan a follow up seminar for
              industry representatives, consultants, and regulators.  Based on the data
              analysis and site visit results, it is anticipated that recommendations
              regarding phosphate mining environmental impacts will be made. A workshop on
              these findings is planned.

Scope:  The results of previous US-Jordanian
              collaboration reveal a lack of information on hazardous wastes and its
              management in Jordan.  There is no operative hazardous waste disposal facility
              in the country, even though there are plans to finish constructing an already
              existing site in Jordan. The project will address a topic that is important to
              the United States and Jordan where the phosphate mining industry is strong. 
              The two sides plan to increase the collaboration between JUST and the
              University of Central Florida.  The project is mutually beneficial, is expected
              to promote research, teaching, training and learning in this field, and is
              expected to give US researchers an understanding of the issues faced in other
              geographical regions.  The project meets INT criteria for support of
              cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial.

