Title       : Behind Closed Doors: New Cabinetry for the Herbarium at the Academy of Natural
               Sciences, Philadelphia (PH)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0138639

Award Number: 0138639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucinda A. McDade mcdade@acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Macklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. McCourt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will bring the storage conditions for the plant collection at the
              Academy of Natural Sciences (PH) up to archival standards. These specimens,
              representing many of the earliest and historically most significant plant
              collections of the United States, are currently threatened by environmental
              instability and pest incursions that result from current storage conditions.
              The mobile shelving systems installed more than 20 years ago were one of the
              first such installations and were thus something of a testing ground for
              several design features. Although designed with the best of intentions, the
              system has proven to be fundamentally flawed on several counts including
              absence of doors, storage spaces (cubbies) that are the wrong size for
              herbarium specimens, and construction materials that are not archival quality. 
               The cabinet system is made of bulky yet permeable wood-composite materials
              that outgas volatile compounds.  In addition to these flaws in the compactor
              system, the surrounding storage area is not adequately sealed from adjacent
              areas and has poor control of temperature and humidity. These conditions will
              be ameliorated by acquisition of new metal herbarium cabinets to be installed
              on existing, refurbished compactor carriages and by installation of a new HVAC
              system to control temperature and humidity. Metal cabinets with tightly
              closing, gasketed doors, will solve several problems including elimination of
              exposure of specimens to non-archival quality construction materials,
              correction of cubby dimensions, and buffering of local environmental
              conditions. Together with climate control, this will permit control of insect
              infestations and prevent pest movement between cabinets. 

The Herbarium of
              the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia is home to unique resources of
              scientific and historical importance. Notably, it houses upwards of 44,000 type
              specimens and half again as many specimens of special historical significance.
              The collection totals more than 1.3 million specimens, including many of the
              most historically significant collections of the North American flora. Notable
              collections from the 18th and 19th centuries include those of B. S. Barton
              (1766-1815), H. Muhlenberg (1753-1815), T. Nuttall (1786-1859), and nearly all
              of the surviving specimens collected by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark
              during their historic exploration of the western U.S. (1804-06). This project
              will preserve the current collection and allow for expansion of approximately
              10-15%, sufficient to handle anticipated growth over the next 10-15 years. The
              new cabinets and HVAC system will have the immediate and long-term impact of
              saving the specimens at PH from further damage and protecting them for the
              future. Due to the many type specimens and wealth of historical material, these
              upgrades will benefit the national and international community of botanical and
              historical scholars, while 
