Title       : Compactorization of the Specimens and Library of the UC Davis Herbarium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0138602

Award Number: 0138602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Dean eadean@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	The UC Davis Herbarium is a reference collection of over 240,000 dried and
              pressed plant specimens and an associated botanical library that is used by
              faculty in over 20 campus departments for their research in the diverse fields
              of genomics, plant biology, entomology, ecology, conservation, veterinary
              medicine, and agriculture.  The current were outgrown by the early 1970s, at
              which time specimen cabinets were stacked on top of each other to a height of
              eleven feet.  In the 1980s when no further cabinets could be stacked in the
              main collections area, cases were placed in the hall. Since that time, many
              more cases and freezers have been added to the hallway to accommodate incoming
              specimens.  In addition, the lack of temperature control results in
              temperatures close to ninety degrees within the collection area for at least
              one time period per year.  This makes it impossible to completely control the
              population of herbarium beetles in the main collections, and the larvae rapidly
              eat the flowers and leaves off the dried specimens.  To remedy these problems,
              space has been allocated for the herbarium on the first floor of the Life
              Sciences Laboratory Building.  The new herbarium facility will be temperature
              controlled and insect-free.  As space is extremely limited and expensive on the
              UC Davis campus, the herbarium cases in the new collections area and the
              herbarium library will need to be installed on a movable aisle storage
              system.

The specimens of herbaria are an historic record of where and when
              plants have grown in all parts of the world, and as such are repositories of
              tremendous biological information including the current locations of invasive
              weeds and the former locations of extinct species.  In addition, the UC Davis
              Herbarium houses unique collections of California vernal pool plants, wine
              grape varieties, grasses, and oaks which should be preserved for future
              generations. UC Davis trains hundreds of scientists in diverse fields every
              year.  Many of those scientists make their way to the herbarium for help with
              plant inquiries.  Herbarium staff routinely do plant identifications for both
              university affiliates and the general public, including federal and state
              agencies, and such a service is impossible without reference specimens.  As
              herbarium specimens can be used for both sight identification of plants and a
              source of genetic material for evolutionary studies, it is critical that these
              specimens be rehoused in a safe and functional facility in insect-free
              cases.	

