Title       : Upgrade and Operation of a Marine-Atmospheric Sampling Facility at Tudor Hill,
               Bermuda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0138352

Award Number: 0138352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony H. Knap knap@bbsr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Sedwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0138352

The atmospheric transport and air-sea exchange of
              aerosols and gases play major roles in the  global geochemical cycles of many
              elements.  These processes also exert significant controls on the  global
              radiation budget and affect the concentrations and distributions of major 
              anthropogenic pollutants.  Much of our present knowledge of atmospheric
              transport and ocean-  atmosphere exchange has come from time-series data
              collected at atmospheric sampling stations,  of which oceanic sites are
              essential components.  Bermuda has been a key sampling location for numerous
              studies of the marine atmosphere,  owing to its strategic geographic location
              in the western North Atlantic, and it is likely to feature  importantly in
              future field studies. 

In this project, the research team at the Bermuda
              Biological Station for Research will:  (1) upgrade and maintain a
              state-of-the-art atmospheric sampling station at Tudor Hill, Bermuda;  (2)
              operate this atmospheric sampling station to provide facilities for the
              collection of  atmospheric samples and operation of analytical instrumentation
              in research programs led by  other investigators; and  (3) collect and store
              selected core meteorological data and atmospheric samples on a continuous
              basis, in collaboration with and in support of other investigators.

The
              time-series data and samples collected in this program will provide the basic
              context for  future marine-atmospheric research programs to be conducted in the
              Bermuda region, while the upgrade and maintenance of sampling facilities will
              provide the basic support needed for such programs.  


