Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates Microbiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0138978

Award Number: 0138978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin S. Kurtz rskurtz@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Roll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Bacteriology and the Graduate School of the University of
              Wisconsin Madison will provide opportunities for summer research projects for
              undergraduates in microbiology, molecular biology and related fields.  Students
              from colleges with limited opportunities for research and members of groups
              underrepresented in science are especially encouraged to apply.  The main goal
              of the program is to attract and stimulate motivated students to pursue careers
              in research, while providing them hands-on experience.  Participating students
              will work as part of a dynamic research team investigating a basic problem in
              cellular or molecular biology.  Students will become familiar with research
              techniques of microbiology, biochemistry, genetics and molecular biology using
              modern equipment and facilities.  Students will attend professional seminars
              and make oral presentations of their research findings.  They will attend
              workshops and seminars aimed at preparing them for admissions to competitive
              graduate programs.  Students will be part of a collective group of
              approximately 100 other students from all over the United States and Puerto
              Rico participating in other Summer Research Opportunity Programs on campus. 
              REU-Microbiology students will participate with other summer research interns
              in several social and educational events.
