Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Agricultural Production in the
               Emergence of Chiefdoms in Tierradentro, Southwestern Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0138138

Award Number: 0138138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, Ms. Andrea Cuellar will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research focuses on the initial
              development of complex hierarchical social organization in the Eastern piedmont
              of Ecuador during the last few centuries BC. As in other parts of the Andes,
              the development of complex societies has been attributed to the extremely
              varied environments packed closely together because of the sharp variations in
              altitude which this mountain range presents. At the time of the Spanish
              Conquest in the sixteenth century, residents of different altitude zones often
              specialized in the cultiva-tion of crops especially adapted to local conditions
              and exchanged their products for those of other zones. Andeanists have often
              tended to as-sume that such economic patterns characterized the much more
              distant past as well, but in fact there is very little archeological evidence
              to document patterns of agricultural production in these societies. This
              project will map out settlement distribution over a region of 200 km2 and
              conduct test excavations in a sample of sites for the recovery of pollen
              samples and plant macroremains. The pollen samples from cultural con-texts will
              provide a sensitive indicator of the species of plants culti-vated in gardens
              near the house, and thus monitor patterns of local ag-ricultural production.
              The plant macroremains will reflect plant species brought into the household
              and manipulated there, and thus will monitor patterns of consumption. The
              delineation of changing patterns of re-gional political centralization and
              social complexity by the settlement survey will combine with the reconstruction
              of patterns of production and consumption. It will, as a result, be possible to
              determine whether changes in the one accompany changes in the other
              chronologically, and thus whether they might be causally related. As a
              consequence we will be better able to evaluate whether patterns of specialized
              economic produc-tion must underlie the development of social hierarchies and
              political centralization, as some anthropologists have long argued. The two
              might be found to go hand in hand in the Valle de los Quijos sequence, or it
              could be found that complex regional organization emerged long before
              specialized agricultural production did. The research will provide
              ar-cheological documentation of a sequence of 2,000 to 3,000 years during which
              societies developed that integrated thousands of people in numer-ous
              communities scattered through a region. It will also document the nature of the
              economic base that sustained these societies, and evaluate the importance of
              specialized agricultural production in that economic base.
