Title       : ADIMET: A Tool for the Synthesis of Alkyne-Briged Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0138659

Award Number: 0138659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uwe H. Bunz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the preparation of poly(paraphenyleneethynylene)s
              (PPEs) via alkyne metathesis.  The goal will be the synthesis of PPEs with
              large chiroptical activities, PPEs that carry polymeric or conjugated side
              chains as novel rod-coil polymers and PPE-heterostructures for use in polymeric
              light emitting diodes.  Also, the absolute molecular weight of the PPEs will be
              determined by transformation from rigid rods into flexible coils by catalytic
              hydrogenation.  Further, synthetic methodology will be developed for access to
              polydiacetylenes and hybrids with PPEs and poly(paraphenylenevinylene)s (PPVs)
              by alkyne metathesis with simple in situ catalysts or defined molybdenum
              carbynes. Materials properties will be determined and the polymers will be
              exploited for device applications such as LEDs,  circularly polarized LEDs and
              PPE-based lasing devices.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Uwe H. Bunz of the
              Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina. 
              Professor Bunz will focus his work on using alkyne metathesis for the synthesis
              of both new and known conjugated polymers.  These polymers are attractive as
              stable, processable and emissive semiconductors with a wide range of potential
              applications.  The research is also an excellent training ground for
              undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students.
