Title       : Improvement and Computerization of the Preserved Collection of Orchid Flowers at
               Selby Gardens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0138615

Award Number: 0138615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22626              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley E. Higgins whiggins@selby.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Holst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marie Selby Botan Gardens
	      811 South Palm Ave
	      Sarasota, FL  342367726    813/955-7553

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The world-class collection of preserved orchid flowers in the Herbarium at the
              Marie Selby Botanical Gardens in Sarasota, Florida, is deteriorating, as metal
              caps and paper-lined closures show their age. As a result, the alcohol
              preservative is evaporating and rust is contaminating many of the 24,000 orchid
              flower specimens. The glass specimen bottles currently are stored in cardboard
              boxes, arranged by the Orchid Identification Center (OIC) accession number. In
              addition to OIC of research botanists, scientists from around the world and
              especially from countries with tropical rain forests use this valuable
              collection. The current arrangement makes it time consuming to locate all
              specimens of a given orchid species for comparison. The National Science
              Foundation project will allow for replacement of metal lids and paper liners
              with plastic caps and liners, storage of glass bottles in plastic crates,
              bar-coding of each bottle, and databasing of all accession information. The
              scope of the project encompasses processing all 24,000 preserved orchid
              specimens. In addition to OIC vouchers, the collection contains the
              irreplaceable field collections of such prominent research botanists as Galfrid
              Dunsterville, Alexander Hirtz, Calaway Dodson, and Carlyle Luer. A barcode
              label will be applied to each bottle, which will be refilled with preservative;
              caps and liners will be replaced as required; and inventory information will be
              entered into a database developed for the collection.

The NSF project will
              preserve a scientifically significant taxonomic resource. The Selby Gardens
              Herbarium, known worldwide as SEL, is a library of plant specimens used by
              "alpha" (species level) taxonomists for plant identification. The preserved
              collection of orchid flowers at Selby Gardens is the largest in the Western
              Hemisphere and contains many type specimens (reference plant specimen for
              published scientific names). Many orchids have large complex blooms that are
              best preserved as 3-dimensional flowers rather than pressed-and-dried
              specimens. The preserved collection is crucial to orchid identifications made
              by the OIC.  The societal benefits of the project include facilitating the work
              of the OIC, which is the only "store-front" in the United States for orchid
              identification. The preserved collection is also available to visiting
              scientists for morphological studies on the structure of orchids.  Plant
              identification has societal impact because some orchids are edible, but others
              contain alkaloid compounds that, if ingested, can be harmful. Plant
              identification, using the preserved collection, has an economic impact by
              allowing plant breeders/producers to correctly name their products. Orchids are
              not just pretty; they rank in the top three plant groups in the
              multi-million-dollar floriculture industry in the United States. The preserved
              orchid flower collection at Selby Gardens is a botanical resource to be
              maintained and cherished for the nation and the world.

