Title       : The Haystack Observatory as an REU Site for Astronomy and Atmospheric Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0138506

Award Number: 0138506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Salah jsalah@haystack.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1359,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Proposal ID:	AST 0138506
PI:		Joseph Salah

Dr. Salah is awarded funds to
              continue a successful Research Experiences for Undergraduates site and
              associated Research Experiences for Teachers at the Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology's Haystack Observatory. Funding is provided jointly through the
              Division of Astronomical Sciences, the Division of Atmospheric Sciences, and
              the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. Over the next five years, seven
              undergraduate interns and four K-12 science teachers will be hired per year at
              the observatory to do summer research projects in radio astronomy, atmospheric
              science, and instrumentation. 

Each undergraduate student will be paired
              with a staff mentor, and will participate in a seminar series. Research
              projects in radio astronomy will include investigations of star-forming
              regions, active galactic nuclei, and envelopes of evolved stars.  Atmospheric
              science projects will include investigations of the structure of the upper
              atmosphere, space weather, and the effect of atmospheric delays on satellite
              transmissions. Instrumentation and software projects will include new designs
              for digital radio receivers, software radar, and signal processing. At the end
              of the summer each student will prepare a detailed report and give a
              presentation, and will be encouraged to present the results at a national
              meeting. 

The participating teachers will spend eight weeks at the site
              their first summer, and four weeks the following summer. During the first
              summer, the teachers will participate in a group research project and develop
              curriculum for their classroom that is related to the underlying scientific
              concepts of the research project.  During the following school year, the
              teachers will test their lesson plans and then refine the plans during the next
              summer.

