Title       : RUI: L-Alanine Biosynthesis in Escherichia Coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0138124

Award Number: 0138124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320493             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Whalen wawhalen@xula.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Xavier Univ of Louisiana
	      Palmetto & Pine Streets
	      New Orleans, LA  70125    504/486-7411

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9150,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The physiology and metabolism of Escherichia coli is perhaps the best understood
              of any
organism (1). Nearly all of the major metabolic pathways have been
              elucidated, and much of the
regulation of these pathways is well understood.
              There is, however, one significant deficiency in our
knowledge: the pathways
              of L-alanine biosynthesis have not been fully elucidated (2). L-alanine is
              the
second most abundant amino acid found in E. coli protein, is a component
              of peptidoglycan, is the
precursor to another component of peptidoglycan,
              D-alanine, and is a precursor to biotin.

With the availability of complete
              genomic sequences, it is now possible to make strong
predictions about an
              organism s physiology and metabolism solely from analysis of its DNA
              sequence.
A key to this analysis is having several model organisms whose
              metabolism and physiology are well
defined. E. coli is one such model
              organism. Using whole genome comparisons, it has been possible to
reconstruct
              the biosynthetic pathways of all 20 amino acids in E. coli, Haemophilus
              influenzae, and
Bacillus subtilis. However, for L-alanine this required
              assuming a wider specificity for the aspartate
aminotransferase. While this
              assumption is logical, it is not supported by experimental results
              (see
below). A more recent analysis does use some of the reported enzymes used
              in L-alanine biosynthesis,
but as outlined below, this information is
              incomplete (4). The fundamental reason that the biosynthesis of
L-alanine has
              not been completely elucidated is that no strict L-alanine auxotroph has yet
              been isolated.
This stems from the fact that there are multiple pathways of
              L-alanine biosynthesis. Clearly,
understanding the synthesis of L-alanine and
              its regulation is important for a comprehensive
understanding of E. coli
              metabolism. Moreover, understanding L-alanine biosynthesis in E. coli can
              then
be used to predict its biosynthetic pathways in other organisms whose
              genome has been sequenced.

This project will employ a genetic approach to
              determine the pathways of L-alanine
biosynthesis in E. coli. Mutations that
              confer an L-alanine requirement will be isolated by either
counterselection
              and screening or by directed mutagenesis of genes of unknown function that
              could
potentially function in L-alanine synthesis (e.g. aminotransferases).
              Once the genes have been identified,
the enzymes encoded by those genes will
              be purified and their biochemical activities and allosteric
regulators
              identified. 

The regulation of the genes will be investigated using fusions
              of the promoter regions to the lacZc reporter gene. Deletion analysis of the
              promoter regions will be used to identify the important cis-acting regulatory
              sites. Additionally, these fusions will be used to determine the involvement of
              trans-acting factors in regulation. Since L-alanine is synthesized in large
              part from pyruvate and affects nitrogen metabolism, particular attention will
              be paid to several global regulatory factors that affect genes
involved in
              carbon and nitrogen metabolism. One gene that has been shown to be involved in
              L-alanine
biosynthesis is avtA, and it has been proposed that the global
              regulator, Lrp, is involved in its regulation
(2). Computer analysis of its
              promoter region supports this hypothesis, and the influence of Lrp on
              avtA
expression will be thoroughly studied.

Xavier University of Louisiana
              is a historically black college and university (HBCU). The
Biology Department
              has approximately 1100 undergraduates. It has been successful in training
              and
placing students into medical school, and seeks to build on this success
              in preparing students to pursue an
academic career. This project has been
              designed to allow undergraduates to be involved in research on a
daily basis
              using modern molecular biology techniques. In particular, most of the strain
              construction can
be performed in short segments of time, allowing students to
              integrate their research into a demanding
academic schedule.
