Title       : Collaborative Research: Optical Gradient Polymeric Materials via Isothermal
               Frontal Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0138660

Award Number: 0138660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140359             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Pojman john@pojman.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the project is to learn how isothermal frontal polymerization (IFP)
              can be efficiently used to produce gradient optical materials.   IFP is a
              method of producing polymers in which a localized reaction zone of free-radical
              polymerization propagates at the rate of about one cm per day through an
              unstirred solution of monomer and initiator.  A "seed" of polymer is placed at
              the bottom of a cuvette, and a solution of the polymer's monomer with a
              free-radical initiator is placed over it.  The system is maintained at a
              constant temperature.  Polymerization occurs slowly in the bulk solution but
              much faster in the region of polymer as the monomer swells it because of the
              gel effect. The overall effect is the slow propagation of a transition zone
              between polymer and the monomer/initiator solution.  Using Laser Line
              Deflection, we will measure the gradients created during the polymerization of
              methyl methacrylate and compare these to analytical and numerical models.

A
              gradient optical material is a material that possesses a spatial gradient of an
              optical property.  Two types can be prepared via IFP.  One type is Gradient
              Refractive Index (GRIN) lenses and fibers.  The other type is organic optical
              limiters.  The RI gradient can be produced by adding a dopant, with a
              refractive index different from that of the polymer, to the monomer/initiator
              solution.  The dopant is redistributed by the propagating front to create a
              dopant concentration gradient and resulting refractive index gradient.  Using a
              nonlinear optical dye as the dopant allows the creation of a concentration
              variation of this dye in a polymer matrix.

Impact:

This project will
              result in a superior understanding of how isothermal frontal polymerization can
              be used to prepare special materials with useful applications.  Gradient
              refractive index fibers are used commercially for applications in which large
              amounts of digital signals must be transferred between devices over a short
              distance.  Plastic fiber is cheaper to produce and so this research can help
              the production of consumer products and fibers for computer networks.  Optical
              limiters are used for protecting human eyes from intense laser pulses. 
              Preparing such devices with polymers can make their weight and cost lower and
              thus their utility greater.

The research will benefit the education of two
              graduate students.  The collaboration between mathematicians and chemists will
              provide them an important learning experience in collaborative research. 
              Because of the significant number of African-Americans and women at USM, these
              groups will benefit from this project.

