Title       : Photonics Technology Access Program - PTAP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0138518

Award Number: 0138518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1234961            (Estimated)
Investigator: Arpad Bergh bergh@oida.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : OIDA
	      1133 Connecticut Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200364380    202/785-4426

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-0138518
Arpad Bergh


The Optoelectronics  Industry Development
              Association is establishing under NSF and DARPA support the Photonics
              Technology Access Program (PTAP), where government funds are used to procure
              pre-commercial photonics experimental research prototypes (hereinafter referred
              to as "prototypes") to be made available to qualified researchers in a
              competitive solicitation and evaluation process.  These pre-commerical
              prototypes may comprise novel materials, material structures, devices and
              device arrays, circuits and modules.  Academic researchers can use the
              prototypes to advance discovery and understanding in photonics and provide
              feedback to the industry.  Professors may also use the prototypes to enhance
              teaching, training and learning in class demonstrations and teaching
              laboratories.  The goal of the program is to improve the availability of novel
              experimental research prototypes to universities.  New prototypes are evolving
              at increasing rate and frequency, and if researchers have access to them only
              when they are available commercially, they are one or two generations behind
              leading edge technology.

The program is modeled after the successful parts
              of the U.S.-Japan Joint Optoelectronics Project (JOP).  Although the proposed
              program is domestic in nature, it has the potential to be expanded
              internationally at a later date to include Japan, Europe and others. Such an
              expansion might be considered to enrich the offerings of the program to include
              prototypes that are not available in the U.S. and to collect feedback from
              academic researchers from outside the U.S. who might have different
              perspectives.  OIDA is well qualified to provide the broker function for this
              program based on its five years of experience with the JOP, including managing
              the domestic competitive solicitation and evaluation process supported with NSF
              and DARPA funds.  OIDA also has strong interactions with large and small
              photonics companies and photonics-active academic institutions.  To further
              strengthen its ties with PTAP constituencies, OIDA would assemble an Advisory
              Board for this program comprising leading researchers and educators from
              academia, industry and government.

Photonics is a key enabling technology
              for the information age and it complements the goals of the National
              Nanotechnology Initiative and the National Information Technology Initiative. 
              The proposed Photonics Technology Access Program also contributes to workforce
              development in science, engineering and technology and benefits numerous
              existing photonics programs thoughout the government.  The program also helps
              industry, especially small companies who might find new applications for their
              leading prototypes.   

