Title       : L-functions: Zeros and Values
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0138597

Award Number: 0138597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Rubinstein miker@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Math
	      360 Portage Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  943062244    650/845-2065

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator is studying the statistical properties of zeros and values
              of
L-functions in the context of random matrix theory. Random matrix models
              are 
being used to conjecture the full asymptotic expansion and analytic
              continuation
for the moments of L-functions, and to make predictions for the
              statistical behavior 
of ranks of elliptic curves. A C++ L-function class
              library along with a front end 
application is also being developed for
              computing zeros and values of L-functions. 
This software is being used by the
              investigator to numerically confirm the predictions 
being made, and will be
              released freely to the public as a much needed tool for studying L-functions.

                  Many problems in number theory can be described in terms of the properties
              of 
so-called L-functions. These functions, which encode profound information
              about various 
number theoretic problems, have remained largely unyielding to
              mathematical analysis. 
Many deep problems in number theory would be solved if
              one could understand these 
functions in detail. Surprisingly, a seemingly
              unrelated field known as random matrix theory, a subject that originally arose
              in connection to experimental physics, has recently been found by number
              theorists and physicists alike to provide a framework in which to model the
              behavior of L-functions. This mysterious connection has been used successfully
              to make hitherto unimaginable predictions for the behavior of L-functions.  The
              work in this proposal is concerned with exploring the connections between these
              two fields, number theory and random matrix theory. To assist in this project,
              the investigator is also preparing a software package, to be made freely
              available to the public, for numerically studying L-functions.
     This award
              is being cofunded by the Algebra, Number Theory, and Combinatorics Program, the
              Numeric, Symbolic, and Geometric Computation Program, and the Computational
              Mathematics Program.

