Title       : Real-Time Animal Telemetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0138011

Award Number: 0138011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Garris pagarri@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Vincent Rebec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul A. Garris at Illinois State University
to
              develop a new instrument for wireless monitoring of neural activity in
the
              brain of awake, unrestrained animals.  The new instrument, called
real-time
              animal telemetry (RAT), will combine two powerful technologies;
microsensors
              for spatially and temporally resolved measurements, and digital
telemetry for
              remote data transmission and system control with high speed
and high fidelity.
              The primary advantage of RAT will be sub-second
characterization of brain
              function  with minimal perturbation of behavior.  
The proposed RAT instrument
              holds great promise for advancing the study 
of brain-behavior
              relationships.

RAT will be a modular and multifunctional instrument, a
              design that advances
development and affords flexibility to its application. 
              Several types of
measurement techniques will be incorporated into RAT:
              Voltammetry which 
monitors the chemistry of the brain and electrophysiology
              which
measures brain bioelectrical activity.  Combined, the techniques assess
              the
release of a neurotransmitter and its postsynaptic effect to obtain a
              more
integrative view of brain function. Although great strides have recently
              been made 
applying real-time voltammetry and electrophysiology to awake
              animals, 
the connection between sensor and recording equipment is made by a
              cable tether.  Unfortunately, the hard connection affects behavior and hinders
              or even prevents 
investigation of important paradigms such as those involving
              social interactions 
and complex environments.  To overcome this problem, the
              new instrument will 
use a wireless link.  Moreover, because real-time
              voltammetric and electrophysiological measurements are very susceptible to
              transmission artifacts, RAT will use high fidelity digital
              telemetry.

Ultimately, RAT should be commercially viable instrumentation in
              the support of
biological research.  The incorporation of well-established
              techniques will
make the proposed RAT instrument attractive to large number of
              users working
in the neuroscience fields.  With further development, there is
              enormous
potential for RAT to support other existing real-time microsensors. 
              RAT can
also evolve to accommodate sensor technologies that emerge in the
              future.
