Title       : Structure/Function Relationships in Tropomyosin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1993     
File        : a9220183

Award Number: 9220183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terese R. Tansey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Tropomyosin is a protein which plays a critical role in regulating             
              muscle contraction.  Like all proteins, tropomyosin is composed of             
              a linear sequence of amino acid sub-units.  Although we know that              
              the function of a protein depends on the chemical properties of its            
              amino acids, very little is known about how the specific amino                 
              acids in tropomyosin help to regulate muscle contraction.  The                 
              long-term goal of this research program is a more detailed                     
              understanding of the relationship between the amino acid                       
              composition of tropomyosin and the role of the protein in muscle               
              cells.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              Animals have several kinds of muscle, with unique properties.  What            
              imparts this uniqueness?  The intriguing observation has been made             
              that different muscles contain different versions of the                       
              contractile proteins, where each version, known as an isoform, has             
              a unique amino acid sequence.  Tropomyosin is one of the                       
              contractile proteins with a muscle-specific distribution of                    
              isoforms.  The short-term objective of this project is to determine            
              whether different tropomyosin isoforms endow muscles with                      
              distinctive contractile properties.                                            
                                                                                             
              We are focusing on an isoform of tropomyosin found in the indirect             
              flight muscle of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster.  Indirect             
              flight muscle has special properties that allow it to move the                 
              wings rapidly during flight.  The project will employ a mutant                 
              strain of Drosophila that is unable to fly because it does not                 
              produce enough of the flight muscle tropomyosin isoform.  To                   
              determine whether the flight muscle isoform is essential for flight            
              muscle function, flight muscle of the mutant strain will be                    
              supplemented with two non-flight muscle tropomyosins.  Muscle                  
              structure and function will be analyzed.  If tropomyosin isoforms              
              are functionally interchangeable, the mutants will regain the                  
              ability to fly; if the flight muscle isoforms provides unique and              
              essential contractile properties, the flies will remain flightless.            
              Should we obtain the latter results, those segments of the flight              
              muscle protein critical for flight muscle function will be                     
              identified.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Before we can understand completely how the muscle cell works at               
              the molecular level, the part played by each of the component                  
              proteins must be elucidated in as much detail as possible.  The                
              present study will expand our knowledge of tropomyosin's role.
