Title       : New Technologies for the Blind: Improving Accessibility to Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9220322

Award Number: 9220322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157241             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Gardner gardner@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 2840,9260,9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              At present, blind people have limited access to scientific                     
              literature and few means beyond "working it out in one's head"                 
              to do math.  New raised-print technology permits printing                      
              scientific equations, figures, and diagrams that can be read                   
              tactilely.  Development and testing of an equation-printing                    
              method that retains the intuitive and conceptual advantages of                 
              the standard spatial representation of math equation is under                  
              development.  Research to date has worked with equations comprised             
              of braille numbers and letters and with tactile representations of             
              the math symbols that replace the often ambiguous braille math                 
              symbols.  Math equations are now presented in a spatial format as              
              they are for sighted people, unlike that used with braille.                    
              Fractions are printed as numerator over denominator.  Subscripts               
              and superscripts are printed in the proper sub- or superscripted               
              positions.  Limits of sums and integrals are printed in their                  
              normal positions.                                                              
              The symbols are represented by compact tactile patterns that can               
              be read more easily than the Braille math symbols.  The process is             
              referred to as the "Dots+" method.                                             
                                                                                             
              Research is being done to determine whether representation of                  
              common math symbols can be done with an enhanced 6-symbol cell                 
              with three distinguishable symbols, or if it will be necessary                 
              to use an 8-symbol cell with two symbols.  Work is also being                  
              done to use the enhanced Braille cell to represent alphabetic                  
              charters, greek, italic, bold, script, etc.  Non-overprinted                   
              attributes (for example, vector signs, dots, carets, tildes, and               
              other such things over a character) are being printed normally                 
              with some enhancement for readability.                                         
                                                                                             
              The printing technology needed for producing such dot+ equations               
              exists, but an actual machine does not.  The project has been                  
              promised a beta-test version of a desk-top plotter capable of                  
              making any of the required shapes.                                             
                                                                                             
              During the project, the Director is working with two                           
              undergraduate computer science students, one of whom is blind.                 
              In addition, he is researching international activities in                     
              aspects of blind technology.  The research being done should                   
              result in the ability to write equations for blind people that                 
              retain all the intuitive and conceptual advantages of visual                   
              equations.
