Title       : Test Morphogenesis in Giant Antarctic Foraminifera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1997   
File        : a9220146

Award Number: 9220146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel S. Bowser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. MacColl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,9117,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Some types of foraminiferan protozoa produce shells composed of                
              mineral grains tightly bound by a chemically-resistant,                        
              biological cement.  During shell development, these single celled              
              animals collect mineral grains from the sediment and secrete                   
              cement in the proper amount and location to sculpt                             
              architecturally elegant structures.  The high abundance of                     
              certain giant species at an antarctic collection site makes the                
              foraminiferan community there uniquely suited for studying                     
              specific aspects of such shell construction, and for addressing                
              related questions concerning the evolution of the group.  Studies              
              on the development of these structures will focus on a giant                   
              one-celled species that allows the study of the secretion of                   
              cement in a cold-adapted marine organism without the                           
              complications of cell to cell and cell to tissue interactions                  
              common to multicellular animals.  Studies using time-lapse                     
              videomicroscopy, light- and electron-microscopic cell chemistry                
              and gel electrophoresis will provide information on this kind of               
              test construction at the cellular and biochemical levels of                    
              analysis.  Materials testing combined with structural modelling                
              will characterize the mechanical properties of the cement. From a              
              practical standpoint, this environmentally-safe cement binds                   
              immunoglobulins and has useful material properties that may have               
              applied biotechnological or biomedical applications.  Finally,                 
              molecular genetic analyses of selected species, will provide a                 
              much-needed framework for determining the evolution of this                    
              important protozoan group.  This highly interdisciplinary project              
              is made possible by new advances in biotechnology, and has both                
              basic and applied implications for a variety of fields, including              
              medicine, molecular pharmacology, protozoan development and                    
              evolution, paleontology, engineering, and marine products                      
              chemistry to name a few.
