Title       : Molecular Analysis of Phylogenetic Relationships Among the Nymphalidae
               (Lepidoptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9220317

Award Number: 9220317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert DeSalle desalle@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The large butterfly family Nymphalidae has been fundamentally                  
              important to diverse research fields in biology for more than a                
              century.  However, efforts to elucidate the group's evolutionary               
              history using data from morphology have met with frustration; the              
              consensus of available morphological phylogenies yields an almost              
              total lack of resolution.  This project will examine cladistic                 
              relationships in the Nymphalidae through character analysis of                 
              DNA sequences taken from independent mitochondrial and nuclear                 
              gene regions.  The survey of taxa will include representatives of              
              all nymphalid tribes (in 72 genera).  This, combined with the use              
              of multiple genetic markers, is expected to provide resolution                 
              not available from previous morphological or molecular studies.                
              The phylogenetic results will serve as a framework for examining               
              well-known evolutionary hypotheses including mimicry, herbivore-               
              hostplant coevolution, and the evolution of unpalatability.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The butterfly family Nymphalidae contains some of the best-known               
              species in the insect world, including the Monarch Butterfly, our              
              national insect, and such conspicuous members of the tropical                  
              fauna as the Passion Flower butterflies (Heliconius) and the                   
              beautiful Morpho butterflies.  Forms such as the Morpho are                    
              currently the focus of intense conservation research as part of                
              urgent efforts to save the earth's biodiversity.  This project                 
              will sequence DNA molecules from representative butterfly species              
              in the family Nymphalidae and use the molecular data obtained to               
              produce a phylogeny or description of relationships among those                
              species.  This phylogeny will then allow researchers to address                
              other questions or theories about such things as mimicry and                   
              hostplant associations of these insects.
