Title       : Rapid Isolation of Plant Hypersensitive Response Genes Usinga Viral Expression
               Vector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1992  
File        : a9220176

Award Number: 9220176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis A. Holt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                   One form of resistance that plants employ against viral                   
              disease is the development of necrosis at the site of initial                  
              infection.  This hypersensitive response (HR) limits the virus to              
              the infection site and prevents it from spreading throughout the               
              plant.  Although many of the metabolic changes associated with HR              
              are known, the nature and function of the genes that control the               
              response remain a mystery.  A novel strategy for the isolation of              
              host genes that control a HR against tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) has            
              been conceived.  A full-length, infectious cDNA clone of TMV has               
              been modified to permit the introduction of foreign open reading               
              frames in place of the viral coat protein gene.  Foreign genes                 
              inserted into this viral vector are expressed in planta with                   
              protein levels ranging from approximately 0.1% to 1% of the total              
              extractable protein.  The isolation of HR-specific genes using the             
              TMV-based expression vector will involve the "shotgun" cloning of              
              pooled cDNAs derived from HR-positive host plants into the                     
              universal cloning sites of the vector.  In vitro transcription                 
              reactions will be performed, and the transcribed RNAs will be                  
              inoculated directly onto appropriate host plants that lack the HR-             
              controlling genes ("systemic hosts").  The inoculated leaves will              
              be monitored for the appearance of necrotic infection sites or                 
              other evidence of HR.  Individual viruses eliciting a HR will be               
              propagated and viral RNA will be extracted.  The segment of the                
              viral RNA representing the cDNA inserted into the cloning site of              
              the TMV vector will be amplified by PCR techniques using primers               
              that flank the inserted gene.  The genes will be sequenced and will            
              be used as probes for the analysis of RNA expression in plant                  
              tissues before and during viral infection.  Antibody preparations              
              generated in rabbits immunized with proteins produced in E. coli               
              will also allow the analysis of protein expression patterns.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              The successful development of this technique would allow very                  
              important plant resistance genes to be cloned and characterized                
              after many failures to do so by other productive research workers.
