Title       : Design of Homolytic Chain Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9220639

Award Number: 9220639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen A. Russell grussell@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Free radical chain reactions will be designed involving electron-              
              accepting and electron-donating alkyl radical additions to                     
              unsaturated systems that are both electron-rich and electron-                  
              deficient. Both types of radicals will be generated from                       
              alkylmercury halides. Reactivities of unsaturated systems toward               
              these radicals will be established from product analysis by                    
              competitive reactions. Demonstration of enhanced reactivity in                 
              electron transfer reactions of radicals will be an important goal              
              of this research. Complexation with nucleophiles has already been              
              demonstrated to increase the electron-donating ability of                      
              alkylmercury halides and similar nucleophilic solvent complexation             
              with paramagnetic species such as silyl radicals will be used to               
              increase electron transfer to an easily reduced molecule. The                  
              concept of radical activation in electron transfer processes by                
              protonation or deprotonation will continue to be pursued,                      
              particularly in regard to the alkylation of aromatic systems.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Russell at Iowa State University. The             
              formation carbon-carbon bonds is a process of considerable                     
              importance in organic chemistry. One method by which the formation             
              of carbon-carbon bonds is initiated is the addition of a carbon                
              free radical (a trivalent carbon with one odd electron) to a                   
              carbon-carbon double bond. Only recently has the synthetic utility             
              of this reaction been vigorously pursued. In this research, new                
              methods will be developed to facilitate this addition reaction. A              
              scale of reactivity of free radical addition to carbon-carbon                  
              double bonds will be developed and this will serve as a guide for              
              the synthesis of organic molecules.
