Title       : High Voltage Conduction & Breakdown Phenomena in Dielectrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9220638

Award Number: 9220638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Markus Zahn zahn@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9220638  Zahn  The proposed research is the continued study of high voltage
              insulation, conduction and breakdown characteristics in liquid, gaseous and
              solid dielectrics.  Insulating dielectrics used in power apparatus, such as
              transformers and cables, and in the pulse power technology, such as Marx
              generators and pulse forming lines, have their performance affected by injected
              space charge and by surface charge accumulation on insulating surfaces.  This
              charge distorts the electric field distribution and introduces the charge
              migration time between electrodes as an additional time constant over the usual
              dielectric relaxation and fluid transport times.  Charge injection from high
              voltage stressed electrodes are measured by Kerr electro-optic field and charge
              mapping measurements, voltage-current terminal measurements, and electrical
              breakdown tests.  The magnitude and polarity of injected charge and the
              electrical breakdown strength deped strongly on electrode material combinations
              and voltage polarity.  The research tries to understand conduction, aging,
              degradation, and breakdown mechanisms in high field stressed gaseous, liquid,
              and solid dielectris using new modern optical, electronic, and computer
              instrumentation to give us eyes to see charge transport effects inside
              materials that could not be seen before. These measurements are improved by
              also using newly developed sensors to continuously monitor liquid and solid
              conductivity, permittivity, moisture, and volume charge densities so that
              necessary parameter values are known to allow comparison between theory and
              experiment.  Charge transport theory will also be  used to analyze published
              experimental results of others of space charge distributions measured with
              electro-acousitc methods.  ***   v       s  t                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           9220638  Zahn  The
              proposed research is the continued study of high voltage insulation, conduction
              and breakdown characteristics    s                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       }   n 
               s                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  $         $
                      $                                (                  F                  
               /                                                                             
                                          s                                   s     /  1
              Courier    Symbol  & Arial  5 Courier New                     X X             "
                          h        %   %                        I   R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT 
                 Cassandra Queen Cassandra Queen                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
