Title       : Morphological and Physiological Analysis of the Motor Units of the Major Flight
               Muscles in the Pigeon (Columba livia) and the Starling (Sturnus vulgaris)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1995      
File        : a9220097

Award Number: 9220097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214117             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Goslow ted goslow@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  My students and I are engaged in studies of the vertebrate                
              neuromuscular and musculoskeletal systems with an emphasis on                  
              function and evolution. We examine limb kinematics, muscle design              
              and spinal cord organization using a variety of techniques                     
              including high-speed photography and electromyography.                         
                   The particular focus of this study is functional analysis of              
              the Avian shoulder. The project is designed to yield basic                     
              morphological and physiological data requisite for the eventual                
              modeling and testing of the neural control of wing movements in                
              birds. Evidence exists from studies of muscle is ordered according             
              to specific synaptic properties of the motoneuron which relate to              
              size. Theoretical considerations, however, have resulted in                    
              alternative hypotheses for the ordering of motor unit within birds.            
              To help clarify this important issue, we are studying the                      
              physiological profiles of isolated flight muscle motor units as                
              well as their peripheral  and central anatomical organization in               
              two species with contrasting flight styles.                                    
                   This study is designed to address fundamental questions                   
              concerning the evolution of neuromuscular organization across the              
              major vertebrate groups. Studies of birds will also provide data               
              useful for evaluating current interpretations (based primarily on              
              studies of the fossil bird Archaeopteryx) of the evolutionary                  
              origin of wings from the shoulder of early Mesozoic terrestrial                
              archosaurs. Until we fully understand the musculoskeletal and                  
              neuromuscular basis of flight in a extant species, our                         
              understanding of the fundamental issue of the evolution of flight              
              among tetrapods will be hampered.
