Title       : U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund Research: Pollutant Photodegradation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1993    
File        : a9220790

Award Number: 9220790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : January 15,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Imre Dekany   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Attila Jozsef University
	      H-6720 Szeged, Aradi Vt 1
	      ,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund research project on "Pollutant                    
              Photodegradation Mediated by Clay-Organocomplex-Incorporated                   
              Semiconductors" will be conducted by Dr. Imre Dekany of Attila                 
              Jozsef University and Dr. Janos H. Fendler of Syracuse University.             
              Semiconductors mediate the efficient photodegradation of                       
              pollutants.  Well-characterized alkylammonium and alkylpyridinium              
              surfactant-modified clays (clay organocomplexes), developed by the             
              Hungarian investigators, will be used as hosts for the                         
              semiconductors.  Judicious selection of experimental conditions will           
              allow the adjustment of interspace distances between the surfactant            
              molecules and the preparation of size-quantized colloidal                      
              semiconductor particles therein.  In this project, size-quantized              
              semiconductor particles will be in situ generated and used to                  
              mediate the photodegradation of pollutants.  Size- and                         
              dimensionality-controlled semiconductor particles will be generated            
              in the interlamellar spaces of the clay organocomplex particles.               
              Absorption spectroscopy, electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction,               
              and electrochemical measurements will be used to characterize the              
              structures of the systems constructed.  Fundamental information on             
              photoelectron transfer will be obtained by steady-state and                    
              picosecond time-resolved spectroscopy.  The obtained knowledge                 
              will, in turn, be used to optimize pollutant photodestruction.  The            
              project could point the way to an economically tractable approach              
              to useful methods of environmental cleanup.                                    
                                                                                             
              This research in materials theory fulfills the US-Hungary Joint                
              Fund's objective of advancing science by enabling leading experts              
              in the United States and Hungary to combine complementary talents              
              and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and             
              competence.
