Title       : SGER: The Effects of Acid Deposition on Soil Physical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1994  
File        : a9220969

Award Number: 9220969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43855              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. G. Wolman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to examine the effect of major               
              ion constituents arising from acid deposition on soil structural               
              properties.  Acid deposition effects the composition of the soil               
              solution and the migration of constituents through the soil.                   
              Recognizing that the chemistry and mineralogy of soils are                     
              transformed by acid deposition, it is postulated that acidification            
              alters physical properties of soils including the behavior of                  
              cementing agents perhaps even in well buffered soils The effects               
              of acid deposition on soil morphology and structure will be                    
              examined in two kinds of laboratory experiments. Prolonged leaching            
              of different soils in long columns, and leaching of soils contained            
              in shallower pans subjected to different treatments, including                 
              wetting and drying.  For controlled experiments, two kinds of                  
              cement, carbonated and iron-aluminum oxides will be used in mixed              
              natural and artificial soils.  In evaluating the importance of                 
              selected cementing agents to soil structure, physical properties               
              of the soil including hydraulic conductivity, cohesion and                     
              aggregate stability will be examined by comparing acid   and                   
              control treatments under different buffering conditions.  To the               
              extent possible, non-destructive X-ray, gamma ray or CT-scan                   
              observations of the internal structure of the soil will be made to             
              relate changes in internal structure to measured physical                      
              properties.  Because soil relates to soil chemistry and hydrologic             
              processes, understanding the interrelation among them should                   
              improve our ability to predict how different environments respond              
              to acid deposition.
