Title       : U.S. Participation in International Congress of Genetics, held in the United
               Kingdom, August 1993.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1992   
File        : a9220522

Award Number: 9220522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol S. Newlon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Genetics Soc of America
	      Administrative Office
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The XVIIth International Congress of Genetics provides a                  
              major opportunity for a unique, broadly based, large group of                  
              scientists who work on all aspects of genetics to meet.  The                   
              remarkable technical explosion that has occurred in genetics in                
              the last few years has had an enormous impact on both basic and                
              applied aspects of the field.  Tremendous strides have been made               
              in understanding the structure of genomes from the level of DNA                
              sequence and topology through chromosome organization and nuclear              
              architecture.  The roles genes play in whole organisms to produce              
              unique patterns, determine sex and organize and regulate function              
              in neural systems will be explored.  The explosion in information              
              concerning mechanisms has been paralleled by a geometric rise in               
              the number of known genes.  In a similar fashion, areas of                     
              understanding in population genetics and evolution have                        
              dramatically increased often by the application of molecular                   
              techniques to classical problems and the use of computer modeling              
              systems.  Finally, the new industry of biotechnology has been                  
              spawned by the advances in basic genetics.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              The theme of the Congress will be "Genetics and the Understanding              
              of Life".  Papers will be presented on the structure, behavior,                
              evolution, pathology and engineering of genomes al all levels of               
              biological and phylogenetic organization.  There will also be                  
              sessions on the historical, philosophical and social aspects of                
              genetics.  This meeting , the first in five years, will provide a              
              unique setting for the synthesis of general concepts arrived at                
              in a broad set of diverse organisms and systems.
