Title       : Genetic Modulation of Self-Recognition in Brassica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1995     
File        : a9220401

Award Number: 9220401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail E. Nasrallah men4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              June B. Nasrallah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Self-incompatibility (SI), a mechanism that prevents self-                     
              fertilization in plants with perfect flowers, is based on the                  
              ability of the pollinated flower to inhibit the development of                 
              self-related but not of genetically unrelated pollen. In Brassica,             
              SI is genetically controlled by the highly polymorphic S locus, and            
              work in the Nasrallahs' laboratory has demonstrated that two genes             
              are tightly linked to this locus and located within 200 kb of each             
              other: one gene encodes a transmembrane receptor protein kinase,               
              and the other encodes a secreted glycoprotein highly homologous to             
              the extracellular domain of the receptor. To understand the role of            
              S-locus genes in SI, Dr. Nasrallah has begun an analysis of self-              
              compatible variants in two predominantly self-incompatible species,            
              B. oleracea and B. campestris. They identified a strain carrying a             
              mutation in a trans-acting locus that regulates in the stigma S-               
              locus function and the expression of the secreted glycoprotein gene            
              at the RNA level. Two other strains were identified that carry S-              
              locus linked mutations, or"self-fertility" alleles, and lack                   
              transcripts encoded by the receptor kinase gene They propose to                
              continue the molecular genetic characterization of these                       
              spontaneous variants with the aim of deciphering the role of the               
              receptor kinase gene in SI. In addition, other self-compatible                 
              variants will be isolated from among the available genetic base in             
              an effort to obtain additional genetic markers at the complex S-               
              locus region, and to ascertain the number of genes that are                    
              necessary and sufficient to impart an SI response. The genetic                 
              studies will be complemented by an analysis of engineered receptor             
              kinase mutations expected to be dominant based on studies of                   
              receptor kinase mediated signalling pathways in other systems. The             
              proposed analyses should not only yield insight into the mechanisms            
              of self-recognition but also define the unique and novel aspects of            
              cell-cell signalling in plants.
