Title       : Vibration Rotation Studies of Condensed Phase Dynamical Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1994   
File        : a9220908

Award Number: 9220908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert L. Strauss hls@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the                       
              Chemistry Division, Prof. H. Strauss of the University of                      
              California will investigate the vibration-rotation spectra of                  
              small molecules in order to study the dynamical interactions in                
              the condensed phase.  In this work the methods of infrared and                 
              Raman spectroscopy, neutron spectrscopy, time-dependent                        
              vibrational excitation, and theoretical analysis will be used                  
              to explore the dynamics of a number of liquid and solid                        
              systems.  The emphasis is on chemical systems that illustrate                  
              important general methods or elucidate important intermolecular                
              interactions.  Infrared "holeburning" is used to study the                     
              ability of infrared radiation to cause changes in the molecular                
              conformation and structure in solids at low temperature.  Raman                
              spectral data of hydrogen gas dissolved in water or ice will be                
              combined with theoretical calculations to determine the nature                 
              of the interactions in these systems.  The nearly free rotation                
              of deuterated ammonium ions embedded in ammonium salts will be                 
              studied to ascertain the cause of observed different rate                      
              processes of reactions and to determine the effect of the                      
              inhomogeneous environment on them.  The iodine-benzene complex                 
              interaction will be investigated by Raman spectroscopy in order                
              to understand the dynamics of the ground and excited states.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              These investigations serve to improve our understanding of                     
              molecular interactions in the condensed phase.  These                          
              interactions have a profound effect on the reaction dynamics                   
              and kinetics in liquid and solid systems.  The work on                         
              molecular hydrogen dissolved in ice will provide important data                
              on the behavior of a quantum mechanical rotator embedded in a                  
              classical bath and will assist in the development of                           
              theoretical models for this process.  Such knowledge will be of                
              use in understanding the properties of cold planets and moons                  
              which are believed to contain the hydrogen/ice system in their                 
              surface layers.
