Title       : French Lower Paleolithic Excavations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9220828

Award Number: 9220828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold L. Dibble hdibble@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip G. Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Dibble and his                   
              colleagues will conduct three seasons of archaeological                        
              excavation and analysis at the site of Cagny-l'Epinette which is               
              located in the Somme Valley of northern France. They will                      
              collaborate with Professor Alain Tuffreau and his team who have                
              worked at this site for several years. Excavation to date                      
              indicates multiple archaeological levels, the lowest of which is               
              the focus of this project. It contains materials from the                      
              Acheulian culture as well as associated faunal remains.                        
              Geological evidence indicates it dates to more than 700,000 years              
              ago and the distribution of materials and the nature of the                    
              matrix within which they are contained suggest it may represent a              
              living floor. Dr. Dibble and team will attempt to determine                    
              whether this, in fact, is correct. In the course of their                      
              excavation, they will apply a number of techniques which have                  
              never been used before in tandem in the excavation of such a                   
              site. All artifact orientations and distributions will be noted;               
              a concerted effort will be made to recover very small remains;                 
              lithic artifacts and bone will be refit; fauna will be studied                 
              from a taphonomic perspective and sediment magnetic measurements               
              will be made. On this basis the investigators hope to determine                
              the extent of post depositional disturbance. The archaeological                
              meaning of the materials can then be addressed.                                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for three reasons. The Acheulian                    
              peoples were among the first to move from Africa to the more                   
              temperate regions of the Old World. While many Acheulian sites                 
              are known, very few contain in situ material which permit                      
              cultural interpretation. From this perspective Cagny-l'Epinette                
              may be an exception which provides information on early human                  
              subsistence and social organization. Secondly, the research is                 
              important for methodological reasons. When archaeologists                      
              excavate surfaces such as this it is extremely difficult to                    
              disentangle the "cultural" and "natural" forces which played a                 
              role in their formation. Dr. Dibble's work will help to develop                
              techniques, applicable in a wide range of sites, which may make                
              this possible. Finally, this project includes a number of                      
              students and will assist in the training of these young                        
              scientists.
