Title       : Theoretical Studies of Antibody-Antigen Binding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9220477

Award Number: 9220477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Horowitz                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim A. Sharp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is directed at understanding the physical and            
              chemical basis of specific antibody-antigen binding.  The                      
              experimental systems to be studied are three antibody/protein                  
              complexes and four antibody/hapten complexes for which high                    
              resolution X-ray structures and binding data re available, plus                
              data on binding differences for point amino acid mutations and                 
              hapten analogue binding.  The focus will be on two key aspects: 1)             
              The role of solvation, which involves both electrostatic and                   
              hydrophobic interactions. 2)'Association entropy' effects, meaning             
              the loss of translational/rotational entropy upon association, with            
              the concomitant gain in vibrational entropy of the complex, and the            
              change in conformational mobility of groups involved in the                    
              intermolecular contact.  A combination of theoretical approaches               
              will be used, the aim being to develop computationally feasible yet            
              quantitative methods for calculating both differences in binding               
              energy, and absolute binding energies.  This will enable specific              
              questions of biological importance to be addressed, including                  
              identifying the overall driving force for binding, contributions to            
              specificity, the role of electrostatic complementarily, whether                
              induced fitting is important, the intrinsic antigenicity of surface            
              groups, and the effect of amino acids mutations and substitutions              
              on binding energies.  Electrostatics will be treated using a                   
              continuum treatment of solvent with an atomic detail representation            
              of the molecule, using the Finite Difference Poisson-Boltzmann                 
              (FDPB) method.  Dynamic aspects will be handled by a method which              
              combines the FDPB method with molecular mechanics (FDPB/MD).                   
              Hydrophobic interactions will be treated using surface free energy             
              relationships, modified to account for shape effects, calibrated on            
              small molecule solvent transfer data.  Translational and rotational            
              entropies effects will be estimated from changes in the rotational             
              and translational partition function upon binding.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The ability of an organism to produce molecules that bind                      
              specifically to certain 'target' molecules or parts of 'target'                
              molecules, but not to other molecules, gives rise to the phenomenon            
              of biological recognition at the molecular level.  This process of             
              molecular recognition underlies many fundamental biological                    
              processes including catalysis, gene transcription and the immune               
              response.  The design of drugs also involves creating or modifying             
              molecules to recognize given biological target molecules.  In                  
              physical terms recognition occurs because a molecule binds more                
              tightly to its 'target' than to other molecules.  It is known that             
              the tightness of binding is determined by how much energy is                   
              released (the binding energy) when two molecules are brought                   
              together.  it is also known that contributions to the binding                  
              energy come from the interaction of the two molecules with each                
              other, the interaction of each molecule with its surroundings,                 
              especially water, and from the change in shape and mobility of each            
              molecule upon binding.  However it is not yet possible to calculate            
              the binding energy accurately, even if the structure o the two                 
              molecules is known.  This impedes both our understanding of what               
              properties of molecules are necessary for recognition and the                  
              ability to design molecules to  recognize a given target.  The                 
              recognition of foreign antigens by antibodies is one of the key                
              properties of an immune system, and one of the most studied                    
              examples of molecular recognition:  The structures of at least                 
              seven antigen/antibody complexes are known at the atomic level, and            
              their binding energies have been measured.  Therefore these systems            
              have been chosen for a detailed theoretical study of binding.  The             
              aim of the proposed research is to apply recently developed methods            
              for simulating the behavior of molecules to the problem of                     
              calculating the different contributions to the antibody-antigen                
              binding energy.  The goal is to identify the properties of the                 
              antibodies important for tight binding and specificity, and to                 
              improve the ability to calculate binding energies.
