Title       : Cyclic Phosphatidylinositol Metabolism and Resynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9220001

Award Number: 9220001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie E. Monaco mem6@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6693

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hormone-stimulated hydrolysis of phosphatidyl inositol bis-                    
              phosphate is followed by conversion of phosphatidyl inositol to                
              phosphatidyl inositol bis-phosphate.  Studies indicate that lipid              
              from subcellular organelles in addition to the plasma membrane must            
              be accessible in order to account for the large amount of PtdIns               
              that is often involved in the cycling response.  To date, two                  
              mechanisms have been proposed to explain this:  (1) A PtdIns                   
              transfer protein facilitates the transfer of intracellular PtdIns              
              to the plasma membrane, and (2) The bulk of the PtdIns metabolized             
              is hydrolyzed directly, perhaps as a result of the rise in                     
              intracellular free calcium, and is not involved in the generation              
              of inositol tris phosphate second messengers or directly associated            
              with a hormone-receptor complex.  A third possibility is suggested:            
              (3) Internal membrane PtdIns is accessed as a result of receptor               
              sequestration and recycling through the interior of the cell.  A               
              series of experiments have been devised to test this third                     
              possibility.  They involve inhibition of internalization by                    
              potassium depletion as well as by receptor mutation.  As a                     
              corollary to this hypothesis, compensatory resynthesis of PtdIns               
              need not take place at the plasma membrane.  The subcellular                   
              location of the PtdIns synthetase enzyme will be determined by                 
              immunocytochemistry.                                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              One important signaling pathway in the response of cells to                    
              hormones involves the breakdown of a membrane component known as               
              phosphatidylinositol bis-phosphate to produce further signal                   
              molecules.  To maintain a cell's ability to respond to hormone,                
              this material must be resynthesized.  The goal of this research is             
              to determine where within the cell resynthesis takes place and how             
              it is controlled in coordination with hormonal stimulation of the              
              cell.  The results of this research will contribute important new              
              information on how cells respond to hormones and other external                
              signals.
