Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Models in Cellular & Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9220719

Award Number: 9220719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Oster goster@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9139,9183,9215,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator and his colleague study by mathematical                  
              modeling and computer simulation several phenomena dealing with                
              the mechanochemistry of cell and organelle motions.  In                        
              particular, they focus on the role of biased random motions in                 
              creating order at two levels of organization.  At the cell/tissue              
              level they investigate how apparently random cell motions can                  
              self organize into tissue geometries via boundary inhibitions and              
              intercellular communication.  At the molecular/cell level they                 
              examine several intracellular motility phenomena that appear to                
              extract work from random thermal motions by employing chemical                 
              bond energy to ratchet molecular assembly and disassembly.                     
                   This study aims at basic questions about how cells move                   
              and change shape during morphogenesis, and how macromolecules                  
              are transported across cell membranes.  The issues are important               
              for fundamental understanding, and also have implications for                  
              such problems as wound healing and the development of tissues.                 
              During and after protein synthesis on ribosomes the nascent                    
              polypeptide chains must be transported across internal membranes               
              into intracellular compartments such as endoplasmic reticula and               
              mitochondria.  How this is accomplished is a mystery, for                      
              it appears to proceed in the absence of a metabolic energy                     
              source such as nucleotide hydrolysis.  The investigators propose               
              a mechanism to explain this process based on the idea that                     
              the thermal motions of the amino acid chain can be biased by                   
              any process that makes it difficult for the chain to go                        
              backwards.  Examples of such processes are binding of                          
              chaperonins, glycosylation, and/or chain folding.  The propulsion              
              mechanism of the intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes is              
              another example of a process that works, they believe, by                      
              ratcheted Brownian motion.  This bacterium drives itself by                    
              building a tail of cross-linked actin filaments.  They propose to              
              model this process by simulating the coupled dynamics of tail                  
              assembly and the Brownian motion of the bacterium.
