Title       : Assessing the Industrial-Commercial Impacts of Federal R & D Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1992 
File        : a9220125

Award Number: 9220125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard L. Lederman                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77241              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Bozeman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria C. Papadakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study will assess the commercial impact on U.S. industry of               
              U.S. federal laboratories' scientific and technical outputs.  The              
              assessment will be from the perspective of industry.  Using data               
              from a recent comprehensive study of 297 federal laboratories                  
              performed by the U.S. GAO, a population of federal laboratories                
              will be defined.  From that population a stratified probability                
              sample about 40 federal laboratories will be drawn.  The                       
              laboratories' Office of Research and Technical Applications ?ORTA!             
              (or the equivalent) will provide information about technical                   
              activities of the laboratories and outputs used by industry.  The              
              technical activities of the laboratories and outputs used by                   
              industry.  The technical activities examined include not only the              
              direct products of federal laboratory research, development, and               
              demonstration (RD&D) activities, but also the indirect transmission            
              of knowledge and know-how.  From ORTA records, a sample of                     
              industrial users will be developed.  The study will gather                     
              qualitative and survey data from industrial users on such questions            
              as how the users became aware of federal laboratories' products,               
              barriers to use of the products, commercial value of the products,             
              and level and types additional technical development performed by              
              the user.  The study will also examine a set of "non-users."  The              
              industrial users will be asked to identify firms similar (in size,             
              product lines, market share) to their own.  The investigators will             
              then contact those similar firms, identify "non-users" of federal              
              laboratory products, potential interest in those products, and                 
              perceptions about requirements for using federal laboratory                    
              outputs.  This design will (a) explain patterns of laboratory-                 
              industry interactions, and (b) assess the commercial impacts of the            
              federal laboratories.
