Title       : Evaluation of a Resource Allocation Model for Regulation of Litter Decomposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9220900

Award Number: 9220900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Carreiro   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Sinsabaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4650

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Decomposition is a vital ecosystem process that results in the            
              recycling of nutrients needed for plant growth.  Most existing                 
              decomposition models predict rates indirectly form measures of                 
              regional climate and litter chemical composition.  Mechanistic                 
              models of litter decay, based  on the actual level of microbial                
              activity, are still lacking.  This reduces our ability to predict              
              the effects of ecosystem disturbances such as those anticipated                
              form global climate change.  We will address this problem by                   
              evaluating a decomposition model based directly on microbial                   
              production of enzymes involved in litter breakdown.  Our model is              
              based o the testable hypothesis that microbial populations grow by             
              optimizing the relative production of extracellular enzymes that               
              obtain essential carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) from their                        
              environment.  We propose that microbes will change the amount of               
              (C-acquiring enzymes produced depending on the availability of N               
              compounds in the environment.  If inorganic N compounds are easily             
              obtained, microbes should allocate more of their resources to                  
              producing C-acquiring enzymes.  This should result in grater                   
              microbial growth and faster decomposition of litter.  If inorganic             
              N is in low supply, microbes should produce more organic N-                    
              acquiring enzymes and allocate less resources towards acquiring C              
              compounds.  This should result in both reduced microbial growth and            
              decomposition rats for litter.                                                 
                   To evaluate this model, we will place mesh bags containing                
              three of types of leaf litter on forest soil plots.  Some of these             
              plots will receive N fertilizer at two levels of application.                  
              Others will not receive N fertilizer.  This will provide a range               
              of variation in inorganic N availability over which to test the                
              model.  During decomposition, litter samples will be collected and             
              analyzed for microbial biomass and the activities of several                   
              enzymes involved obtaining C and N form organic compounds.  These              
              enzyme activities will serve as measures of microbial resource                 
              allocation to nutrient acquisition.  The significance of our model             
              is that it mechanistically links N availability to decomposition               
              rates.  If validated, it may facilitate assessments of nutrient                
              limitation in field studies as well as contribute new information              
              for nutrient cycle modeling.  Such information should also improve             
              our ability to predict forest ecosystem responses to inputs of                 
              atmospheric N pollution at levels now found in forests near                    
              agricultural and urban areas.
