Title       : Bacteriocuprein Superoxide Dismutases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9220055

Award Number: 9220055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Steinman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9111,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The superoxide dismutases (SODs) are a family of metalloenzymes                
              that defend against toxic oxygen species.  While bacteria                      
              ordinarily contain MnSOD, FeSOD, or both in the cytoplasm, a small             
              number contain a periplasmic CuZnSOD, called bacteriocuprein.  The             
              periplasmic location of bacteriocupreins suggests that they defend             
              against oxyradical stress originating outside the cell.  The goal              
              of this project is to investigate the physiological function and               
              structure of this SOD type in bacterial species exposed to external            
              oxyradical stress.  Two bacterial cell models will be studied.                 
              Caulobacter crescentus, a pond bacterium that tolerates high                   
              concentrations of oxygen, and Legionella pneumophila, a pulmonary              
              pathogen that escapes oxygen-dependent killing by macrophages.  In             
              C. crescentus, SOD function will be studied by measuring                       
              transcriptional activation in gene fusions of periplasmic CuZnSOD              
              and cytoplasmic FeSOD.  In L. pneumophila the CuZnSOD gene will be             
              cloned and a mutant lacking CuZnSOD will be constructed and                    
              characterized.  In these studies, the mutants and gene fusion                  
              strains will be exposed to internal and external oxyradical                    
              stresses.  In addition, the ability to invade, multiply and to grow            
              in a HL-60 macrophage system will be studied for the L. pneumophila            
              mutants.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Many microorganisms can be killed by toxic forms of oxygen, a gas              
              we breath, but a few types of bacteria are resistant.  It has been             
              proposed that the resistant bacteria survive because they can make             
              special enzymes that fight against the energized, toxic forms of               
              oxygen.  One unusual enzyme that can fight against "toxic" oxygen              
              was discovered in my laboratory.   This basic research project will            
              study the structure of the unusual enzyme and determine how it                 
              works to destroy "toxic" oxygen, thereby allowing the cells to                 
              survive and grow in its presence.
