Title       : Purposive Vision in Robot Exploration of Three-Dimensional Scenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1995  
File        : a9220782

Award Number: 9220782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336889             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Dyer dyer@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir J. Lumelsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Two abilities fundamental to any robot equipped with a camera             
              and functioning within an unknown, three-dimensional environment               
              are exploring the environment and planning a collision-free path to            
              reach a desired location.  The focus of this research project is on            
              the development of strategies that have provable properties,                   
              operate in real-time, and rely on efficiently-computable,                      
              qualitative visual information to control the motion of the robot.             
              Because the robot moves in the environment in a continuous fashion,            
              exploration and path planning is modeled as continuous, dynamic                
              processes where motion planning and visual sensing are tightly                 
              coupled and occur simultaneously.  The connection between these two            
              processes becomes stronger as the geometric constraints imposed on             
              the environment's obstacles get weaker. At some level of                       
              uncertainty, this connection induces a qualitative jump in the                 
              complexity of path planning, making visual exploration of the                  
              environment's obstacles necessary.  To address these problems, the             
              dynamics of the boundary separating the explored from the                      
              unexplored parts of the environment are studied. The strategies                
              developed aim to structure the motion of the robot so that the                 
              representation of this boundary is simple and qualitative, can be              
              efficiently derived from qualitative visual information, and its               
              dynamic evolution is predictable and can be used to further guide              
              the motion of the robot.  This research should provide a better                
              understanding of the connection between motion planning in three               
              dimensions and visual sensing, and lead to the development of                  
              active, exploratory strategies for problems such as reaching a                 
              desired location, surveying unknown environments (e.g., a ship                 
              wreck),recognizing objects, or learning the shape of an unknown                
              object.
