Title       : Theoretical Population Genetics of Genome Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9220434

Award Number: 9220434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Bruce Walsh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Initiatives such as the human genome project and similar                  
              projects for other model genetic systems are generating vast                   
              amounts of information on the detailed genetic organization of a               
              variety of organisms.  The search for general organizing                       
              principles and new biological processes using these data requires              
              a starting framework for a theory of genome structure.  This                   
              project continues Dr. Walsh's long-term research goal of a                     
              comprehensive population-genetic theory of genome evolution,                   
              based on an understanding of how molecular forces within the cell              
              shape the genome and, conversely, how one can make inferences on               
              the nature of these forces from genomic sequence and structural                
              information.  Three related problems will be examined.  The first              
              is to examine how intracellular selection, drift, and gene                     
              conversion influence the within-cell substitution dynamics of                  
              organelle genes.  All eukaryotes carry at least two separate                   
              genomes (the nuclear genome plus one or two organelle ---                      
              mitochondrial and chloroplast --- genomes).  Organelle genomes                 
              are very widely used as genetic markers in problems as diverse as              
              understanding human origins, tracing the genetic input from                    
              different native plants into high-yield domesticated crops, and                
              conservation biology.  The theory proposed to be developed here                
              will provide a better understanding of how these genetic markers               
              behave.  Second, models for the conditions under which a recently              
              duplicated gene evolves a new function (as opposed to becoming an              
              inactive pseudogene) will be examined.  There has been                         
              essentially no modeling of just how frequent (or infrequent) the               
              evolution of new function is expected to be.   Finally, models of              
              the evolution of genome size, treating size as a quantitative-                 
              genetic character will be developed.  While there is a developing              
              theory of the behavior of an individual gene family, there is                  
              currently no general theory about how genome size as a whole                   
              evolves.                                                                       
               //
