Title       : Protein Isoprenylation in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1995   
File        : a9220099

Award Number: 9220099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dring N. Crowell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen K. Randall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9294,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Compounds derived from mevalonic acid are required for growth of               
              plant and animal cells.  In plants, the mevalonic acid pathway                 
              participates in the synthesis of cytokinins, abscisic acid,                    
              gibberellins, ubiquinones, plastoquinones, dolichols, sterols,                 
              carotenoids, chlorophylls, and numerous other isoprenoids.                     
              However, it is not clear whether these small isoprenoids fully                 
              account for the mevalonic acid growth requirement of plant cells.              
              In mammalian and yeast cells, it has been shown that products of               
              mevalonic acid are covalently bound to G-proteins, low molecular               
              weight ras-like GTP-binding proteins and nuclear lamins.  Covalent             
              attachment of isoprenoids to these proteins is required for their              
              assembly into membranes and, hence, for their role in signal                   
              transduction and cell growth control.  Given the recent discovery              
              of G-proteins and ras-like GTP-binding proteins in plants, it was              
              predicted that plants also contain isoprenylated proteins.                     
              Preliminary data shown in this proposal indicate that plants                   
              contain isoprenylated, membrane-associated proteins similar in mass            
              to ras-like GTP-binding proteins and nuclear lamins.  The goals of             
              this project are to determine the structure of the isoprenoid                  
              modification of these proteins and to identify the proteins.  This             
              work will lead to and understanding of the role of protein                     
              isoprenylation in plant cell growth, phytohormone action, signal               
              transduction, and membrane biogenesis.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Isoprenoids belong to a specialized class of lipid molecules.  In              
              animal cells, many proteins have been shown to be linked to                    
              isoprenoids.  These proteins participate in cell division and other            
              cellular processes. Current evidence suggests that the                         
              isoprenoid modification is essential for the biological activity of            
              these proteins.  This proposal presents the first evidence that                
              plant cells also contain isoprenylated proteins.  The goals of this            
              project are to determine the chemical nature of the isoprenoids                
              that are linked to plant proteins and to identify the respective               
              proteins.  This work will lead to an understanding of how the                  
              isoprenoid modification of proteins affects plant growth and                   
              development.
