Title       : US-Hungary Joint Fund Research on Phenomenology and Microscopics of High
               Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1993      
File        : a9220801

Award Number: 9220801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : December 15,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred Zawadowski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eotvos Lorand University
	      
	      Budapest, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund research project on "Phenomenology                
              and Microscopics of High Temperature Superconductors" will be                  
              conducted by Dr. Alfred Zawadowski of Etvs Lorand University                 
              in cooperation with Dr. Gergely T. Zimanyi of the University of                
              California Davis.  The researchers consider the Marginal Fermi                 
              Liquid (MFL) theory one of the most successful phenomenologies                 
              for high Tc superconductors.  Their early studies explored the                 
              importance of higher order perturbative corrections, producing                 
              improved agreement with the experiments.  They now introduce the               
              notion of the Anti-Ferromagnetic MFL (AF-MFL) theory, the basic                
              assumption of which is that the spin correlations are dominantly               
              anti-ferromagnetic.  They will analyze the high order corrections              
              with the help of renormalization group methods, and explore many               
              experimental consequences.  On the issue of spin-charge                        
              separation, they will address the importance of non-scaling                    
              contributions, and the question of a minimal model.  The                       
              researchers also intend to develop a novel microscopic approach to             
              higher dimensional Luttinger Liquids, based on a well-controlled               
              expansion technique in a model of a two-dimensional wire-mesh.                 
              Their initial scaling studies revealed that spin and superconducting           
              fluctuations are the dominant excitations of the model at low                  
              temperatures.  They will establish their momentum dependence to                
              distinguish between magnetic ordering tendencies and spin-liquid               
              formation.  Results should determine experimentally accessible                 
              response functions and add to our understanding of the special role            
              of two dimensions in problems of high temperature                              
              superconductivity.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This research in materials theory fulfills the US-Hungary Joint                
              Fund's objective of advancing science by enabling leading experts              
              in the United States and Hungary to combine complementary talents              
              and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and             
              competence.
