Title       : Impairment of Root GS Activity in Alfalfa by Antesense RNA Technology and Its
               Effect on NO3-Assimilation, Nodulation and N2-Fixation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9220142

Award Number: 9220142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans J. Bohnert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Champa Sengupta-Gopalan cscopala@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at testing the hypotheses that impairing                 
              glutamine synthetase (GS) activity in roots of nitrate fed and N2-             
              fixing alfalfa plants perform better than normal plants.  The                  
              working hypothesis for the NO3-fed, root GS impaired plants is that            
              the NO3-taken up by the root instead of being distributed between              
              the root and leaves for assimilation is now exclusively assimilated            
              in the leaves.  Being energetically more efficient to assimilate               
              NO3-in the photosynthetic tissue, the result is more efficient                 
              usage of nitrogen.  In the case of the nodulated alfalfa plants, it            
              is postulated that all the photosynthate normally distributed                  
              between the roots and the nodules is now directed primarily to the             
              nodules.  The increased flow of photosynthate to the nodules                   
              provides more energy substrate for the bacteroides to fix N2 and               
              more C-skeleton for assimilating the fixed N2, resulting in                    
              increased N2-fixation rates and ammonia assimilation.  The                     
              experimental approach to impair root GS activity is to use the                 
              antisense RNA technology.  To specifically target the root GS,                 
              antisense gene constructs consisting of either the constitutive 35S            
              promoter and a root GS specific sequence or a root                             
              specific/enhanced promoter and a GS coding sequence in antisense               
              orientation have been introduced into alfalfa via Agrobacterium                
              tumefaciens mediated transformation of leaf discs.  To ensure that             
              GS activity in nodules is not impaired, root GS impaired alfalfa               
              transformants will be transformed with GS gene sense contructs                 
              behind the leghemoglobin gene promoter or the nodule-specific GS               
              gene promoter.  Since the effects of increased GS activity is not              
              known, alfalfa plants have also been transformed with GS sense                 
              constructs under the control of constitutive and root                          
              specific/enhanced promoters.  Both molecular and biochemical                   
              analysis of the different tissues will be performed to test for                
              changes in expression of genes encoding key enzymes in N- and C-               
              metabolism.  Besides allowing us to understand why root GS impaired            
              plants perform better, this analyses will allow us to determine if             
              changes in N-metabolism has any effect on C-metabolism.                        
              Availability of root GS impaired plants will provide us with the               
              necessary tools to test our hypothesis with and eventually allow us            
              to manipulate plants for better usage of N and C.
