Title       : Nitrogen-Fixation by Subterranean Termites in Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9220857

Award Number: 9220857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Waller dwaller@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objective of the proposed research is to determine how                
              much nitrogen is fixed per unit land per year by two species of                
              subterranean termites in coastal Virginia.  Field and laboratory               
              studies will be conducted over a three-year period to examine                  
              rates of nitrogen fixation as a function of temperature and wood               
              nitrogen content and acidity.  Seasonal changes in the relative                
              proportions of workers, soldiers and immatures in termite nests                
              will be examined along with nest density in order to determine                 
              the annual nitrogen contributions by termites to coastal forests.              
              %%%                                                                            
              Nitrogen fixation by termite bacteria may be an important                      
              source of nutrients in forests that are deficient in available                 
              nitrogen.  The bacteria resident in the hindguts of termites can               
              fix atmospheric molecular nitrogen into nitrogen compounds that                
              are incorporated into termite tissues.  When termites die or                   
              excrete nitrogenous wastes, free-living bacteria metabolize the                
              organic nitrogen into ammonia and nitrates which are then                      
              available as nutrients for plants.  However, the quantity of                   
              nitrogen fixed by termite bacteria is unknown, because many                    
              factors influence rates of nitrogen fixation.  These factors                   
              include temperature and the nitrogen content and acidity of the                
              wood eaten by termites.  Also, different species of termites and               
              different termites castes such as workers, soldiers and immatures              
              vary in the amount of nitrogen they fix.
