Title       : Collaborative Research: A Combined Observational and Theoretical Investigation
               of Thermal and Chemical Transport in Subduction Zones and the Evolution of
               Active...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1996 
File        : a9220106

Award Number: 9220106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Spiegelman mspieg@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9196,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9220106  Spiegelman         The role of subduction and magmatism in the growth
              of the  continental crust and the evolution of the crust/mantle system has 
              long been recognized, but a detailed, process-oriented under-  standing of the
              subduction cycle has been elusive.  In this project  the principal
              investigators will combine experimental petrology and  geochemistry,
              observational seismology, isotope and trace element  geochemistry and
              laboratory convection experiments with numerical  approaches to the thermal
              structure and large-scale convection of  the slab and mantle wedge, and porous
              flow models for melt and  fluid migration in the arc environment.  Heat flow
              and various  analyses of seismic data, from primarily the Japan arc, will 
              constrain the thermal structure and rheological properties used in  the initial
              calculations (2-D and some 3-D) of flow in the slab and  mantle, using a
              temperature-dependent viscosity.  Models developed  for Japan, where seismic
              constraints are strongest, will be used  as a base for Central America and for
              the Cascades, where a young  hot plate is subducting and conditions are far
              from steady state.   Models for transport of hydrous fluids in the vicinity of
              the slab,  and of melts through the mantle will be calculated using the stress 
              and flow fields from the thermal and convection modeling.         Plate scale
              mass transport delivers chemical elements derived  from the continental crust,
              hydrosphere and lithosphere to the deep  source of arc magmas; fluid and melt
              transport processes translate  some fraction of these elements back to the
              surface in crust  building magmas.  Documentably slab-derived elements such as
              10Be  (1.5 Ma half-life), B and U (75 ka half-life in disequilibria  series)
              will be incorporated as chemical tracers in fluid/melt  migration models, with
              fluxes, transport paths and characteristic   transport times constrained from
              chemistry of subconducting  sediments and erupting lavas.  Fluid partitioning
              studies on key  elements will further  constrain input to migration models.  
              Predictions from coupled thermal, convection and transport models  regarding
              spatial distribution, character and chemistry of lavas  along the length and
              across the width of arcs will be compared with  observed values, and evaluated
              against observed variations in  subduction parameters from arc to arc to arrive
              at an integrated  model of the subduction cycle and its role in crustal growth
              and  evolution of the mantle.  ***
