Title       : Evolution in Dryopteris: The Role of Hybrids in Polyploid Speciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1996   
File        : a9220755

Award Number: 9220755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Werth CNCRW@TTACS1.TTU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    Hybridization between different species is an accident of                
              nature that may in some instances have a very important outcome:               
              the origin of new species.  Hybrids are typically unable to                    
              reproduce through ordinary sexual means because they contain                   
              incompatible chromosomes that do not pair during meiosis, the                  
              reduction division that produces the haploid cells that ultimately             
              produce eggs and sperms.  However, a second accident, chromosome               
              doubling (polyploidy) may restore fertility by providing each                  
              chromosome with an exact duplicate with which it can pair. These               
              two processes, hybridization and polyploidy, have combined in this             
              way to produce a vast number of new plant species, termed                      
              allopolyploids.  Allopolyploids include some of our most important             
              crops, among them wheat, cotton, coffee, peanut, and tobacco.                  
              Nonetheless, surprisingly little is known about the precise                    
              cellular mechanisms that operate to produce allopolyploids, or                 
              about the circumstances that prevail in nature when successful                 
              allopolyploids become established.                                             
                    The present proposal is designed to bolster our knowledge of             
              the origin of allopolyploids through detailed studies of natural               
              hybrids between species of Dryopteris, a genus of ferns common in              
              eastern North America.  Dryopteris is an ideal model system for the            
              following reasons: (1) as a fern, the products of meiosis in                   
              Dryopteris are spores that can be grown directly into plants rather            
              than the pollen grains or embryo sacs of flowering plants which are            
              much less amenable to further study; (2) Dryopteris plants are large           
              and produce numerous spores, offering an enhanced opportunity to               
              observe relatively rare events; (3) numerous hybrids are produce in            
              nature, some of them very frequently, allowing for the variation               
              between processes that pertain to individual kinds of hybrids to be            
              evaluated.                                                                     
                    This study will consist of two phases, a laboratory phase and            
              a field phase.  In the laboratory, the production of spores with               
              doubled chromosomes will be followed.  Such spores are believed to             
              be distinguishable as large spherical ("giant") spores that stand              
              out from the remainder of the shriveled spores ordinarily produced             
              by the hybrid.  The genetic constitution and growth potential of               
              these "giant" spores will be evaluated by growing them into                    
              juvenile ferns (gametophytes) and examining these using molecular              
              and microscopic techniques.  Attempts will also be made to produce             
              adult ferns (sporophytes) from the gametophytes by both sexual and             
              asexual means.  In the field, clusters of hybrids will be studied              
              to determine whether they are actually reproducing through                     
              polyploid spores, i.e. whether the hybrids are all first                       
              generation, or include some later generations.  Molecular                      
              fingerprinting techniques will be used that can distinguish between            
              these two possibilities.  The results from these combined field and            
              laboratory studies will provide important new information on the               
              means by which hybrids can give rise to allopolyploid species.
