Title       : Phylogenetic Analyses of the Evolution of Continuous Characters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1993   
File        : a9220872

Award Number: 9220872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47777              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Kirsch  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore Garland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Closely related species often resemble each other for many                
              characteristics.  Statistical analyses of cross-species                        
              (comparative) data sets cannot assume that species data points are             
              statistically independent or drawn from a common underlying                    
              distribution.  The former leads to uncertainties about degrees of              
              freedom for hypothesis testing; the latter may lead to problems of             
              estimation.  Several authors have proposed analytical methods that             
              attempt to solve these problems by mapping characters of ecological            
              or physiological interest on a "known" phylogeny, estimated from               
              independent information (e.g., DNA sequences).  Computer simulation            
              techniques will be used to investigate the statistical properties              
              of several such methods.  First, the Type I error rates, power, and            
              estimation abilities of two new methods for analyzing correlated               
              evolution of continuous traits, one based on autocorrelation models            
              (Cheverud et al., 1985;  Gittleman and Kot, 1990) and the other on             
              pedigree models from quantitative genetics (Lynch, 1991), will be              
              compared to those previously studied (non-phylogenetic, independent            
              contrasts, minimum evolution).  Second, a simulation approach to               
              phylogenetic analysis of covariance will be developed.  Third,                 
              computer programs will be developed that (1) simulate data                     
              phylogenetically under alternative models of evolutionary change,              
              (2) perform analysis of covariance on the simulated data to obtain             
              null distributions of F-statistics, and (3) allow graphically-based            
              data entry and transformation of tree structure and character data.            
              %%%                                                                            
              Comparative analyses of phylogentic relationships is an important              
              interdisciplinary approach linking studies in phylogency with                  
              ecology, behavior and physiology.  This proposal focuses on                    
              statistical techniques of comparative analysis and will validate               
              and further develop comparative methods essential to this approach.
