Title       : Adaptations to Counter Diffusional Constraints in Muscle of Channichthyid
               Icefishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9220775

Award Number: 9220775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435481             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Sidell bsidell@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Antarctic fish species have evolved over 40 million years at                   
              nearly constant body temperatures of about 0 C.  Exposure to                   
              chronic cold has required adaptations to overcome thermal                      
              sensitivities of cellular processes and to permit retention of                 
              characteristics that would be lethal at warmer body temperatures.              
              Such features will be addressed in this project which focuses on               
              a hemoglobinless icefish family.  Although it is well established              
              that these icefishes lack hemoglobin, the presence/absence of the              
              intracellular respiratory pigment, myoglobin has not been                      
              resolved as a familial characteristic.  Preliminary evidence is                
              presented that suggests myoglobin is expressed exclusively in one              
              tissue of a single icefish species.  Validity of this conclusion               
              will be tested using immunological methods to establish                        
              definitively whether myoglobin is expressed in oxidative muscles               
              of channichthyid species.  It will also be determined whether                  
              point mutations in the protein encoding sequence of the myoglobin              
              gene account for lack of the protein's expression mRNA in tissues              
              that do/do not express myoglobin.  Characteristics in protein                  
              structure that are necessary for function of the intracellular                 
              fatty acid binding protein at cold cell temperatures will be                   
              examined; this protein enhances transcellular movement of                      
              metabolically important fatty acids and serves a cytoprotectant                
              function.  Coordinated ultrastructural and biochemical                         
              measurements of icefish glycolytic muscle will identify                        
              adaptations that have occurred in the tissues of icefish.  These               
              experiments will test the proposed paradigm that adaptations to                
              overcome diffusional limitations are fundamental to ensure life                
              at cold cellular temperatures.  The studies will add insight into              
              adaptive responses of muscle in higher vertebrates and increase                
              understanding of the metabolism of antarctic fishes, a group                   
              important to the trophic structure of the Southern Ocean.
