Title       : U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund Research: Convection Induced by Chemical Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1993    
File        : a9220788

Award Number: 9220788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : January 15,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: George Bazsa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kossuth Sci Univ
	      
	      Debreceu, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Hungary Joint Fund research on "Convection Induced by                  
              Chemical Waves" will be conducted by Dr. George Bazsa of                       
              Kossuth Science University in cooperation with Dr. John A.                     
              Pojman of the University of Southern Mississippi.  Autocatalytic               
              reactions (in which the products increase the rate of their own                
              production) can propagate in unstirred solutions.  The reactions can           
              alter the density of the solution by releasing heat (decrease the              
              density) and by changing the composition of the solution (either               
              increase or decrease the density).  Under the influence of gravity             
              the resulting density gradients can result in fluid motion, or natural         
              convection.  The effect of convection on the rate of front                     
              propagation in the iron-nitric acid system has been shown to exhibit           
              puzzling dependence on the orientation of the tube and the initial             
              concentrations.  The mechanism of the convection is still not clear.           
              Besides raising basic questions about the interactions of chemistry            
              and hydrodynamics, this work may aid in understanding chemically               
              induced convection in other areas such as directional solidification           
              and wet chemical etching.  This study will measure the                         
              concentration gradients and thermal gradients in traveling fronts              
              using video imaging technology in order to test mechanisms                     
              proposed for the convection which has been observed, and often,                
              only inferred from measurements of propagation.  Chemically                    
              induced convection systems offer insight into natural convection in            
              small containers.  The orientation dependence of fluid flow with               
              respect to the gravitational vector is especially relevant to materials        
              processing in space, where there is reduced gravity but greater                
              difficulty in controlling the orientation of the container with respect        
              to the gravitational vector.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research in chemistry fulfills the program objective of                   
              advancing science by enabling leading experts in the United States             
              and Hungary to combine complementary talents and pool research                 
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
