Title       : Evolutionary Dynamics of Prey Morphology and Vulnerability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9220634

Award Number: 9220634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130859             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ken Spitze kspitze@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Many species of organisms can adopt different outward                     
              characteristics in different environmental situations.  This                   
              phenomenon is called phenotypic plasticity.  Such plasticity has               
              been found in many aquatic organisms where the different                       
              environments that elicit the alternate characteristics involve the             
              presence or absence of particular potential predators.  While                  
              plasticity in such cases is assumed to provide some advantage to               
              the organism, in many cases this cause-effect relationship is                  
              difficult to demonstrate.  The characteristics adopted in the                  
              presence of the predators may result in lower vulnerability to                 
              predation, or may simply reflect developmental changes that afford             
              the individual no particular advantage.                                        
              %%%                                                                            
                   This proposed research involves phenotypic plasticity in the              
              freshwater crustacean Daphnia in response to the presence of                   
              predaceous larvae of the insect Chaoborus.  The research will                  
              result in useful information about the evolutionary importance of              
              phenotypic plasticity.  In particular, they will help clarify the              
              extent to which plasticity is advantageous, rather than simply                 
              reflecting random changes with respect to the environment.  Such               
              information will be important in evaluating how organisms can adopt            
              to a changing environment, such as might result from global                    
              warming.***//
