Title       : U.S.-Bulgaria Research on Iterative Methods for Large-Scale Discretization
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9220287

Award Number: 9220287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony F. Chan chan@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              20        Mathematics                             
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5958,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Bulgaria Joint Cooperative Research on                                 
              Iterative Methods for Large-Scale                                              
              Discretization Problems is between Dr. Tony F.-                                
              C. Chan and Dr. Barry F. Smith of the                                          
              University of California, Los Angeles, and Dr.                                 
              Panayot Vassilevski, Dr. Svetozar D. Margenov,                                 
              and Dr. Oleg P. Iliev of the Center of                                         
              Informatics & Computer Technology.  The                                        
              research topics will include computational                                     
              study (performance and analysis) of efficient                                  
              iterative methods, based on domain                                             
              decomposition, multi-level, and on ILU                                         
              techniques for solving discretized differential                                
              equations.  Such a collaboration will benefit                                  
              both sides which have different experience on                                  
              various aspects of multi-level, domain                                         
              decomposition and general preconditioning                                      
              methods.  The research will focus  on                                          
              anisotropic, nonsymmetric, indefinite and/or                                   
              almost indefinite problems obtained when                                       
              discretizing elliptic equations with strong                                    
              anisotropy, convection-diffusion type problems,                                
              elasticity equations including the                                             
              incompressible limit, and Navier-Stokes                                        
              equations, for example in stream-function                                      
              vorticity formulation.  Advances in deriving                                   
              efficient solution methods for problems such as                                
              Navier-Stokes equations should be applicable to                                
              a large class of important processes in, say,                                  
              ecology, weather prediction, oil and gas                                       
              recovery, design of new constructive elements                                  
              and materials, and in fluid dynamics.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research in mathematics fulfills the                                      
              program objective of advancing science by                                      
              enabling leading experts in the United States                                  
              and Bulgaria to combine complementary talents                                  
              and pool research resources in areas of strong                                 
              mutual interest and competence.
