Title       : Systematics of Iguanian Lizards (Squamata, Reptilia): Integration of Molecular
               and Morphological Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1997   
File        : a9220870

Award Number: 9220870
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrel R. Frost frost@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom A. Titus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9104,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This is a five year study of the systematics of Iguanian                  
              lizards.  Both morphological and molecular characters will be used             
              to address the relationships within the Tropiduridae,                          
              Polychrotidae, Chamaeleonidae, and basal agamines.  Three                      
              mitochondrial genes (16S rRNA, cytochrome c oxidase subunit I, and             
              cytochrome c oxidase subunit III) will be sequenced in a effort to             
              investigate more recent divergences.  Relationships involving older            
              lineage divergences will be determined using nucleotide sequences              
              from nuclear single-copy genes.  Detailed comparative morphological            
              studies will be conducted on the same taxa used in the molecular               
              study, and the intrinsic qualities and information of each kind of             
              data will be evaluated using several analytical approaches.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Iguanian lizards represent a biologically diverse group of                     
              vertebrates, with the New World families (occurring primarily in               
              South America) being considerably more diverse than their Old World            
              counterparts (represented by taxa in Madagascar).  The results from            
              this multidisciplinary approach to understanding the diversity of              
              this group of vertebrates will provide a framework for                         
              understanding molecular and morphological change in a related group            
              of taxa located in different regions of the World.  The overall                
              pattern of variation obtained from this study can also provide a               
              basis for understanding the ecology, physiology, and behavior of               
              this important component of the World's biota.
