Title       : Regulation of Homologous Recombination in Mammalian Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1994     
File        : a9220945

Award Number: 9220945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Waldman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to increase our understanding of the              
              mechanisms that normally regulate homologous recombination in                  
              mammalian cells.  Such an aim seems relevant in light of the often             
              made observation that cancer cells exhibit aberrant chromosomal                
              rearrangements.  To study homologous recombination, mouse Ltk cell             
              lines will be transfected with DNA substrates that contain two                 
              defective Herpes thymidine kinase (tk) gene sequences.                         
              Recombination events that reconstruct a functional tk gene will be             
              monitored by the appearance of tk-positive cells.  This work will              
              refine earlier measurements of the homology dependence of "normal"             
              recombination as well as explore the possibility that DNA lesions              
              or sequences that promote DNA strand breakage can alter the rate               
              or relax the homology requirements of recombination.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              This proposal also includes studies of "gene targeting", or                    
              homologous recombination between a transfected molecule and a                  
              specific chromosomal target sequence.  Gene targeting offers a                 
              powerful tool for studying gene function and potentially a                     
              methodology for eventual gene therapy.  By studying gene targeting             
              events involving a selectable chromosomal marker, they propose to              
              measure the homology dependence as well as make an assessment of               
              the rate-limiting step of targeted recombination.  Experiments will            
              also be done to test the hypotheses that inhibiting random                     
              integration of DNA into a mammalian genome will improve targeting              
              efficiency.
