Title       : Rock Friction Constitutive Experiments as Related to Theory of Earthquake
               Instability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1993    
File        : a9220005

Award Number: 9220005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80817              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry E. Tullis terry_tullis@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Weeks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9220005  Tullis         This work is a laboratory experimental study of the
              frictional  behavior of rocks with significance both for understanding 
              fundamental frictional processes and for learning how to apply the  laboratory
              results to faults in the Earth's crust that produce  earthquakes.  The focus is
              on two important problems.  The first  is to understand the processes
              responsible for the observed  behavior, so that constitutive equations can be
              based on known  processes.  This is important for extrapolating laboratory
              results  over large time and distance scales to earthquakes.  The second 
              problem is to understand the reason for differences in large  displacement
              experiments between velocity weakening behavior of  friction samples using
              initially bare surfaces and velocity  strengthening behavior of samples using
              simulated gouge.   Understanding the correlations between frictional behavior
              and  structures in these samples will help ascertain what behavior may  be
              associated with structures observed in natural faults.   Experiments will be
              conducted using a unique high pressure rotary  shear apparatus well suited for
              this purpose.  Experiments will be  done on rock types of geological importance
              with known flow and  fracture properties.  Pore fluid chemistry, sliding rate
              and  temperature will be varied to determine how frictional behavior  depends
              on these variables and to help identify operative  processes.  ***
