Title       : WiscNet Extensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9220544

Award Number: 9220544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George O. Strawn                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tad B. Pinkerton tad@doit.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Dorl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The University Wisconsin is requesting funds to add 12 new 2              
              and 4 year colleges and universities to its state wide higher                  
              education network which already comprises over 30 institutions.                
              The proposal requests partial funding for participation in NSFNET              
              through an additional connection with CICNET, the regional network             
              attaching to NSFNET in the Wisconsin Area as well as partial start-            
              up funds for the necessary routers, circuits, and operating support            
              to facilitate the fullest possible participation.  The educational             
              institutions that will participate include: Cardinal Stritch                   
              College, Concordia University, Marshfield Medical Research and                 
              Education Foundation, Mount Senario College, Northland College,                
              Viterbo College, Wisconsin Board of Vocational, Technical and Adult            
              Education, Chippewa Valley Technical College, Moraine Park                     
              Technical College, Wausheka County Technical College, and Western              
              Wisconsin Technical College.                                                   
                   The network will provide a consistent statewide architecture              
              for NSFNET access for a broad variety of entities engaged in                   
              education and research.  This cooperative network will provide                 
              gateways to regional, national, and international networks and will            
              be consistent with their standards.  It will further the                       
              institutions' work in enhancing the state's economic development               
              through a well-educated workforce, accessible training                         
              opportunities, and research and development partnerships.  Another             
              goal of the network is to facilitate collaborative projects and                
              sharing of resources between institutions, including those outside             
              the state.                                                                     
                   The universities need greater functionality and network speed             
              to be able to access supercomputers, libraries, and make file                  
              transfers along with being able to implement a more reliable mail              
              system.  Students and faculty research will benefit from the link.             
              This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to explore                   
              innovative educational resources.
