Title       : Kinetics and Mechanisms of Main-Group Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1994   
File        : a9220924

Award Number: 9220924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Stanbury Stanbdm@mail.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Howard Hargis  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9156,9187,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                   
              Organometallic Chemistry Program.  Its focus is the kinetics                   
              and mechanisms of main-group inorganic reactions in aqueous                    
              solution. Stopped-flow methods (with single wavelength, rapid                  
              scan and conductivity detection) will be used to obtain kinetic                
              data.  The stopped-slow data will be used to obtain rate                       
              constants, reaction rate laws and stoichiometries.  Reactions                  
              to be studied include: 1) Selected electron transfer reactions                 
              between pairs of main-group redox couples, in order to provide                 
              stringent tests of the applicability of Marcus theory to                       
              reactions between species of widely differing ionic radii;                     
              2) electron transfer reactions involving chlorine/dichloride,                  
              bromine/dibromide, hydroxylammonium/hydroxylamine, and NO/NO-                  
              as redox couples, where the reaction partners are                              
              substitution-inert coordination complexes, leading to standard                 
              redox potentials and effective self-exchange rate constants for                
              the main-group couples; 3) dihydrogen transfer from diimide                    
              (now that methods are available to generate and detect this                    
              species) with emphasis on reactions with dioxygen, diiodine and                
              hydrogen peroxide, as well as with olefins and one-electron                    
              oxidants; 4) inner-sphere reactions in which sulfite is                        
              oxidized by tetrachloroaurate(III) and other coordination                      
              complexes, probing the mechanistic factors that lead to                        
              formation of the S-S bond in dithionate; 5) the reactions of NO                
              with dioxygen and of sulfur trioxide with water, because of                    
              their relevance to environmental issues.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Reactions of molecules containing the so-called main-group                     
              elements, such as nitrogen, sulfur, chlorine and bromine, are                  
              of great importance in industry and in everyday life, with                     
              examples including the purification of drinking water and the                  
              action of chlorine bleach in the home washing machine. In                      
              addition to providing a better understanding of how many of                    
              these common reactions occur, the results of this project may                  
              provide insight into how to avoid detrimental side reactions,                  
              such as the formation on carcinogens during the chlorination of                
              sewage plant effluents.
