Title       : Analysis of the B Cell Receptor Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1993       
File        : a9220169

Award Number: 9220169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen J. Rosenspire   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term objective of this research is to elucidate the                   
              molecular mechanisms by which membrane immunoglobulin generates                
              proliferative or inhibitory signals to the interior of the B                   
              lymphocyte in response to antigen binding at the surface.  Since               
              the membrane immunoglobulin receptor shares many characteristics               
              with tyrosine kinase dependent growth factor receptors, an                     
              understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in B lymphocytes            
              will benefit the greater community of cell biologists by                       
              contributing to an understanding of proliferative control in a wide            
              variety of cell types.  In particular, preliminary evidence which              
              suggests that membrane immunoglobulin heavy chains are linked to a             
              diverse group of proteins, some of which are src family tyrosine               
              kinases, while others appear to be cytoskeletal constituents will              
              be pursued.  Biochemical and immunological methodologies will be               
              employed to explore the molecular topology of membrane                         
              immunoglobulin and membrane immunoglobulin-associated proteins.  A             
              particular focus of the project will be the possibility that the               
              function of membrane immunoglobulin may be controlled by structural            
              associations which are dependent upon receptor clustering.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Most types of living cells respond to external signal molecules                
              such as hormones or growth factors by undergoing a cascade of                  
              biochemical changes that result in various physiological changes.              
              Growth factors, for example, are signals that trigger a chain of               
              biochemical events leading to cell division.  The steps in such                
              cascades of events are generally referred to as "signal                        
              transduction".  This project will study the early events in signal             
              transduction following binding of a signal molecule to its specific            
              receptor protein in a cell membrane.  The specific goal is to                  
              identify and characterize molecules in the cell membrane or in the             
              cell's interior (for example, protein molecules that constitute the            
              cell's internal skeleton) that bind to and/or chemically modify the            
              receptor and each other after the receptor binds its signal                    
              molecule.  Identifying the cellular components that interact with              
              this receptor in response to a signal should contribute                        
              substantially to our understanding of the mechanisms of signal                 
              transduction in cells.
