Title       : The Use of Stereolithography and Computer Graphics to Develop Three-Dimensional
               Tactile Models for Use by Blind and Visually Impaired Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1994  
File        : a9220510

Award Number: 9220510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Venanzi   (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Skawinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Jersey Inst of Tech
	      University Heights
	      Newark, NJ  07102    /   -

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9260,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Carol A. Venanzi and Dr. William J. Skawinski are                    
              supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational                    
              Chemistry Program to: 1) perform theoretical chemical studies                  
              of amiloride analogs in an effort to understand their efficacy                 
              as sodium channel blockers in epithelial cells, and 2) to                      
              develop the use of stereolithography in conjunction with                       
              computer graphics as a three-dimensional tactile modeling                      
              technique for visually impaired scientists.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Drs. Venanzi and Skawinski will use theoretical calculations of                
              molecular electrostatic potential maps to explain experimental                 
              data on the binding constants for chemical analogs of the                      
              compound amiloride which is a known diuretic drug and a potent                 
              sodium channel blocker.  Their working hypothesis is that the                  
              long-range electrostatic interactions orient and direct the                    
              amiloride molecule into the channel binding site which must be                 
              complementary to amiloride in both molecular shape and                         
              molecular electrostatic potential.  As part of this research                   
              they will also exploit a technique known as stereolithography                  
              to translate 3-D computer generated images into tactile models                 
              so that Dr. Skawinski, a visually impaired theoretical chemist,                
              can perceive the molecular shapes of the active species and                    
              actively participate in the research.
