Title       : Molecular and Organismal Characters in Green Algal Phylogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9220834

Award Number: 9220834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Buchheim mark-buchheim@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell L. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The scientific significance of the unicellular green algae                
              treated in the formal genus Chlamydomonas flourishes on several                
              fronts including use as a model system in experimental genetics,               
              molecular biology, and gene manipulation.  Modern molecular                    
              systematic studies of variability have also revealed a previously              
              unsuspected wealth of phenotypic and genotypic diversity in the                
              genus.  Comparisons of nuclear-encoded, ribosomal RNA gene                     
              sequences revealed distinct groups of Chlamydomonas species that               
              share more recent ancestry with other non-Chlamydomonas species,               
              including groups of colonial Volvocales.  Although these new                   
              observations conflict with the traditional taxonomy of                         
              Chlamydomonas and its allies, based largely on light-microscopy,               
              new evolutionary interpretations of morphological variability                  
              suggest that undue influence was accorded primitive features and               
              that ultrastructural and biochemical characters are not in conflict            
              with the new gene data.  A broader sampling of Chlamydomonas and               
              allied species will be implemented in a new project designed to                
              expand the molecular and morphological database for these algae and            
              to test evolutionary hypotheses about their origin and                         
              diversification.  A synthesis of modern genetic and traditional                
              morphological approaches to the study of evolutionary patterns will            
              serve as a key component of a taxonomic reassessment of                        
              Chlamydomonas and of other green algae as well.
