Title       : Sources of Cenozoic Volcanism in McMurdo Sound: An Isotopic Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9220065

Award Number: 9220065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Kurz mkurz@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The existence of basaltic volcanism in McMurdo Sound has been                  
              attributed to a mantle hotspot, or alternatively, to structurally              
              controlled eruptions related to continental rifting and extension              
              in the Ross Sea.  The goals of this award are to: 1) characterize              
              the mantle source beneath the region and understand its origin,                
              and 2) determine the relationship between the volcanism and the                
              proposed hotspot and/or extension-related tectonic origin.                     
              Existing isotopic data suggest that these basalts have unique                  
              radiogenic lead and non-radiogenic strontium isotopic                          
              compositions that are compatible with derivation from a                        
              hypothetical class of mantle called HIMU (meaning high uranium to              
              lead ratio).  This type of mantle could be produced by one or                  
              more of the following processes; recycling of oceanic crust into               
              the mantle, metasomatic addition of uranium, metasomatic removal               
              of rubidium, or lead loss to the core.  Helium isotopes have not               
              yet been used extensively to study HIMU mantle.  However, helium               
              isotopes will be useful for characterizing HIMU mantle sources of              
              basalts and identifying the processes involved in its production               
              because helium isotopes can help distinguish between undepleted                
              mantle and mantle that has been involved in mid-ocean ridge or                 
              subduction processes.  Thus, helium isotopic data from the                     
              McMurdo Sound region will help to understand the nature and                    
              origin of HIMU mantle sources in Antarctica and elsewhere in the               
              world.  In addition, new helium isotopic data from this area,                  
              coupled with strontium, neodymium, and lead isotopes, will help                
              determine whether the McMurdo Sound basalts are associated with a              
              hot mantle plume, involving undepleted mantle, or whether they                 
              are associated with extension related magmatism that would not                 
              require involvement of a mantle plume.  Isotopic ages of the                   
              volcanic rocks which would be produced in the course of this work              
              will also help document the temporal and tectonic controls on                  
              volcanism.
