Title       : Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on the Photosynthesis of Phytoplankton in the
               Antarctic Marginal Ice Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9220373

Award Number: 9220373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Neale   (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Cullen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chespke Res Consrtium Inc
	      P.O.Box 1280
	      Solomons, MD  206881280    301/261-4190

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
              Increases in middle ultraviolet radiation associated with the                  
              Antarctic ozone hole have been shown to inhibit the                            
              photosynthesis of phytoplankton, and results have been                         
              extrapolated to estimate the effect of ozone depletion on primary              
              productivity in the marginal ice zone.   This research will                    
              refine the assessment by specifying detailed wavelength-dependent              
              biological weighting functions for the inhibition of                           
              photosynthesis by ultraviolet radiation, and by considering the                
              mitigating effects of vertical mixing.  Biological weighting                   
              functions of phytoplankton in the marginal ice zone will be                    
              measured under controlled conditions and applied in a new model                
              of photosynthesis to predict primary productivity in situ, as                  
              well as under altered ultraviolet irradiance.  These predictions               
              will be compared with observations on samples from the water                   
              column and with measurements during incubations of several hours               
              under different irradiance regimes.  Results of these comparisons              
              will be used to test the model and to quantify the potential                   
              artifact of long incubations.  Assumptions about the kinetics of               
              photoinhibition and recovery, critical to modeling the effects of              
              vertical mixing, will be examined with time-course experiments.                
              Results will be incorporated into a model of photosynthesis and                
              photoinhibition in the water column that will be used to predict               
              the influence of ozone depletion on marine primary production,                 
              particularly in the marginal zone.
