Title       : Cellular and Biomechanical Analysis of Convergence and Extension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9220525

Award Number: 9220525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Keller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mimi A. R. Koehl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of the proposed research is to develop explants of               
              the dorsal axial tissues of the Xenopus laevis gastrula as an                  
              experimental system in which the biochemical mechanisms responsible            
              for convergence and extension of these tissues can be linked to                
              molecular and cellular events.  The project involves combining                 
              skills and methodologies in bioengineering, biomechanics, cell and             
              developmental biology.  We have developed a miniaturized force-                
              measuring device the "Histowiggler", that allows us to measure the             
              mechanical properties of embryonic tissues and the forces they                 
              generate in standard engineering measures useful for mechanical                
              analysis and mathematical modelling.  We will use this device to               
              measure the mechanical properties of explants of dorsal axial                  
              tissues and the forces they generate during normal convergence and             
              extension and after experimental treatments known to affect                    
              gastrulation in whole embryos.  Normal and experimentally altered              
              cell behavior will be recorded by  analyzing shapes and                        
              arrangements of fluorescein dextran-labeled cells indirectly with              
              histology and directly with low-light fluorescence microscopy and              
              video image processing and recording.  Cytoskeletal structure under            
              normal and experimental conditions will be evaluated with                      
              immunocytochemistry and electron microscopy.  The results are                  
              expected to contribute to our understanding of how cytoskeletal                
              structures and cell behaviors generate the mechanical properties               
              and forces driving convergence and extension of the axial mesoderm.            
              This system will be a step in the direction of developing routine              
              methods of analyzing the biomechanical function of molecules and               
              cell behaviors.
