Title       : A Novel Mechanism of Ribosomal Protein Modulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9220573

Award Number: 9220573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent L. Redman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9237,
Abstract    :
              The tobacco, human and two Arabidopsis genes for a highly conserved            
              eukaryotic ribosomal protein (CEP52) contain introns.  In each                 
              gene, one intron contains open reading frame which would allow the             
              production of an altered form of the CEp52 protein (ALT52) from                
              unspliced message.  Based on immunoblots probed with CEP52 specific            
              antiserum, it is proposed that translation of unspliced mRNA                   
              occurs.  A putative ALT52 is expressed at high levels in rat                   
              tissues, but the protein is not ribosomally associated.  ALT52                 
              synthesis appears to be tissue specific and inversely related to               
              the level of CEP52 present.  Since CEP52 levels correspond to the              
              amount of ribosomes present in rat tissues, the production of ALT52            
              may function to limit ribosomes production.  These preliminary                 
              results suggests that CEP52 splicing may be a novel regulatory                 
              mechanism involved in controlling the levels of cytoplasmic                    
              ribosomes. The investigators  will investigate these observations              
              by characterizing the rat proteins that react with the CEP52                   
              antibody and by sequencing a rat CEP52 genomic clone to determine              
              if the gene contains introns as do the other characterized CEP52               
              genes.  Additional antibodies will be generated to examine the                 
              possible production of ALT52 in the plant Arabidopsis.                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Cellular ribosome levels are controlled by the need for the                    
              proteins that they synthesize.  Rapidly growing cells, whether                 
              normal or cancerous, require elevated amounts of ribosomes compared            
              to cells that are not as metabolically active.  Despite significant            
              advances, gaps remain in our understanding of how the assembly of              
              two ribosomes from more that  80 proteins and four nucleic acids is            
              coordinated and regulated.  Two ribosomal proteins discovered in               
              1989 may have important roles in the regulation of ribosome                    
              assembly, since, an insufficient amount of either protein results              
              in the decreased production of functional ribosomes.  Recent                   
              studies suggest that one of these proteins may be regulated by                 
              editing the RNA copy of the genetic information once it is                     
              transcribed from DNA.  This editing process occurs for many                    
              proteins, however, this case is unusual in that both the edited and            
              unedited form of the RNA could be used to produce a protein.  The              
              proteins would be identical in some parts of their structure, but              
              would significantly differ in size and probably function                       
              Preliminary evidence indicates that two forms of this protein are              
              produced.  The large version that would be produced from the                   
              unedited RNA is not found on ribosomes, and it is produced in the              
              largest amounts by tissues that have few ribosomes.  These studies             
              will determine if the detected proteins are produced as the result             
              of RNA editing of a common RNA precursor and if the editing process            
              represents a previously unknown regulatory mechanism that controls             
              ribosome levels.
