Title       : A Watershed Simulation Model with Vegetation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9220385

Award Number: 9220385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75781              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. McDonnell   (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              David W. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Christopher Neale  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1325,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Development of accurate, computationally efficient simulation                  
              models for hydrologic processes and vegetation is needed for use               
              in global climate models.  Methods for validating such models need             
              to be broader in scope and easier to implement on various time and             
              length scales.  The objective of this study is to develop and test             
              a watershed simulation model which includes simulation of the                  
              response of vegetation to changing hydrologic conditions.  An                  
              important objective of this study is to find out whether the                   
              hydrologic status of watersheds can be assessed accurately by using            
              remote sensing observations of vegetation and simulation models.               
              Our approach involves development of a watershed simulation model              
              which integrates existing ground-based, airborne, and satellite                
              observations of a watershed in the Uinta Mountains.  The vegetaton             
              distribution will be based on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's             
              digital vegetation database.  The model will be used to simulate               
              the response of vegetation (i.e., transpiration, assimilation, leaf            
              growth the abcission) to environmental conditions and model values             
              of soil moisture, soil temperature, streamflow, transpiration,                 
              surface temperature, leaf area, and assimilation will be compared              
              to measured values. We will make new field measurements of soil                
              moisture, temperature, transpiration, and photosynthesis.   We will            
              also use operational meteorological and hydrologic data for model              
              initialization and validation.  Finally, the sensitivity of                    
              predictions to model parameters will be investigated.
