Title       : Photochemistry of Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1994   
File        : a9115012

Award Number: 9115012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224175             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nien-Chu C. Yang ncyang@rainbow.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald H. Levy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The energetic and medium requirements in chemical processes                    
              involving electron transfer will be probed with specially                      
              designed equipment. The systems of donor-acceptor pairs to be                  
              investigated will allow studies to be made of the relationship                 
              between exciplex emission and charge transfer emission, the                    
              relationship between energetics and rates of photoinduced                      
              electron transfer, and the role of proteins as the media in                    
              biological photoinduced electron transfer. One of the                          
              bichromophoric systems to be studied will have as the                          
              donor/acceptor pair a substituted anthracene and a                             
              dimethylaniline group which is separated by a spacer of varying                
              length. The spacer will consist of methylene or amido units.                   
              Such a series of compounds will allow the energetics of these                  
              processes to be probed by changes in substituents and the                      
              geometry of the transfer processes to be probed by varying the                 
              length of the spacer. The studies will be carried out with a                   
              transient spectrometer and a supersonic jet to obtain                          
              high-resolution spectra.                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              research of Professor N. C. Yang at the University of Chicago.                 
              Factors that govern electron transfer between two groups within                
              a molecule will be studied. One of the groups will be promoted                 
              to an excited state by the absorption of light energy.                         
              Subsequently, electron transfer from this excited group to the                 
              other electron acceptor group in the molecule can be studied by                
              fast spectroscopic techinques. The energetics of the process                   
              will be probed by altering one of the groups with other                        
              substituents which facilitate or retard electron transfer.                     
              Electron transfer is of fundamental importance in the                          
              conversion of light into chemical energy in many biological                    
              processes including photosynthesis and thus this research will                 
              be of considerable interest to a wide range  of scientists.
