Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: The Modeling and Control of High Performance
               Mechanical and Robotic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1992       
File        : a9115921

Award Number: 9115921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Dubowsky dubowsky@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1445,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative                         
              research in mechanical engineering between Steven Dubowsky                     
              of the Massachusetts Institute for Technology and Jean-                        
              Claude Guinot of the Laboratory for Robotics, Pierre and                       
              Marie Curie University, Paris, France.  The objective of                       
              their research is to develop a series of accurate,                             
              integrated dynamic models and analytical tools for the                         
              design of high performance, high speed mechanical and                          
              robotic systems.  These models will provide insights into                      
              the nature of degrading behavior in advanced, high speed                       
              systems and could provide a foundation for predicting a                        
              system's problems.  The investigators will also develop                        
              control algorithms for highly flexible robotic manipulators.                   
              Dr. Dubowsky brings to this collaboration expertise in the                     
              development of methods for modeling the spatial dynamics and                   
              control of high performance mechanical systems.  He has                        
              developed new control algorithms for robotic manipulators.                     
              This is complemented by the French investigators'                              
              contributions in the area of spatial kinematics of complex                     
              mechanical systems. They have developed extensive                              
              experimental capability in the areas of manipulators and                       
              integration of sensors and computation for real time                           
              control.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project will advance our understanding of design and                      
              control of high performance mechanical systems.  It will                       
              result in a predictive model and effective control                             
              algorithms for degradation problems and improved robotic                       
              systems.
