Title       : Higher Plant Nitrate Reductase: Structure and Function of Its Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1994    
File        : a9115009

Award Number: 9115009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilbur H. Campbell wcampbel@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Nitrate reductase is a central enzyme in plant metabolism.  The PI             
              will investigate the biochemistry of the flavin adenine                        
              dinucleotide (FAD) domain and the combined cytochrome b/FAD super-             
              domain of corn NADH:nitrate reductase by expressing them as                    
              recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli.  The FAD domain has                  
              already been expressed; it is similar to holo-nitrate reductase in             
              biochemical and immunochemical properties.  Crystals of the                    
              recombinant FAD domain, which diffract x-rays have recently been               
              obtained by collaborators in Sweden and analysis of its 3-D                    
              structure is underways.  Based on the structural model being                   
              derived, he will construct site-directed mutants of residues                   
              involved in binding FAD and NADH.  The cytochrome b/FAD super-                 
              domain, which is expected to catalyze NADH-dependent cytochrome c              
              reduction, will be expressed in E. coli, purified and                          
              characterized.  Purified recombinant super-domain will be supplied             
              to Professor Branden's group in Sweden for crystallization.  Site-             
              directed mutagenesis will also be done on this recombinant nitrate             
              reductase fragment.  These studies will provide new information on             
              functional and structural properties of nitrate reductase and may              
              be useful for gaining insight into cellular mechanisms involved in             
              regulation of the enzyme's activity.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The structural and functional properties of corn nitrate reductase             
              will be investigated by expressing portions of the enzyme in an E.             
              coli system.  Such expression will allow production of sufficient              
              quantities of the enzyme's catalytic domains to allow                          
              crystallization.  Crystals of the domains will be used in X-ray                
              diffraction studies to determine the three dimensional structure of            
              the functional protein.  These experiments should provide                      
              significant new insights into electron transfer properties of the              
              enzyme which are essential to its function in nitrate reduction.
