Title       : Table Top Soft X-Ray Laser
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9115426

Award Number: 9115426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Szymon Suckewer suckewer@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Skinner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Progress has been made in the last six years in the                            
              development of soft x-ray lasers.  Advances in their                           
              performance (wavelength range and gain) have                                   
              been achieved together with simplifications of the                             
              technology required to generate gain.  These                                   
              achievements have, in part, been stimulated by the                             
              first applications of soft x-ray lasers to soft x-ray                          
              microscopy and micro-holography.  The impact soft                              
              x-ray laster technology will have on these and other                           
              fields in science and industry is critically dependent                         
              on the cost of these lasers.  Fortunately, significant                         
              soft x-ray gain has been demonstrated in plasmas                               
              generated by relatively low energy river lasers;                               
              however,to date the maximum gain-length product                                
              achieved in these systems has been less than                                   
              desired.  The PI proposes to identify the factors                              
              crucial to achieving high gain using novel                                     
              diagnostics to detect gain with unprecedented                                  
              sensitivity and provide a high resolution soft x-ray                           
              image of plasmas produced by new target                                        
              configurations.  In the second phase of the work,                              
              factors such as plasma uniformity and refraction                               
              critical to the achievement of high gain-length in                             
              extended plasmas will be identified and controlled                             
              in order to produce a high intensity output suitable                           
              for applications.  In the third year soft x-ray mirrors                        
              will be installed to implement a laser cavity.  In                             
              addition to advancing our understanding of the                                 
              physics issues, this research is aimed at producing a                          
              moderate cost table-top soft x-ray laser suitable for                          
              sub-optical resolution lithographic inspection and a                           
              variety of other applications in science and industry.
