Title       : High Resolution Laser Spectroscopy, Visit to Develop a JointResearch Project,
               Travel Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9115310

Award Number: 9115310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gottipaty N. Rao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 6164      INDIA - INDIVIDUAL TRAVEL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              Technical Narrative:  This is a travel award to finalize a                     
              research proposal in the area of high resolution laser                         
              spectroscopy which will be submitted to the NSF.  Dr. Rao of                   
              Adelphi University will finalize a collaborative research                      
              proposal with Dr. Srivastava of the Indian Institute of                        
              Technology, Kanpur.  The proposed research is high resolution                  
              doppler free laser spectroscopy.  This enables the study of ultra              
              narrow atomic/molecular lineshapes, linewidths and small energy                
              shifts.  Many new physical phenomena which are not normally                    
              accessible can be measured now.  High precision and extreme                    
              sensitivity offered by the high resolution Doppler free laser                  
              spectroscopy techniques will be employed to study  1) the                      
              hyperfine structure of the atomic levels including Rydberg states              
              and the excitation and autoionization of atoms and molecules in                
              electron-ion collisions 2) atomic hyperfine structure and the                  
              nonlinear polarization of the atoms using Degenerate Four Wave                 
              Mixing 3) of collision cross sections, rate coefficients,                      
              collisional electronic excitation transfer and other atomic and                
              molecular parameters.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This proposal is to support Dr. Rao's travel to Kanpur,                
              India where he has been invited by the Department of Physics,                  
              Head to develop a collaborative program to utilize the                         
              sophisticated facilities at their high resolution laser                        
              spectroscopy laboratory.  This is the only laboratory of its kind              
              in India and has been identified by the Department of Science and              
              Technology as a high interest area.  Dr. Rao in collaboration                  
              with several scientists at Kanpur expects to provide the                       
              necessary expertise to initiate the project.
