Title       : U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Stable Transformation of Leguminous Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9115626

Award Number: 9115626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13316              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Lurquin lurquin@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Paul F.             
              Lurquin of Washington State University and Drs.  Filippone and                 
              Penza of the University of Naples, Italy.  The objective of the                
              project is to optimize gene transfer frequencies in a variety of               
              leguminous plants and to explore techniques for the production of              
              stably and homogeneously transformed plants from chimeric ones.                
                                                                                             
              Leguminous plants are notoriously refractory to genetic                        
              engineering.  Failure to produce transgenic legumes is generally               
              attributed to the fact that fertile plants cannot be regenerated from          
              transformed callus cells growing in vitro.  The investigators have             
              developed a transformation procedure that does not require a tissue            
              culture step and allows recovery of large proportions of plantlets             
              chimeric for a transgene.  This procedure hinges on the                        
              cocultivation of isolated mature embryos with Agrobacterium                    
              tumefaciens followed by plantlet development on nonselective                   
              medium.  Specific staining indicated that large number of such                 
              plantlets contain a variety of tissues expressing the transgene.  The          
              two laboratories are essentially complementary, the Italian                    
              laboratory having a strong plant tissue culture and cytogenetic                
              component, while the US laboratory is well versed in molecular                 
              and microbial techniques. Three graduate students are currently                
              working on the project at Washington State University.  The results            
              of this collaboration will eventually improve the quality of pea,              
              lentil, and chickpea plants grown in the US; the technology will be            
              transferred to developing countries where cowpea and chickpea are              
              grown on a large scale (the Middle East and Africa), thanks to the             
              close links that exist between the Italian laboratory and IITA and             
              ICARDA.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                               //
