Title       : High Pressure Freezer for Advanced Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9115718

Award Number: 9115718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77305              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry A. Palevitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wilma L. Lingle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melvin S. Fuller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Hussey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chester J. Karwoski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A group of investigators at the University of Georgia requests                 
              funds for a Balzers high pressure freezer to take advantage of                 
              the unique opportunities provided by this instrument in                        
              addressing a variety of relevant biological problems.  The group               
              has extensive prior experience with freeze substitution under                  
              standard conditions, plus preliminary data showing the efficacy                
              of high pressure freezing in their systems.  The freezer will                  
              support a wide range of research projects, e.g. host-pathogen                  
              interactions (Hussey, Fuller and Mims), desiccation acclimation                
              in algae (Lingle), cytoskeletal organization during plant cell                 
              development and differentiation (Palevitz), extracellular space                
              in frog retina (Karwoski) and ultrastructure of protozoal                      
              pathogens (Paulin).  The projects entail examination of thin                   
              sections as well as additional applications such as electron                   
              immunocytochemistry.  Our combined requirements of excellent                   
              ultrastructural preservation, retention of soluble components and              
              antigenicity, and elimination of artifacts due to the slow action              
              of fixatives under aqueous conditions or ice crystal formation in              
              thick specimens require high pressure freeing followed by freeze               
              substitution.  The University of Georgia is committed to                       
              fostering ultrastructural research on campus and is prepared to                
              provide 50% of the cost of the high pressure freezer.
