Title       : Phosphorous Geochemistry in Marine Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1992  
File        : a9115569

Award Number: 9115569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Berner robert.berner@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1670,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Research to date has resulted in a number of significant                       
              findings.  (1) By means of a modified selective extraction                     
              technique, separate solid forms of phosphorus have been                        
              distinguished, and their concentrations determined, in sediments               
              from a number of locations, with emphasis on the Amazon Delta.                 
              Results indicate that previously unrecognized mechanisms for the               
              removal of P from seawater (as dispersed authigenic apatite and P              
              associated with hydrous ferric oxides) may be important on a                   
              global basis.  Also, differences in relative proportions of P-                 
              containing phases from place to place agree with independent                   
              geological reasoning which serves as a check on the method.  (2)               
              Organic phosphorus in marine sediments has been investigated in                
              terms of C/P ratios and its chemical nature using 31P NMR.                     
              Principal forms are phosphate monoesters and diesters, and                     
              phosphonate compounds, the latter having been identified in                    
              marine sediments for the first time.  Phosphonate, where C is                  
              directly bonded to P, is especially important because of its                   
              resistance to bacterial decay.  (3) An experimental study of the               
              kinetics of nucleation and crystal growth of fluorapatite from                 
              seawater-like solution has resulted in the hypothesis that                     
              phosphorite in upwelling areas forms as the consequence of the                 
              buildup of very high concentrations (>400 uM) of interstitial                  
              dissolved phosphate at shallow depths.  The high concentrations                
              enable the precipitation of metastable Ca-phosphate phases which               
              serve as necessary nucleating agents for fluorapatite                          
              precipitation.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This study will be continued by (1) analyzing in detail for                    
              different forms of solid phosphorus in sediments from three major              
              rivers and their marine deltas:  the Amazon, the Yangtze (Chang-               
              jiang) and the Yellow (Huang-he).  (2) Extending laboratory                    
              precipitation studies to include the role of specific nucleating               
              agents, such as collagen, and the effect of changing dissolved                 
              carbonate levels on apatite precipitation.
