Title       : Workshop on: "Biotic Turnover Examined in a Phylogenetic Context" PS/SVP
               Symposium at GSA; San Diego, CA; October 23, 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1991 
File        : a9115589

Award Number: 9115589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6190               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Archibald  (DATA NOT AVAILABLE current)
              Sandra J. Carlson carlson@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Sandra Carlson, a paleontologists at the University of                
              California at Davis, has organized a half-day symposium entitled               
              "Biotic Turnover Examined in a Phylogenetic Context".  This                    
              symposium will be held in conjunction with the annual meetings of              
              Society of Vertebrate Paleontologists and the Paleontologic                    
              Society in San Diego.  The symposium would be the first joint                  
              meeting between these societies in a long time, and the symposium              
              would focus on a major difference in the ways invertebrate and                 
              vertebrate paleontologists analyze evolutionary patterns in the                
              fossil record.  Vertebrate paleontologists have, to a much                     
              greater degree, embraced cladistic analysis and have labored to                
              reconstruct phylogenetic relationships and histories.  In                      
              contrast, many invertebrate paleontologists have censused                      
              diversity within major taxa per geologic time interval and                     
              studied patterns of diversity change through time.  The degree to              
              which these approaches are incompatible has been addressed by                  
              only a few individuals, and the proposed meeting would bring the               
              principals together for an open discussion of the issue.                       
                   This symposium will address an important and timely                       
              controversy in evolutionary paleobiology.  The results of this                 
              symposium will find an interested audience among research                      
              scientists from paleontology to evolutionary theory.
