Title       : Charge Dependence of Cosmic Ray Solar Modulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9115492

Award Number: 9115492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Evenson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacques L'Heureux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bartol Research Institute
	      University of Delaware
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The anti-correlation between cosmic ray fluxes and the level              
              of solar activity (solar modulation) is caused by magnetic field               
              irregularities carried by the solar wind that sweep charged                    
              particles out of the solar system and/or decelerate them.  Since               
              electrons and nuclei have greatly different charge/mass ratios,                
              the relation of velocity and magnetic rigidity is significantly                
              different for these two particle species.  If the heliospheric                 
              magnetic field has long range order, the charge sign of cosmic                 
              ray particles can affect their propagation.  A major failure of                
              current modulation model simultaneously to reproduce electron and              
              nucleon modulation is related to reversals of the solar magnetic               
              field which occur every eleven years.  Charge dependence should                
              change when the solar field reverses, but in a way different from              
              what is observed.  The PIs propose a research program designed to              
              extend measurements of charge dependence of cosmic ray solar                   
              modulation through comparison of electron data to be obtained                  
              under this proposal with electron and proton data available from               
              an instrument on the ICE spacecraft as well as other data from                 
              the literature.  This investigation will determine the extent to               
              which large scale order of the heliospheric magnetic field is                  
              important in determining trajectories of charged particles in the              
              heliosphere.
