Title       : Interfacial Charge and Mass Transfer at Polymer Modified Electrodes: Diagnosing
               the Rate Limiting Step
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1993   
File        : a9115462

Award Number: 9115462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Bruckenstein chemstan@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Robert Hillman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is in the general area of analytical and surface                  
              chemistry and in the subfield of electrochemistry at polymer                   
              modified electrodes.  Professor Stanley Bruckenstein of the State              
              University of New York at Buffalo and Professor A. Robert Hillman              
              of the University of Bristol in the United Kingdom will                        
              collaborate on a comprehensive and definitive investigation of the             
              kinetics and mechanisms of interfacial mass and charge transfer at             
              polymer modified electrodes.  Using quartz crystal microbalance                
              techniques, these researchers will diagnose rate limiting mass and             
              charge transfer processes in electroactive polymer films and study             
              such processes as functions of polymer structure and solution                  
              composition.  The resulting correlation of polymer structure and               
              solution composition with mechanism of kinetic control should                  
              enable the rational design of sensors and molecular electronic                 
              devices based on polymer modified electrodes.  This research will              
              be conducted at the State University of New York at Buffalo where              
              Professor Hillman holds an appointment as Adjunct Associate                    
              Professor of Chemistry.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              This project will give rise to new fundamental understandings of               
              mass and charge transfer in complex electrochemical systems,                   
              resolve many troubling questions which plague electrochemistry at              
              polymer modified electrodes, facilitate progress among many                    
              research groups working in this technologically important area,                
              and enable international collaborative research in chemistry.
