Title       : Core Support for a Central Hybridoma Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1991  
File        : a9115841

Award Number: 9115841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72507              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Gottlieb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas System Office
	      601 Colorado Street
	      Austin, TX  787012904    512/471-4227

NSF Program : 1103      TECHNIQUE DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award provides transitional support for a hybridoma facility              
              at the University of Texas at Austin.  The facility makes hybridoma            
              and monoclonal antibody production technology available to                     
              individual researchers at the University, regardless of their                  
              departmental affiliation.  The facility performs immunization, cell            
              fusion, cloning and antibody production.  The individual                       
              researchers are responsible for the specialized assays needed for              
              hybridoma screening and antibody characterization.                             
                                                                                             
              Central facilities which provide both service and expert advice                
              with respect to specialized research techniques like hybridoma                 
              production and the sequencing or synthesis of protein and DNA have             
              become important ingredients of modern research universities.  The             
              specialized reagents they supply are needed for state of the art               
              research in many areas of the life sciences.  The cost of the                  
              equipment and technical help necessary for successful application              
              of the techniques involved are generally far beyond the financial              
              resources of an individual research program, and often beyond the              
              combined resources of all users of the facility in the university,             
              especially in the first few years of the facility's existence.                 
              During this period, when the user community is learning how to                 
              incorporate the new resource into its research programs, some                  
              financial support beyond that provided by user fees is often                   
              crucial to the facility's survival.  In the past, the NSF has                  
              provided a large measure of support for the facility; funds                    
              provided by this award will insure an orderly transfer of financial            
              responsibility to the University over the next few years.
