Title       : Metal Colloids and Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1992      
File        : a9115964

Award Number: 9115964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Klabunde kenjk@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
              This Science in Developing Countries award will                                
              support the collaboration of Kenneth Klabunde of                               
              Kansas State University  and Galo Cardenas-                                    
              Trivino of the University of Conception, Chile.  The                           
              project aims to (1) prepare M-solvent colloids with                            
              Cu, Ag, and Sn, and with monomers such as styrene and                          
              methylmethacrylate; (2) characterize colloidal                                 
              particles by electrophoresis, TEM, SEM, FTIR,                                  
              Mossbauer, and SRS; and (3) characterize metallic                              
              films formed from the colloids by TGA, DSC,                                    
              microanalyses, and resistivity measurements.                                   
                                                                                             
              The researchers will use a new method for preparing                            
              nonaqueous colloidal metal particles, using metal                              
              evaporation and solvation of atoms in excess cold                              
              organic solvents.  The mobile metal atoms cluster upon                         
              warming.  The forming particles stop growing due to                            
              solvation and electrostatic repulsion.  Various metals                         
              have been shown to form stable colloidal solutions.                            
              The major interest in these new colloids is in their                           
              use as metallic film precursors.  The researchers aim                          
              to develop them for chemical liquid (rather than                               
              vapor) deposition of films.  With a recent patent,                             
              much industrial interest has developed.  This joint                            
              project is expected to facilitate progress in metal-                           
              colloid, metal film work.  The U.S. side has expertise                         
              in colloid chemistry and state-of-the-art equipment                            
              for preparing and analyzing colloidal  solutions and                           
              metal films.  The Chilean side has expertise in                                
              polymer characterization and necessary TGA, DSC, and                           
              TEM/SEM facilities, which the U.S. side lacks.
