Title       : Effects of Rotation and Magnetic Fields on the Winds from Early Type Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1996      
File        : a9115375

Award Number: 9115375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Cassinelli cassinelli@astro.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon E. Bjorkman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murugesapillai Maheswaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For some time astronomers have explored the interconnected nature              
              of magnetic fields, turbulent velocity fields, and rotation in the             
              atmospheres of cool "flare" stars.  For hot, normal-abundance "Be"             
              stars this is a more controversial subject because it is difficult             
              to measure magnetic fields in these stars because their spectral               
              lines are smeared by the stars' rotation. Nonetheless, it is                   
              generally thought that several physical processes, such as                     
              radiation pressure, rotation, magnetic fields, and pulsation, may              
              interact in a complicated way to cause these stars to eject matter             
              "episodically," that is, from time to time rather than in a smooth             
              fashion, such as a "wind." The Principal Investigator (PI) and his             
              colleagues propose to  continue previous work on a "wind compressed            
              disk" model to explain how, once the ejection has started by                   
              another means, how a circum-stellar equatorial disk develops and               
              interacts with the radiation-driven wind at higher latitudes. This             
              award will support a postdoc-toral fellow, Dr. J. Bjorkman, over               
              three years and will permit him to refine his model to interpret               
              it in the context of observed changes in polarization and spectral             
              characteristics with time. This work is expected to have an impact             
              on a variety of other types of stars that periodically eject mass              
              during their evolutions, even if by other mechanisms.
