Title       : Modeling of the Hot Isostatic Pressing Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9115585

Award Number: 9115585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145250             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Gustavo Weber   (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry R. Piehler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   There is considerable industrial interest in the development              
              of Hot Isostatic Pressing (HIP) of material powders into a truly               
              net or near-net shape.  The objective of this research is to set               
              the basis for the development of an efficient methodology to                   
              predict shape changes in HIP.  The study will characterize the two             
              principal causes of shape distortion:  (1) the effect of powder                
              container stiffness, and (2) the formation of densification fronts             
              by inhomogeneous heating.  Iron powder will be used as a first                 
              target material for its mechanical behavior is well understood.                
              Commercially pure titanium will be investigated in a second stage              
              as relevant material data becomes available.  The response of the              
              iron powder material to stress and temperature will be simulated               
              via an internal variable constitutive model.  The model will be                
              calibrated and incorporated in a coupled thermo-mechanical finite              
              element code streamlined for HIP applications.  A novel hot                    
              triaxial compaction apparatus will be used to provide data for the             
              calibration of the constitutive model.  In the final stage,                    
              experiments in an industrial scale will be performed to validate               
              the overall HIP predictive capabilities.                                       
                   The primary benefit of this work will be: (a) the capability              
              of assessing the manufacturability of a component via HIP, (b) the             
              design of a container with a minimum number of trial parts, (c)                
              efficient programming of the HIP unit operation schedule as the                
              effect of cycle and workpiece distribution in the unit work zone               
              becomes better understood, and  (d) exploration of new products                
              with the potential to influence the design of a new generation of              
              HIP units.
