Title       : Console Upgrade for 500MHz NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1996       
File        : a9115826

Award Number: 9115826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15177              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto Isidori isidori@zach.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tzyh-Jong Tarn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher I. Byrnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in             
              applied mathematics.  The investigators are Christopher I. Byrnes,             
              T.J. Tarn and Alberto Isidori of Washington University in St.                  
              Louis and Jean-Pierre Aubin of the University of Paris-Dauphine.               
              The objective of their research is to utilize and coordinate diverse           
              methodologies in algebraic and differential equations for resolving            
              problems on the regulation and control of nonlinear systems.  They             
              will study output regulation, stabilization of systems by feedback             
              and system tracking.  Dr. Byrnes and his group at the University of            
              Washington bring to this collaboration expertise in applying                   
              differential geometry to theories of nonlinear control.  This is               
              complemented by the French group's algebraic approach to                       
              problems in nonlinear systems.  The project will benefit from the              
              synthesis of the different methodologies and theories.                         
                                                                                             
              The problem of controlling or influencing nonlinear systems is of              
              interest to researchers in industry.  For example, in the aerospace            
              industry, flight control systems for aircraft are nonlinear systems,           
              where small changes can affect performance.  The methodology                   
              developed by these researchers could be applied to control                     
              problems for wind shear in take-off and landing.  This research                
              will also advance our understanding of fundamental theories on                 
              nonlinear systems and modern control theory.
