Title       : Discrete Time Synchronization Systems for Burst Mode Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1994      
File        : a9115820

Award Number: 9115820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197172             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Fitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This project is an investigation of discrete time burst mode              
              synchronization algorithms.  The goal of the work is to minimize               
              acquisition time in synchronization to enable applications to                  
              burst mode systems such as multi-user architectures.  The primary              
              design tool is the discrete time maximum likelihood estimator.                 
              Lower bounds are sought for symbol timing with an unknown phase                
              or frequency and for the performance of joint symbol time and                  
              carrier phase and frequency estimation wit doppler.  This will                 
              establish theoretical lower limits of the acquisition                          
              performance.  Maximum likelihood estimator structures for                      
              discrete time burst mode synchronization systems will then be                  
              sought.  The work will focus on recursive and nonrecursive                     
              discrete time implementations.  Stochastic approximation                       
              techniques will be used in the solution of the maximum likelihood              
              equations.  This will result in digital  phase lock loop systems               
              with time varying gains, greatly improving the acquisition                     
              performance over constant gain realizations.  Recursive                        
              structures will be developed for both joint and marginal                       
              synchronization of carrier phase and symbol timing.  Statistical               
              characterization of the acquisition process of the resulting                   
              estimators is a major emphasis.  Markov theory and efficient                   
              Monte Carlo simulation are tools.  Optimal techniques for                      
              detecting the start of a burst and optimal preamble designs will               
              be developed and investigated.
