Title       : Collaborative Research on the Use of Case-Control Methods to Test Opportunity
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1994     
File        : a9115171

Award Number: 9115171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25294              (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Lynch jlynch@american.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Over the past decade, a major focus of crime etiology has been                 
              opportunity theories of victimization.  The appeal of these                    
              theories has been the idea that opportunity, as much as criminal               
              motivation, is a necessary element for crime to occur.  Despite the            
              popularity of the opportunity theories, neither theoretical nor                
              empirical research has gone much beyond the original principles                
              articulated in the late 1970's.  The development of the theory has             
              been slowed by the over-reliance on secondary data which has                   
              limited the refinement of concepts and the testing of theoretical              
              propositions.  As a result, the theory is not sufficiently                     
              developed to operationalize key opportunity concepts.                          
                                                                                             
              This collaborative project will expedite theory building by using              
              a case-control design to refine and test the theory as it applies              
              to non-commercial robbery.  A sample of 50 robbery victims and 50              
              nonvictims will be interviewed using both structured and semi-                 
              structured questions.  Qualitative and quantitative information                
              will be collected on both the lifestyle and ecological contexts of             
              each group.  This information will be used to determine (1) the                
              situational and lifestyle circumstances associated with becoming               
              a robbery victim and (2) any discernable differences between                   
              victims and nonvictims in terms of their ecological and lifestyle              
              patterns.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The results of the research will enable refinements to the criminal            
              opportunity model as it applies to victimization.  As importantly,             
              it will provide an assessment of the utility of the case-control               
              design for testing opportunity models.  Beyond advancing theory and            
              methodology in criminological research, results of this research               
              could have significant implications for crime reduction.
