Title       : The Sevilleta Field Station: Laboratory Equipment for Ecological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1991   
File        : a9115452

Award Number: 9115452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford S. Crawford ccbosque@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Findley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Duszynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1104,
Abstract    :
                   The University of New Mexico operates the Sevilleta Field                 
              Station in central New Mexico at a site adjacent to the Sevilleta              
              National Wildlife Refuge, the Bosque del Apache National Wildlife              
              Refuge, the Sierra Ladrones Wilderness Study Area, and the                     
              Magdalena Mountains Research Area in the Cibola National Forest.               
              Habitats in these areas range from desert to montane forests, and              
              there are dozens of active research projects based at the                      
              Sevilleta Field Station.  Among these are many NSF-supported                   
              projects, including a Long-Term Ecological Research Site and a                 
              Research Experience for Undergraduates Site.  Dr. Clifford                     
              Crawford, Director of the Station, proposes to install a                       
              microwave link between the microcomputers at the Station and the               
              computing facilities at the main campus.  He also plans to                     
              install a remote weather station with a radio link for data                    
              transmission, and to acquire many essential pieces of laboratory               
              and field research equipment.                                                  
                   The proposed additions to the Sevilleta FIeld Station will                
              add significantly to the Station's capacity to host diverse                    
              research projects.  This Station offers research support in a                  
              remote but unique setting, and has demonstrated its ability to                 
              facilitate outstanding research.
