Title       : The Neolithic Revolution in Spain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9115209

Award Number: 9115209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19983              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Michael Barton Michael.barton@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E M. MacMinn-Barton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Barton will              
              conduct exploratory archaeological research in the Alicante                    
              region of Eastern Spain.  Evidence indicates that between 6,500                
              and 7,500 years ago, a major transformation took place and                     
              cultivation of domestic crops and the herding of animals replaced              
              a hunting and gathering way of life.  The data available,                      
              however, is limited to archaeological excavations in a small                   
              number of caves and rock shelters and no settlements themselves                
              have been located and excavated.  In this first stage of a larger              
              project, Dr. Barton and his collaborators will conduct surveys in              
              three river valleys in an attempt to locate such occurrences.  A               
              combination of random sampling and directed survey will be                     
              employed both to maximize the number of sites discovered and to                
              understand their distribution across the landscape.  All sites                 
              will be recorded and selected materials recovered.  These data                 
              will provide the basis to plan future work.                                    
                                                                                             
              The Neolithic Revolution - the domestication of plants and                     
              animals - constitutes a major revolution in human cultural                     
              development and paved the way for the rise of complex societies.               
              While much archaeological attention has focussed on the "core" or              
              "nuclear" areas where domestication took place, relatively little              
              is understood about its spread to other areas.  Two competing                  
              models exist to explain how Near Eastern agriculture entered                   
              Europe.  One group argues that the spread of traits was                        
              accompanied by large scale population movements and that people                
              employing new technology moved out of the Near East into Europe.               
              Others believe that change resulted primarily through the spread               
              of ideas and traits rather than people themselves and that the                 
              original populations merely adopted and adapted to a new style of              
              life.  Dr. Barton will address this issue in his Spanish research              
              and he will focus on sites which date to immediately before and                
              after agriculture and pastoralism appear.                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  First, it will                
              increase our understanding of a poorly known period in European                
              prehistory.  It will provide data of interest to a large number                
              of archaeologists.  It will also shed light on how major cultural              
              transformations take place.
