Title       : Climate Influences Affecting Atlantic Tropical Cyclones Variability and ENSO-QBO
               Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9115184

Award Number: 9115184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Gray Barb@tutt.atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1577,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This program consists of two research initiatives, one that               
              focuses on interannual and longer term variability of intense                  
              tropical cyclone in the Atlantic region as related to West                     
              African rainfall and the other which examines how the                          
              stratospheric QBO modulates intense equatorial convection and,                 
              thereby, affects the longer term variability of the ENSO.                      
                   The PI has shown that recurrent variations of intense                     
              Atlantic hurricane activity are closely correlated with                        
              concurrent variations of rainfall in the West Africa Sahel                     
              region.  Ongoing studies seek to develop a conceptual model of                 
              the physical processes linking both hurricane variability and                  
              Sahel drought with observed global-scale climate variations.  The              
              PI plans to examine the effects of local and regional feedback                 
              processes in West Africa as well as larger scale factors                       
              affecting conditions in the tropical Atlantic and in more remote               
              areas.  This portion of the program will contribute to our                     
              understanding of the climatological variability of processes                   
              governing the genesis,intensification, movement an longevity of                
              Atlantic tropical cyclones while also providing improvements to                
              seasonal forecasts of Atlantic hurricane activity.                             
                   The second, but subordinant (about 35-40% of the total                    
              effort) research initiative is directed to understanding an                    
              apparent association between variable stratospheric QBO, induced               
              wind shear and temperature anomalies in the lower stratosphere in              
              relation to concentrated deep convection over the equatorial West              
              Pacific.  QBO induced convective oscillations appears to have a                
              strong physical link with ENSO cycle variations.                               
                   This research is important because it seeks to increase                   
              understanding of the interannual variability of climate.
