Title       : Vertical Migration of Pelagic Tunicates: Role of Feeding and Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1992   
File        : a9115453

Award Number: 9115453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence P. Madin lmadin@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This investigation focuses on  diel vertical migration by                 
              salps (pelagic tunicates) in the vicinity of the Bermuda Atlantic              
              Time Series Station.  Salps are efficient grazers on                           
              phytoplankton and other particulates; they are widely distributed              
              and sometimes occur in dense populations.  Several species                     
              migrate vertically, some as far as 800 m, while others are                     
              restricted to surface waters.  Recent work in the Subarctic                    
              Pacific and near Bermuda has revealed intriguing new features to               
              these migrations, which do not seem consistent with traditional                
              theories for the advantages of migration.  Salps in the Pacific                
              make shallow migrations, but stop feeding while at the surface                 
              during the night.  This behavior is believed to relate mainly to               
              spawning and fertilization.  Recently salps have been observed                 
              to consistently appeared at the surface at different times of day              
              - morning, afternoon and night.  This apparent migration is also               
              inconsistent with the usual explanations.                                      
                   Dr. Madin and collaborators will investigate the behavior                 
              of this extremely important group of pelagic herbivores.  They                 
              will test two, non-exclusive  hypotheses for the migratory                     
              patterns observed:  1) migration optimizes feeding at food-rich                
              depths, or temporally partitions food among spatially co-                      
              occurring species; 2) migration concentrates salps at the                      
              surface and synchronizes spawning and fertilization.  The                      
              investigations address basic questions of adaptation and ecology               
              in migrating zooplankton, reproductive physiology of salps, and                
              competition and niche separation.  They are also critical for                  
              calculations of the role of grazing and migration by salps on                  
              vertical fluxes of particulate and dissolved nutrients.
