Title       : ABR: New Production in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific and its Relation to Flux
               of Nitrogen and Carbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9115929

Award Number: 9115929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Dugdale   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances P. Wilkerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project represents an accomplishment based renewal for                    
              continuing studies of upwelling new production processes.  The                 
              major goals are to test hypotheses developed from coastal and                  
              equatorial measurements and to modify current models of upwelling              
              system new production accordingly.  The region selected for the                
              study is Monterey Bay where nitrogen uptake has been measured at 2             
              weeks intervals for 2 years.  The seasonal cycle shows an                      
              alternation between open ocean and upwelling conditions allowing a             
              comparison of the 2 regimes, one expected to show open ocean,                  
              oligotrophic characteristics and the other eutrophic coastal                   
              upwelling parameters.  The project seeks to understand the factors             
              which trigger the transition from the one ecosystem to the other.              
              The basic hypothesis is that the process of nitrate incorporation              
              into the primary producers is the key factor in determining the                
              trophic status of a marine ecosystem.  Further, previous results               
              indicate that the critical factors in development of new production            
              of bloom proportions are nitrate concentration and ambient                     
              irradiance.  These 2 factors set boundaries for the acceleration               
              process between low new production conditions and high new                     
              production.  The results of this project will contribute to global             
              models of new production and its impact on carbon cycling.  The                
              results should be especially helpful in understanding the role of              
              upwelling ecosystems in global new production and carbon cycling.
