Title       : Support for Publication Costs, American Society of Limnologyand Oceanography
               Symposium, What Controls Phytoplankton ___ Production in Nutrient-Rich Area of
               the Open Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1991     
File        : a9115337

Award Number: 9115337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Susan Weiler weiler@whitman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitman College
	      345 Bayer Avenue
	      Walla Walla, WA  993622067    509/527-5111

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The apparent paradox of high nutrients/low phytoplankton                       
              populations in some areas of the open ocean has challenged                     
              oceanographers for many years.  Hypotheses to explain it include               
              the regulation of productivity by light, temperature, zooplankton              
              grazing, and trace metal limitation and/or toxicity in these                   
              regions.  To date, none of the hypotheses, or combinations                     
              thereof, has emerged as a widely accepted explanation for why the              
              nitrogen and phosphorus are not depleted in these areas of the                 
              oceans.  Recently, new evidence has supported the hypothesis that              
              iron deficiency limits phytoplankton growth in Subarctic and                   
              Antarctic waters.  This evidence has stimulated discussions of                 
              the feasibility of fertilizing parts of the oceans with iron, and              
              thus sequestering additional atmospheric CO2 in the deep oceans                
              where it would be bound over the next few centuries.  The                      
              economic, social, and ethical issues surrounding such a                        
              proposition, along with the outstanding scientific issues,                     
              justify rigorous discussion, debate, and publication on the topic              
              of regulation of productivity in these regions.  To this end, The              
              American Society of Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO) held a                   
              symposium on the topic of "What controls phytoplankton in                      
              nutrient-rich areas of the open sea?"  ASLO now seeks funding to               
              cover the costs of publishing a special symposium issue of                     
              Limnology and Oceanography, to provide a written record of the                 
              symposium proceedings.
