Title       : Astronomy Research at the Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9115721

Award Number: 9115721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Dickman                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3090000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Irvine irvine@fcraol.astro.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Goldsmith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F. Peter Schloerb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1211      UNIV RADIO FACILITIES PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports the astronomical research, technological                   
              development, and student training carried out at the Five College              
              Radio Astronomy Observatory (FCRAO).  The research program includes            
              studies of external galaxies, star formation, the dense                        
              interstellar medium, astrochemistry, the late stages of stellar                
              evolution, and planetary science.  The Observatory also plays a                
              major role in education, with 45 graduate and undergraduate                    
              students from 13 universities having carried out research projects             
              at the facility during the past three year period.  FCRAO has                  
              recently brought into operation a focal plane array of receivers               
              for use at a wavelength of 3 millimeters; the first of its kind on             
              any telescope.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Over the next three years this group will expand the spectroscopic             
              capability of the array through construction of an autocorrelation             
              spectrometer.  As an initial step toward construction of larger                
              focal plane arrays, development work on high electron mobility                 
              transister amplifiers will be carried out.  Among the scientific               
              programs to be carried out are maps of a large number of                       
              transitions of molecules to examine the coupled physics, chemistry             
              and kinematics of the dense interstellar medium in our Galaxy;                 
              large scale, good angular resolution maps of molecular clouds to               
              study the relationship of star formation to angular momentum                   
              content and structure on a heirarchy of scales;  fully sampled maps            
              of the molecular distribution in many spiral galaxies in order to              
              study the process of star formation in these systems; and                      
              participation in VLBI experiments to probe the inner structure of              
              quasars and active galactic nuclei.
