Title       : Chemical Communication Among Marine Zooplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9115860

Award Number: 9115860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108887             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry W. Snell terry.snell@biology.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Chemically mediated interactions among marine animals are thought              
              to regulate many important ecological processes.  The nature of                
              chemical signals, their interaction with the aqueous medium, and               
              the mechanisms of reception by tuned receivers are unknown for                 
              virtually all marine animals.  Mate recognition is a major                     
              regulatory point in marine invertebrate reproductive cycles because            
              it is when males and females make evolutionarily significant                   
              choices about investing their gametes.  The overall goal of this               
              project is to investigate how male and female zooplankton                      
              communicate and the ecological and evolutionary consequences of                
              this interaction.  The research will attempt to describe the                   
              biochemical features of a sex pheromone shown to be responsible for            
              mate recognition in rotifers.  The research will investigate the               
              biochemical basis for its species-specificity and how variable the             
              pheromone is within and between populations.  Ultimately, the                  
              research will provide insight to how changes in this molecule                  
              promote reproductive isolation among populations and determine the             
              direction of evolution.  A system similar to the contact                       
              chemoreception mate recognition system of rotifers has ben                     
              described in copepods.  The role of surface glycoproteins in                   
              copepod chemoreception will be explored using the same lectin                  
              probes that have proven useful in rotifers.  By comparing rotifer              
              and copepod mate recognition systems, we may begin to understand               
              the generality of contact chemoreception in zooplankton mating.
