Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics of Interfacial Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1993  
File        : a9115413

Award Number: 9115413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Levine hlevine@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Research will be conducted on microscopically realistic models of              
              interfacial patterns in non-eqilibrium condensed matter systems.               
              These models should be sufficiently accurate so as to allow for                
              quantitative tests of current theoretical concepts.  These concepts            
              include the "solvability" theory for ordered structures,                       
              bifurcation theoretic analysis of secondary instabilities in                   
              cellular patterns, mean field methods for "ensemble-averaged"                  
              Diffusion Limited Aggregation and ideas regarding the emergence of             
              braod-band spectra in non-linear systems via self-organized                    
              criticality."  These ideas must be combined with specific and                  
              detailed models if they are to yield quantitative predictions                  
              regarding pattern forming behavior.  In the course of this work,               
              studies will be made of the solidification of monolayers, where the            
              reduced dimensionality enables one to perform exact shape                      
              calculations and compare to general schemes for bifurcation of                 
              cellular states;  a new mathematical model will be developed for               
              the recent stream instability experiment which exhibits a                      
              transition to broad-band dynamics;  solvability theory for free                
              dendritic growth will be extended to the realistic case of non-                
              axisymmetric crystals with cubic surface tension anisotropy so as              
              to be able to directly compare with experiment; and, mean field                
              Diffusion Limited Aggregation calculations will be done on a                   
              variety of geometries and dimensions so as to ascertain the                    
              generality and usefulness of this new approach.                                
              %%%                                                                            
              A variety of problems in the exciting new field of nonlinear                   
              science which impact condensed matter physics and materials                    
              research will be studied.  The problems focus on models of the                 
              nonlinear dynamics of interfacial patterns which are realistic and             
              can, thus, be compared with experimental results.
