Title       : SGER: Assessing Nematode Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9115734

Award Number: 9115734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana H. Wall   (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   The loss of variety as well as the numbers of organisms in                
              natural habitats is occurring at a rapid pace due to human                     
              intervention.  It has become crucial to monitor habitat destruction            
              by more than visual observation.  One possibility for early                    
              detection of ecosystem degradation is to monitor changes in                    
              diversity of nematode populations.                                             
                   Nematodes are ubiquitous in all ecosystems and are a major                
              component of the food web in both terrestrial and aquatic habitats.            
              Previous research on the structure and function of nematode                    
              communities in global ecosystems has shown that they are of                    
              ecological significance in soil systems.  Soil nematodes are                   
              generally classified into five feeding groups: plant feeders,                  
              bacterivores, fungivores, omnivores and predators.  More recently,             
              the bacterial feeders have been considered as indicators of                    
              pollution in both aquatic and terrestrial systems.  There are very             
              few estimates of the numbers of species of bacterial feeding                   
              nematodes in various habitats.  Species determinations become                  
              crucial as ecosystems are examined for stability/change in                     
              functioning due to the importance of bacterial feeding nematodes               
              in soil, there has been limited taxonomic research directed at this            
              group.  One of the difficulties in species determinations is that              
              most nematodes are transparent, microscopic, and require special               
              techniques in handling in order to discern minute taxonomic                    
              characters, a process that is extremely laborious.                             
                   A different, exploratory approach is proposed for examining               
              the species diversity of bacterial feeding nematodes.  Two methods             
              will be used: 1) traditional morphological analyses, and 2)                    
              recently developed molecular biological techniques.  It is                     
              anticipated that these techniques will allow for the rapid                     
              determination of biodiversity within a nematode population as well             
              as delimitation of species isolates.  These techniques should                  
              eventually allow the enumeration of species and determination of               
              the loss of diversity within nematode populations from endangered              
              habitats.
