Title       : Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Survey in the OlmacHeartland, Veracruz,
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1991   
File        : a9115456

Award Number: 9115456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Kruger  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the guidance of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Robert Kruger, a                 
              graduate student in anthropology at the University of Pittsburgh,              
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  Mr. Kruger will              
              conduct an archaeological survey of an approximately 100 square                
              kilometer area situated between the sites of San Lorenzo and El                
              Macayal which are located in the Gulf region of Mexico.  Both                  
              these large sites are attributable to the Olmec and Mr. Kruger's               
              survey will yield valuable data on the rural population which                  
              surrounded and sustained them.  The surface survey will be                     
              augmented by limited stratigraphic testing and materials such as               
              potsherds will be collected and identified.                                    
                                                                                             
              The Olmec was the first complex stratified society to arise in                 
              Middle America and Olmec peoples constructed impressive                        
              ceremonial sites with monumental-scale stone sculptures.  While                
              these large sites have been the subject of archaeological                      
              scrutiny, very little is known about either the hinterlands which              
              surround them (where the majority of the farming population                    
              likely lived) or the process which led to the development of this              
              complexity.  Several theories have been proposed and these vary                
              from postulated intergroup competition and warfare to the                      
              development of internal status differention within single groups.              
              Mr. Kruger believes that through analysis of settlement pattern                
              and how it changes over time it should be possible to select                   
              among alternative scenarios.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to a large number of Middle Americanist                       
              archaeologists.  It will increase our understanding of the                     
              processes which lead to the development and maintenance of                     
              complex societies  and assist in the training of an extremely                  
              promising young scientist.//
