Title       : The Rotation of Blue Horizontal Branch Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9115183

Award Number: 9115183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1215,
Abstract    :
              Astronomers use the "H-R Diagram" (surface temperature vs.                     
              luminosity) of stellar clusters to infer the evolutionary                      
              properties of stars of a common age and chemical abundance.                    
              Over a decade ago it was noticed that the distribution of                      
              stars along the "horizontal branch" of globular clusters                       
              depends in part on chemical abundance and in part on something                 
              else.  What this "something else" might be constitutes the                     
              "second parameter problem" in the study of stellar clusters.                   
              In earlier NSF-supported work the Principal Investigator (PI)                  
              has found, to the surprise of most astronomers, that horizontal                
              branch stars rotate rather rapidly.  The PI will examine the                   
              rotation rates of horizontal stars in eight globular clusters                  
              to determine whether rotation is the missing parameter.                        
              In addition, the PI's earlier work led theoretical astronomers                 
              to suggest that the rotation rates of cores of intermediate mass               
              stars may continue to remain high during the stars' lifetimes while            
              the rates at their surfaces decelerate from the influence of                   
              magnetic fields in their coronae.  The new work is expected to test            
              this possibility and to offer one of the few ways of inferring the             
              interior rotation rates of stars currently on the "main sequence."             
              These interior rates are otherwise inaccessible to our direct                  
              measurement.
