Title       : Protocol to Support Real-Time Video Teleconferencing on Integrated Services
               Digital Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1991   
File        : a9061114

Award Number: 9061114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. McClure   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Silicon Engines Inc
	      955 Commercial Street
	      Palo Alto, CA  943034908    415/424-0480

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4095,
Abstract    :
                   This project is funded under the National Science Foundation's            
              (NSF) Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which is              
              designed to provide an opportunity for small business, particularly            
              the small high technology firm, to participate in NSF research.                
              Phase I of the SBIR program serves as a filter to select promising             
              proposals and determine if the firm can do high quality research.              
              Phase II is the principal research project.  Phase III is the                  
              conversion of the NSF-funded research into commercial applications             
              and technological innovation supported by follow-on private venture            
              capital or other non-federal financing.                                        
                   This is a Phase I project.  The PI is developing a video                  
              protocol for ISDN, to provide the foundation for all the real-time             
              video teleconferencing implementations likely to derive from the               
              ISDN and image compression technologies in the near future.  The               
              protocol is directed toward personal computers, converting them to             
              video telephones for the application.  The open architecture of                
              personal computers will most likely be the platform of choice for              
              personal video telephones, which should be the boom market that                
              will cause the general public to finally embrace the ISDN standard.            
              The principal objective of this protocol is to provide support for             
              personal video teleconferencing over basic access ISDN, and                    
              corporate video teleconferencing, with larger and higher resolution            
              images, over primary access ISDN.  Thus, one protocol could support            
              video teleconferencing in a variety of ISDN configurations.
