Title       : A New Method of Time-Temperature Modeling of Sedimentary Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1990  
File        : a9061097

Award Number: 9061097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49689              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Solomon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1575,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Time-temperature modeling of organic matter maturation has                
              become an important tool in petroleum an gas exploration in                    
              recent years.  The most serious difficulties in applying these                 
              models are:  1)obtaining accurate downhole geological                          
              information, and 2)estimation of kinetic parameters.  Single                   
              collective kinetic rates are typically measured in the                         
              laboratory.  These must then be applied on much longer geological              
              time scales.  The validity of making these extrapolations in time              
              is always questionable.  The innovation offered in this proposal               
              is the development of a combined theoretical and experimental                  
              methodology for determining the chemistry and kinetics of the                  
              multiple reactions in macromolecular decomposition to obtain a                 
              more valid extropolations between geological and laboratory time               
              scales.  The methodology combines a unique macromolecular                      
              network model of hydrocarbon pyrolysis (FG-DVC) with a unique                  
              method of analysis (TG-FTIR) of the organic samples from the                   
              basin.  FG-DVC provides the link between oil, tar and gas                      
              generation terms of the variation with maturation in Tmax of all               
              species and the crosslinking associated with CO2, CH4, and H2.                 
              The kinetic rate coefficients for the evolution of all these                   
              species can be determined with the TG-FTIR.  In collaboration                  
              with Dr. Jean Whelan of Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute                     
              (WHOI), we will study two geological basins for which state-of-                
              the-art techniques have already been employed to obtain the                    
              basing's properties.  Samples will be subjected to TG/FTIR                     
              analysis.  The samples and basin modeling history will be                      
              employed to develop a "FG-DVC maturation model" to predict the                 
              composition of kerogens in the basin.  The predicted compositions              
              will then be used in the FG-DVC pyrolysis model to predict the                 
              behavior under the TG-FTIR analysis.  In addition, samples from                
              hydrous pyrolysis of basin samples performed at WHOI and at AFR                
              analysis.  In addition, samples from hydrous pyrolysis of basin                
              samples performed at WHOI and at APF will also be tested by TG-                
              FTIR to determine the rates and mechanisms of chemical                         
              transformation which occur.
