Title       : US-Hungary Joint Fund Research on Foaminess and Antifoaming Mechanisms (Chemical
               Engineering)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9116124

Award Number: 9116124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 15,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Gyorgy Racz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tech Univ of Budapest
	      
	      Budapest, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5965      U. S. - HUNGARY JOINT FUND
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this US-Hungary cooperative                           
              research project between Dr. Gyorgy Racz of the Technical                      
              University, Budapest and Dr. Darash Wasan of Illinois                          
              Institute of Technology is to investigate foaminess and                        
              antifoaming processes in foam systems.  Results will                           
              contribute to our understanding of the foam generation and                     
              antifoaming mechanisms by taking into account effects of                       
              dynamic interfacial properties.  Researchers will use a                        
              mixer-type foam generator and specially designed glass                         
              cells for microvisual observations and techniques of                           
              common and differential microinterferometry to observe                         
              film drainage and the effects of antifoaming agents.  Data                     
              obtained will be correlated and serve as a basic data bank                     
              in determining foaminess and antifoaming processes.  Funds                     
              for the project are awarded through the US-Hungary Joint                       
              Fund, Budapest, in accordance with established guidelines.
