Title       : Object-Oriented Data Management for Interactive Visualiza- tion of Scientific
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9116558

Award Number: 9116558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra Walther   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Peskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project continues development of a data management strategy               
              to organize scientific datasets into online (i.e. "in memory")                 
              object-oriented numerical databases.  The strategy uses hashing                
              maps based on the spatio-temporal coordinates of the dataset                   
              itself and addresses a key issue in interactive data analysis -                
              maintaining a retrieval route for the user between the visual                  
              representation on the screen and the actual data.  This is                     
              accomplished through a set of data structures that manage                      
              computed data as "computational objects" at the nodes of a mesh                
              organized as a single plane,  a volume of planes, or a                         
              timeseries.  All  references to the data are resolved into                     
              queries about the maps.  The hashing maps can be resident in a                 
              workstation while managing a database that is itself distributed               
              across numerous facilities.  Current extensions of this research               
              include: (1) design of parallel storage and searching techniques               
              of the distributed data objects; (2) interactive user                          
              specification of filter functions (local or non-local) for                     
              graphics and diagnostics; and (3) generalization of management                 
              utilities to support conversion of any user specified data set to              
              object-oriented database organization.  This research seeks to                 
              alleviate the continuing user problem of "data glut" in science                
              and engineering.  Equally important are its implications for the               
              development of software strategies that can utilize the complex                
              and diverse hardware developments promised for the next decade in              
              massively parallel computing.
