Title       : The Geochemistry of Terrestrial and Marine DOC in the Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1993   
File        : a9116281

Award Number: 9116281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300267             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Ertel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The proposed research combines laboratory and field                            
              investigations to examine the oceanographic processes responsible              
              for the sources and sinks of DOC.  A crucial problem with the                  
              marine DOC cycle is that the overwhelming input of riverine DOC,               
              mostly in the form of dissolved humic substances (DHS), must be                
              removed from seawater to be replaced with non-humic, non-                      
              biologically recognizable DOC from predominantly marine sources.               
              However, the processes responsible for either the terrestrial                  
              sinks or the marine sources of DOC have not been identified.                   
              Major hypotheses to be tested are:  1) Photooxidation represents               
              only the first step in a abiotic-biotic pathway which transforms               
              allochthonous DHS into microbially labile step in a abiotic-                   
              biotic pathway which transforms allochthonous DHS into                         
              microbially labile macromolecules; 2) Photooxidation of marine                 
              detrital material modifies and photo-condenses biochemical                     
              components in marine POC into leachable, non-recognizable,                     
              microbially resistant DOC; and 3) Terrestrial and marine DOC can               
              be selectively concentrated from seawater using physical/chemical              
              separation techniques.  To test these hypotheses, the approach                 
              will be to use laboratory photooxidation experiments together                  
              with microbial microcosm studies to investigate light-induced                  
              biological changes in DOC, and molecular and spectroscopic                     
              analyses to examine the chemical changes.  In addition, molecular              
              (biomarker) and isotopic analysis will be used to characterize                 
              the dissolved and colloidal organic matter in samples collected                
              on transects across the Georgia shelf where there are both                     
              terrestrial (river and marsh) and marine sources.  These results               
              will constrain potential processes for input and removal of DOC                
              from the ocean and define the distribution of marine and                       
              terrestrial organic matter in coastal waters.
