Title       : Bronze Age Chiefdoms of Thy, Denmark
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1992      
File        : a9116921

Award Number: 9116921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23621              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy K. Earle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Earle and his                    
              collaborators will conduct preliminary archaeological survey and               
              excavation on the Thy peninsula which is located in northeastern               
              Jutland, Denmark.  While the region is known to be rich in                     
              archaeological remains, only limited excavation has been                       
              conducted and in the course of one season of fieldwork, Dr. Earle              
              and his team will evaluate survey and excavation techniques which              
              will form the basis for a larger long-term project.  The Thy                   
              region contains large numbers of barrows or burial chambers and                
              most knowledge about the Neolithic and Bronze age derive from                  
              these.  However, much less is known about the settlements in                   
              which people lived.  Because such settlements are marked by                    
              relatively few remains they are difficult to locate.  When                     
              ceramics and lithic remains are discovered on the surface, it is               
              hard to tell whether they are markers of intact deposits which                 
              merit excavation.  The Thy region has been farmed for thousands                
              of years and quite possibly repeated farming has destroyed                     
              subsurface features.  Dr. Earle and his team will evaluate                     
              different survey techniques which are routinely used in the                    
              United States and apply them to the more intensively utilized                  
              Danish landscape.  In areas with significant scatters of surface               
              remains he will conduct test excavations to determine the                      
              relationship between surface and subsurface remains. On this                   
              basis he will assess the feasibility  of a larger scale long term              
              project.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Following the development of agriculture and pastoralism in many               
              parts of the world, one can trace changes in social organization               
              which lead, ultimately, to the rise of states.  Early in this                  
              process, chiefdoms arose and anthropologists still do not                      
              understand the mechanisms through which this happened.  Some                   
              argue that population growth, permitted by a more stable                       
              subsistence base, provided the driving force while others point                
              to other factors such as the development of long distance trade.               
              Over the course of the Bronze and Iron Ages in Scandinavia,                    
              chiefdoms underwent cycles of rise and decline.  The data                      
              collected from this area will allow comparison with cases from                 
              other parts of the world.  From this, it should be possible to                 
              separate historical particulars from the more basic underlying                 
              mechanisms.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to many archaeologists.  It will test and help                
              to develop survey techniques which may be applicable in many                   
              parts of the world and will provide the foundation for a longer                
              term large scale project.
