Title       : Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms for Defense Against Xenobiotics in Marine
               Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9116920

Award Number: 9116920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas E. Brady                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42776              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Epel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Epel is seeking support under the Small Grants for                         
              Exploratory Research for assistance in moving his lab into a new               
              research direction - the cellular mechanisms by which embryos of               
              aquatic organisms resist deleterious effects of xenobiotics, both              
              natural and anthropogenic. He will focus on embryos since this is              
              a particularly sensitive phase of the organism's life history.                 
              This new work combines his long term work and interest in cell                 
              and developmental biology with a new interest and concern about                
              the effects of man-introduced chemicals into the marine                        
              environment. Besides providing new insights about embryonic                    
              defense mechanisms, this work will also yield new and unexpected               
              insights on the normal functioning of cells in both the embryonic              
              and adult phases of the organisms's life history. It will test                 
              the possibility that the multi-drug resistance or P-glycoproteins              
              transport system, whose role has been primarily assumed to be of               
              medical importance in terms of transporting hydrophobic drugs out              
              of cells, is normally (i.e., in the historical or evolutionary                 
              sense) utilized for removal or detoxification of                               
              xenobiotics/pollutants. This idea, if correct, would provide a                 
              novel insight into how organisms, and in particular aquatic                    
              organisms, can resist the effects of man-made and natural noxious              
              compounds. This work could also provide a "natural history" or                 
              evolutionary basis for why these proteins are present and their                
              role in the normal life history of the organism.
