Title       : Dissertation Research: The Development of Apennine Ceramic Manufacturing
               Technology: Xeroradiographic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  1991   
File        : a9116957

Award Number: 9116957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5280               (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen L. Loney  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Bernard Wailes, Ms Helen Loney will                 
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation.  She will analyze                  
              ceramic materials collected from Bronze Age sites located in the               
              area around Lazio in the Apennine region of Italy.  Samples will               
              cover the entire Bronze Age which dates from ca. 1600 BC to 900                
              BC and which documents the rise of social complexity in this                   
              region.  The project has three goals: 1. To build a descriptive                
              catalogue of the technological development of pottery during the               
              Bronze Age. 2. To compare the physical evidence of manufacturing               
              techniques to current ceramic typologies which are based on                    
              decoration and form. 3. To relate these developments to other                  
              economic and political developments in this region and to                      
              correlate these with changes across a broader area.  Materials                 
              from four sites will be subjected to Xeroradiography and X-rays                
              which will produce a transparent record of the production and                  
              manufacturing techniques.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Because archaeologists must work primarily with material remains               
              such as pottery, they are extremely interested in the way that                 
              technological development in the material realm is related to                  
              other societal attributes which cannot be directly observed.                   
              Therefore, through study of objects one can hopefully reconstruct              
              other aspects of culture and social organization.  The Bronze Age              
              in Italy records the transformation of small locally organized                 
              groups into a more highly integrated and hierarchically organized              
              society.  Within this controlled context, Ms Loney wishes to                   
              analyze ceramic remains and see how closely changes and variation              
              in manufacturing style reflect changes in this broader context.                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to many Europeanist archaeologists.  It will                  
              also, hopefully, result in the development of a methodology which              
              can be applied in other situations.  Finally, it will assist in                
              the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
