Title       : Isolation and Characterization of Genes Encoding Cytokinin Metabolic Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9116490

Award Number: 9116490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Mok mokd@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Machteld C. Mok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cytokinins are a group of plant hormones mediating cell division               
              and differentiation.  The mechanisms controlling the appropriate               
              level and activity of cytokinins are not well understood.  The long            
              term goal of the research project is to identify regulatory                    
              elements exerting such controls in the genus Phaseolus.  The                   
              approach is based on the identification of genetic differences in              
              the metabolism of zeatin (a naturally occurring cytokinin) in                  
              embryos which led to the isolation of zeatin-specific metabolic                
              enzymes.  The enzymes are species-spedific and the products of the             
              enzymatic reaction display high biological activity.  Selective                
              expression of such enzymes may represent important mechanism                   
              regulating cytokinin activity.  Therefore, genes encoding these                
              enzymes may be appropriate targets for molecular and physiological             
              studies.  Work proposed herein will center on isolating and                    
              analysing genomic sequences and full length cDNAs of the genes with            
              emphasis on mechanisms regulating tissue specific expression and               
              substrate specificity.  The presence and expression of these genes             
              in other representative dicots and monocots will also be                       
              determined.  Enzymes purified by immunoaffinity chromatography will            
              serve as antigen to generate monoclonal antibodies recognizing the             
              substrate binding epitopes.  Antibodies antigenic to zeatin                    
              epitope(s) will be employed to isolate and purify other zeatin                 
              metabolic enzymes and possibly molecules involved in cytokinin                 
              action.  The proposed research is important in formulating a model             
              regarding the genetic and developmental controls of hormone                    
              metabolism in higher plants.
