Title       : U.S.-Poland Research on Interstellar Neutrals and Pickup Ions in Interplanetary
               Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9116367

Award Number: 9116367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29588              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eberhard Moebius Eberhard.Moebius@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Isenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5953      POLAND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1523,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this U.S.-Poland research project                     
              between Drs. Eberhard Moebius, M.A. Lee, and Philip A.                         
              Isenberg of the Space Science Center, University of New                        
              Hampshire, and Drs. Daniel Rucinski and Stanislav                              
              Grzedzielski of the Space Research Centre, Polish Academy                      
              of Sciences, is to combine the complementary expertise of                      
              the two groups in the interaction of the interstellar gas                      
              within the heliospher, and study the distribution of                           
              interstellar neutrals and pickup ions in interplanetary                        
              space.  The researchers will launch a coordinated effort                       
              to derive a baseline parameter set for interstellar helium                     
              by the combination of the large scale simulation of the                        
              neutral gas distribution with the first comprehensive data                     
              set of interstellar pickup ions.  They will combine the                        
              modeling and the data set to provide a basis to focus                          
              initially on a comprehensive comparison of the                                 
              interstellar parameters as derived from in situ                                
              measurements with the available remote sensing results                         
              with the UV backscatter technique.                                             
                                                                                             
              This project in atmospheric sciences fulfills the program                      
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                        
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to                     
              combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas                      
              of strong mutual interest and competence.
