Title       : Bacterioplankton Carbon Fluxes in the Equatorial Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1993   
File        : a9116304

Award Number: 9116304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404235             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Ducklow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Equatorial Pacific region is characterized by high and                     
              persistent levels of nitrate (N03) and low levels of                           
              phytoplankton biomass (as Chlorophyll), yet it has been                        
              hypothesized that up to 50% of the global new production may be                
              generated in this large area of the ocean.  There are few modern               
              observations of bacterial biomass (BB) and bacterial production                
              (BP) in the equatorial region. Bacterial uptake and respiration                
              is by far the major sink for dissolved organic carbon (DOC),                   
              which is one of the largest reservoirs of freely exchangeable                  
              carbon on the planet.  This project is part of the US JGOFS                    
              process study to be conducted in the Central Equatorial Pacific                
              Ocean in 1992.  In particular the proposal addresses the need for              
              core measurements of bacterial biomass (BB) and production (BP),               
              as well as particulate organic carbon (POC) and nitrogen (PN) and              
              dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the water column during the                  
              Time Series cruises scheduled for Northern Hemisphere spring and               
              fall.  On the basis of bacterial biomass and production levels in              
              other oceanic areas, it is hypothesized that bacterial biomass                 
              dominates the plankton in equatorial waters and commands a large               
              share of the total carbon flux. This project will investigate the              
              role of bacterioplankton in the euphotic zone and upper                        
              mesopelagic water column of the equatorial Pacific, with the                   
              specific objectives of examining:  (1) the depth-, time- and                   
              space-dependent contribution of BB to the total plankton biomass               
              and total POC pool, and of BP to total community production; (2)               
              the role of bacterial extracellular enzymes in breaking down POC,              
              PN and DOC; and 3) the role of bacterial activity in the turnover              
              of DOC.  Together with the results from other EqPac PI's and                   
              plankton modelling studies,  results from this project will                    
              contribute to a better understanding of the factors maintaining                
              the paradoxical high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll condition in                    
              equatorial waters.
