Title       : US-Hungary Joint Fund Mathematics Workshops on CombinatorialOptimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9116129

Award Number: 9116129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 15,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Andras D. Recski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tech Univ of Budapest
	      
	      Budapest, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5965      U. S. - HUNGARY JOINT FUND
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Hungary mathematics workshop, organized by Dr.                         
              Andras Recski of the Technical University, Budapest, and                       
              Dr. Leslie Trotter of Cornell University, will focus on                        
              combinatorial optimization.  Participants will address                         
              topics in oriented matroids, the matroidal foundation of                       
              linear and guadratic programming, the first strongly                           
              polynomial algorithm for the minimum cost circulation                          
              problem, the matroid matching algorithm, proof of the                          
              perfect graph conjecture, the base reduction algorithm,                        
              applications in qualitative analysis of linear systems and                     
              a lower bound on the approximability of volume.  Results                       
              are expected to contribute to our fundamental                                  
              understanding of the theory of combinatorial optimization                      
              and its applications.  Funds for the workshop are awarded                      
              through the US-Hungary Joint Fund, Budapest, in accordance                     
              with established guidelines.
