Title       : U.S.-Hungary Jt. Fund Research on DNA Sequence Recognition by Type II
               Restriction Endonucleases and Modification Methyltransferases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9116383

Award Number: 9116383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 15,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Antal Kiss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hun Acad of Scs Ins Bioche
	      PO Box 521 Szeged
	      Szeged, Hu  000000000    /   -

NSF Program : 5965      U. S. - HUNGARY JOINT FUND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this US-Hungary research project                      
              under the Hungary Joint Fund between Dr. Antal Kiss,                           
              Institute of Biochemistry, Hungarian Academy of Sciences,                      
              and Dr. Richard Roberts, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, is                     
              to purify restriction endonucleases and modification                           
              methylases for enzymological and crystallographic studies.                     
                                                                                             
              Experiments are planned to identify the regions of these                       
              enzymes that are responsible for sequence specific DNA                         
              recognition.  This will involve the preparation of hybrid                      
              methylases and the isolation of specificity mutants, plus                      
              an extensive algorithmic analysis of the amino acid                            
              sequences of restriction endonucleases and of modification                     
              methylases.  The algorithms and programs developed would                       
              be used to detect, define and search sequence motifs of                        
              functionally related proteins.  These motifs could then                        
              help in interpreting new sequence data.  A database of                         
              motifs will be built and maintained.  The results of these                     
              studies will increase our understanding of how restriction                     
              endonucleases and DNA-methylases work.                                         
                                                                                             
              This project in molecular biology fulfills the program                         
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                        
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to                     
              combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas                      
              of strong mutual interest and competence.
