Title       : .S.-Japan Collaborative Research: Production and application of chromosome
               deletion stocks in genome mapping and meiotic paring analysis in common wheat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1992  
File        : a9116424

Award Number: 9116424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : April 1,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Bikram S. Gill bsg@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports a U.S.-Japan cooperative research project                  
              between Professor Bikram  Gill, Department of Plant Pathology,                 
              Kansas State University, and Professor Takashi Endo, Institute of              
              Natural Science, Nara University.  This two-year project, which                
              also involves Professor Rama Kota of Kansas State University, will             
              use the approach of genetically-induced deletion mapping to                    
              construct comprehensive cytogenetic maps of individual                         
              chromosomes of common wheat.  The chromosome deletions are                     
              caused by certain Aegilops chromosomes when added to wheat.                    
              These so-called "gametocidal" chromosomes will be used to                      
              construct unique deletion stocks.  Deletion mapping with multigenic            
              tester stocks consisting of morphological, physiological, protein,             
              and DNA marker loci will also be undertaken.  The size and                     
              breakage-point in deletion chromosomes will be identified by C-                
              banding and in situ hybridization techniques in order to determine             
              the physical location of specific genetic markers.                             
                                                                                             
              This is a no-cost proposal for NSF.  It is required because the                
              Japanese counterpart proposal to the Japan Society for the                     
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) requests funding for the Japanese                  
              investigators.  The award will combine the research interests of the           
              U.S. investigators on physical mapping of the genome of wheat                  
              with the research of the Japanese investigators on the production of           
              deletion stocks.
