Title       : Theory of Interacting Fermi Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1993  
File        : a9116349

Award Number: 9116349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert W. Overhauser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theory of Interacting Fermi Systems - The objective of the project             
              is to acquire a deeper understanding of electron-electron                      
              interactions and their manifestations in solids.  One approach                 
              toward this goal will be the study of physical properties which                
              have been found to exhibit unexpected anomalous behavior, e.g.,                
              phenomena which can be attributed to broken symmetries caused by               
              electron-electron interactions.  Specific topics proposed for study            
              include the longitudinal Hall effect in K at very low temperatures,            
              ultraviolet optical anomalies in alkali metals, two magnon exchange            
              in antiferromagnetic superconductors, phonon anomalies (possibly               
              related to spin density waves) in zinc, cadmium, and technetium,               
              fractional crystallization in 'optical molasses', and                          
              perpendicular-field cyclotron-resonance transmission in simple                 
              metals.                                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              The best-established model descriptions for the behavior of                    
              electrons in solids are based on a picture where electrons are                 
              nearly independent of each other.  Although such a viewpoint is                
              quite successful, there are nevertheless a large number of                     
              important phenomena which cannot be explained properly by this                 
              approach.  When electron-electron interactions become important,               
              new theoretical descriptions must be developed.  This project is               
              aimed at developing such descriptions for a range of phenomena                 
              which appear experimentally and appear to depend explicitly on                 
              electron-electron interactions.
