Title       : Measurement and Characterization of DOM Pools Using EEM Spectroscopy and HPLC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1991  
File        : a9116497

Award Number: 9116497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : September 1,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Nowell A.Nowell (Omnet)  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula G. Coble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The major pool of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the ocean is               
              an order of magnitude larger than the particulate organic carbon               
              (POC) pool, and twice as large as the atmospheric pool of CO2,                 
              yet as much as 90% of DOC remains uncharacterized as to specific               
              chemical identity.  One component of this uncharacterized pool is              
              known as "humic substance" or "gelbstoff", two non-specific terms              
              for a complex mixture of compounds having a yellow color and a                 
              blue fluorescence.  The way in which these compounds have been                 
              defined and analyzed in the past has resulted in much confusion                
              and a lack of insight regarding their nature, distribution, and                
              cycling in the ocean.  Recent developments in fluorescent                      
              spectroscopy and high performance liquid chromatography show                   
              promising results when applied to the study of gelbstoff in                    
              seawater.  Three-dimensional excitation-emission matrix (EEM)                  
              analysis of unconcentrated samples has shown for the first time                
              the existence of four different fluorophores in seawater, each of              
              which exhibits characteristic properties and distributions.  One               
              of these fluorophores may be indicative of a protein-like,                     
              bioreactive substance.  Ion-pairing HPLC can resolve gelbstoff                 
              into up to twenty individual components.  Application of these                 
              new technologies in tandem to the analysis of dissolved organic                
              matter in seawater can be used to trace different components of                
              the DOC, thereby leading to an improved understanding of the                   
              oceanic carbon cycle.
