Title       : A Geometric Framework for the Exploration and Analysis of Astrophysical Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1995   
File        : a9116843

Award Number: 9116843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Goodrich   (Principal Investigator current)
              Holland C. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Salzberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              One of the main challenges facing Astronomy today involves the                 
              organization and analysis of the vast volumes of data that has                 
              been provided by recent advances in computer and data-collecting               
              technology. This project pools the efforts of researchers in                   
              computational geometry, machine learning, and astrophysics in                  
              order to develop and apply computational techniques to aid in the              
              analysis and synthesis of astrophysical data.  The goal of this                
              project is to provide the astrophysical research community with                
              computational techniques, embodied in a software system called                 
              AstroExplorer, for analyzing very large, complex, multi-parameter              
              data sets.  Specifically, this project will provide new paradigms              
              for performing general kinds of data extraction, data synthesis                
              across databases, and cluster analysis.  All of the methods are                
              based on the unifying framework of viewing data points and the                 
              operations that act upon them geometrically.  This work extends                
              the current database technology by providing methods for dealing               
              with geometrical data.  This approach should significantly                     
              improve the productivity of astronomers in their search through                
              the oceans of data that have been produced by the revolution in                
              data collection and storage, for it gives them a computational                 
              tool for extracting data that match specified geometric patterns               
              or can be clustered by methods based on natural and intuitive                  
              geometric concepts.
