Title       : A database System for Neuronal Pattern Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1994       
File        : a9116763

Award Number: 9116763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Beach                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Gabriel mgabriel@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert S. Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Schatz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rhanor Gillette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Greenough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara W. Mihalas  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1107,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neuronal pattern analysis (NPA) documents the dynamic brain                    
              processes of sensation, perception, learning and cognition by                  
              recording the electrical activity of brain neurons.  Recent                    
              advances in multi-array recording technologies have greatly                    
              expanded the rate at which NPA data can be obtained, and these                 
              technologies have fostered means not previously available to                   
              study the intercorrelations of dynamic activities in neuronal                  
              networks.  Computational modeling of brain dynamic activity has                
              fostered major increment in the requirements of data processing                
              due to the need to analyze simulated neuronal spike trains and to              
              compare real and simulated neuronal data.  These developments                  
              call for parallel development of adequate database systems for                 
              organization, rapid access, and sharing of NPA data.  This                     
              project will establish a database system (DBS) for time series                 
              neurophysiological data recorded in experiments of members of the              
              University of Illinois Beckman Institute Neuronal Pattern                      
              Analysis Group.  System design and implementation will be carried              
              out with consultation and guidance of the National center for                  
              Supercomputer Applications.  This proposed system will foster                  
              community-wide sharing of times series and other forms of neural               
              data, proved a model DBS that can generalize to other                          
              neuroscience groups, and enhance the research in the involved                  
              laboratories.
