Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Electron Transfer in Solution and Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1994      
File        : a9116747

Award Number: 9116747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Cusanovich cusanovi@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a two-year U.S.-Japan cooperative                      
              research project between Professor Michael Cusanovich,                         
              Department of Biochemistry and Vice President for Research,                    
              University of Arizona, and Professor Hideo Akutsu, Department of               
              Physical Chemistry, Yokohama National University.  The project is              
              a multidisciplinary approach to elucidating in molecular terms the             
              properties of cytochromes c3 in order to understand its unique                 
              electrical properties.  A major goal will be to use studies on                 
              electron transfer in solution to understand the electrical properties          
              of cytochrome c3 adsorbed on metal substrates and in films.  New               
              insights into intramolecular electron transfer will be obtained.  It is        
              anticipated that these studies will develop possible applications of           
              cytochrome c3 as a bioelectronic device.                                       
                                                                                             
              In this collaboration, the U.S. group, which also includes Professor           
              G.S. Wilson of the University of Kansas and Professor Therese                  
              Cotton of Iowa State University, will focus on the solution                    
              properties of cytochrome c3 (redox and ligand binding kinetics),               
              site-directed mutagenesis, electrochemical characterization of the c-          
              type cytochromes on electrode surfaces and in films and SERS                   
              studies of orientation of cytochromes on solid surfaces.  The                  
              Japanese group will measure microscopic and macroscopic redox                  
              potentials, the properties of c-type cytochromes adsorbed on                   
              electrodes, site-directed mutagenesis, NMR analysis and x-ray                  
              crystallography of cytochromes c3.
