Title       : Acquisition of a High Efficiency, High Resolution Gamma Ray Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1991   
File        : a9116248

Award Number: 9116248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39827              (Estimated)
Investigator: Masashi Kusakabe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Teh-Lung Ku  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Hammond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Naturally-occurring radionuclides of cosmogenic origin and of the              
              U-Th decay series, as well as man-made nuclides produced by                    
              atmospheric weapon testing and nuclear reactors, have proven to                
              be valuable tracers for geochronology and geochemical studies.                 
              At the University of Southern California, the application of                   
              these isotopes is being actively studied for solving                           
              oceanographic, geologic and environmental problems.  In many                   
              cases, the research has been carried out in collaboration with                 
              scientists at several other institutions.  The measurements rely               
              heavily on two work-horse instruments:  y-ray and &-ray                        
              spectrometers.  Whereas the &-spectrometer has 16 detectors to                 
              serve the basic need in the alpha-counting area, there is only                 
              one detector for y-ray spectrometric work.  The y-ray detector,                
              seven years old, has shown signs of wear-and-tear as a result of               
              heavy use.  The present gamma counting system not only is heavily              
              taxed beyond its capacity, but also limits the ability to make                 
              measurements in the field and on short-lived isotopes.  This                   
              action provides funds to purchase an additional y-ray                          
              spectrometer, equipped with a high efficiency, high resolution                 
              well-type intrinsic germanium detector, to alleviate this                      
              problem.  The acquisition will also enable a substantial                       
              reduction of man-power in future analyses to be realized and                   
              benefit programs both at USC and at the institutions of our                    
              collaborators.
