Title       : Spatio-Temporal Database Management for Global Change Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9116988

Award Number: 9116988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nabil I. Hachem   (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew O. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Gennert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is the design and development of an                  
              integrated system for the management of very large scientific                  
              databases, cartographic/geographic information processing,and                  
              exploratory scientific data analysis for global change research.               
              The system will represent both spatial and temporal knowledge                  
              about natural and man-made entities on the earth's surface,                    
              following an object-oriented paradigm. It will apply (user-                    
              modifiable) procedures to perform operations on the data,                      
              including comparison, derivation, prediction, validation, and                  
              visualization. It is an effort to extend the database technology               
              with an intrinsic class of operators, which is extensible and                  
              responds to the growing needs of scientific research.  Of                      
              significance is the integration of many diverse forms of data                  
              into the database, including cartography, geography, hydrography,              
              hypsography, images, and urban planning data. Equally important                
              is the maintenance of metadata, that is, data about the data,                  
              such as coordinate transformation parameters, map scales, and                  
              audit trails of previous processing operations.  This project                  
              will impact the fields of geographical information systems and                 
              global change research as well as the database community. It will              
              provide an integrated database management testbed for scientific               
              research, and a testbed for the development of analysis tools to               
              understand and predict global change.
