Title       : Molecular Approach to the Phylogeny of Primates and Other Placental Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9116098

Award Number: 9116098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Annalisa Berta                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1171,5913,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   Although much progress has been made in elucidating the                   
              phylogeny and systematics of placental mammals, many difficult                 
              problems still remain.  These problems involve not only the order              
              Primates, which has humans among its members, but also the 17 other            
              orders of placental mammals.  For example, one of the most                     
              important primate groups is the superfamily Ceboidea comprised of              
              New World monkeys and marmosets, but the pattern of evolution over             
              the last 25 million years that led from a common ancestor to the               
              16 surviving genera of these neotropical primates is poorly                    
              understood.  Similarly, a series of phylogenetic branching events              
              that occurred between 90 and 65 million years ago separated the 18             
              surviving orders of placental mammals from one another, but the                
              exact course of branching, i.e. the evolutionary relationships                 
              among these major groups of placental mammals, has yet to be                   
              definitively established.  Recent technical advances in molecular              
              biology have made it possible to obtain large amounts of DNA                   
              nucleotide sequence data from corresponding genes in a wide range              
              of species.  Since the sequence of nucleotide in DNA is the genetic            
              or heritable material, such information provides a very precise                
              record of the evolutionary relationships of the species compared.              
              Through utilizing the new molecular methods for generating                     
              comparative nucleotide sequence data, DNA information from several             
              different genes will be obtained from the above mentioned mammalian            
              groups.  These data will be subjected to rigorous phylogenetic                 
              analysis, using computer programs based on theoretical models that             
              best describe the course of genetic change over time.                          
                   This phylogenetic analysis, when applied to the DNA sequence              
              data from the more rapidly evolving portions of the genes, is                  
              expected to provide a highly resolved picture of the evolutionary              
              relationships that exist among the 16 genera of neotropical                    
              primates.  Similarly, this analysis applied to the slower revolving            
              genic portions should provide a well resolved picture of the                   
              evolutionary relationships that exist among the 18 orders of                   
              placental mammals.  In addition to reconstructing the pattern of               
              phylogenetic branching, rates of DNA change along the branches will            
              be determined.  This information on rates, when related to                     
              knowledge on the life history strategies of the animals included               
              in the study, will test the hypothesis that life history changes               
              towards longer generation times and life spans cause decreases in              
              DNA mutation rates, whereas life history changes towards shorter               
              generation times and life spans cause increases in DNA mutation                
              rates.
