Title       : Fluid Flow and Dehydration Reactions Inferred from Chloride Anomalies at Three
               Accretionary Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1995      
File        : a9116462

Award Number: 9116462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165921             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Casey Moore cmoore@es.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley Dreiss  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Continental margin accretionary complexes are sites of large-                  
              scale fluid transport of dissolved matter.  Deformation and                    
              compaction processes occuring in accretionary terranes are                     
              resposible for increasing pore pressures producing these large                 
              scale fluid-flows.  Temperature and pressure conditions  in these              
              areas are beleived to be responsible for the dehydration of                    
              hydrous minerals which then result in the formation of low                     
              chloride fluids.  Variations in chloride concentrations are an                 
              essential part of the observations used to infer preferential                  
              pathways and transient flow episodes in accretionary prisms.                   
              These poorly understood material-transport processes exert a                   
              first-order control on the geochemical and thermal balance of the              
              earth's reservoirs.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This award will support Dr. Dreiss' efforts to investigate the                 
              origin of low chlorinity fluids and to develop a combination of                
              fluid and mass transport models in three acccretionary complexes               
              (Barbados, Nankai, and the Peru margin).  Dr. Dreiss proposes to               
              develop models which can can be used to test the hypothesized                  
              sources of low-chloride fluids and transport mechanisms with                   
              known information about site geometry, sediment permeabilities,                
              and pore water compositions.  These models will provide indepen-               
              dent estimates of fluid flow which can be compared to those                    
              derived from heat transport studies.
