Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Physical Processes in Galaxy and Large Scale
               Structure Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9116745

Award Number: 9116745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremiah P. Ostriker jpo@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin L. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1217,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a two-year U.S.-Japan cooperative                      
              research project between Professor Jeremiah Ostriker, Princeton                
              University Observatory, and Professor Humitaka Sato, Department                
              of Physics, Kyoto University.  The project, which will include                 
              Professor Edwin Turner of the Princeton University Observatory as              
              co-investigator on the U.S. side, brings together American and                 
              Japanese theoretical astrophysicists to study problems connected               
              with the formation of galaxies and cosmic large scale structure.               
              On the Japanese side, the research group includes scientists from              
              the National Astronomical Observatory and the Tokyo Metropolitan               
              University as well as Kyoto University.                                        
                                                                                             
              Among the studies on galaxy formation to be investigated are:                  
              imprints on the microwave background, phase transition generated               
              structure formation, non-zero cosmological constant cosmologies,               
              the relation of the intergalactic medium to background radiation               
              fields, quasar statistics, structure formation by Doppler instability,         
              gravitational lens statistics, phase transitions in the early universe,        
              and related topics.  Most of these projects will emphasize physics             
              other than the purely gravitational interactions that have been                
              studied most thoroughly in the past.  It is hoped that this joint              
              study will lead to more permanent contacts between the two                     
              research communities.
