Title       : US-Hungary Joint Fund Neuro Science Research on Characteristics of External Ca2+
               -Independent Transmitter Release
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9116137

Award Number: 9116137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 1,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Vera Adam-Vizi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Semmelweis Univ Med Sch
	      
	      Budapest, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5965      U. S. - HUNGARY JOINT FUND
Fld Applictn: 0510404   Sensry Physiology & Perc                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this US-Hungary cooperative                           
              research project between Dr. Vera Adam-Vizi of Semmelweiss                     
              University of Medicine, Budapest and Dr. Abel Lajtha of                        
              the N.S. Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY is to examine the                     
              mechanism of which calcium is released when nerves release                     
              neurotransmitters, causing a concentration in                                  
              extracellular fluids.  The researchers intend to 1)                            
              differentiate between a non-specific increase in external                      
              calcium and one which is due to calcium released from                          
              nerve terminans; and 2) identify which fraction of the                         
              neurotransmitter stored in nerve terminals is susceptible                      
              to changes in external calcium concentration.  Results may                     
              reveal molecular mechanisms which are associated with                          
              transmitter secretion.  Funds for the project are awarded                      
              through the U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund, Budapest in                               
              accordance with established guidelines.
