Title       : Collaborative Research: Climate-Fire-Ecosystem Linkages on Decadal to Centennial
               Time Scales in the Northern Rockies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9619410

Award Number: 9619410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope Morgan pmorgan@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9719410  Morgan  University of Idaho    This three-year, collaborative,
              multi-disciplinary research project reconstructs the fire, vegetation, and
              climate history of the sub-alpine forests of the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness
              Area in northern Idaho and western Montana over 2,000 years.  Its purpose is to
              examine the linkages among climate, fire regimes, and vegetation composition at
              different temporal and spatial scales.    The variation in and interaction of 
              climate, fire, and vegetation shape the landscape.  The processes of
              interaction vary according to the temporal and spatial scale of analysis.  At
              century-to-millennial temporal scales and at landscape-to-regional spatial
              scales, large changes in climate determine fire regime and vegetation
              composition.  The linkages between fire and vegetation at these gross scales is
              less clear.  At annual-to-decadal temporal scales and at the watershed spatial
              scale, fire frequency, size, and severity are determined by climate/weather,
              vegetation, and ignition frequency.  In these finer scales, the linkages
              between fire and vegetation are fairly well developed:  vegetation determines
              fuel availability, and fires create a landscape pattern that shapes vegetation
              recovery.    Investigators will derive information on the frequency of past
              fires from charcoal and pollen data in lake sediments, tree-ring records, and
              tree-stand age information.  They will calibrate the lake-sediment and
              tree-ring records against historical fire maps, to estimate the spatial extent
              of fires.  The data will be compiled at the watershed, landscape, and regional
              scales.  They will develop climate reconstructions from Pinus albicaulis and
              Larix lyalli tree-ring-width chronologies for the last 300+ years in each
              watershed.  These reconstructions should yield an understanding of fire
              chronology and synoptic climatic conditions giving rise to prehistoric fires.  
                 In the western United States, whether late-twentieth-century fire regimes
              reflect a shift in climate, a product of  human activity, or current management
              practices is a topic of scientific and public-policy debate.  This research
              should provide data on fire history, vegetation, and climate, and move toward
              understanding the temporally and spatially specific processes of interaction
              among these elements.
