Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research Experience in Computational Group Theory and
               Hyperbolic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1998    
File        : a9619714

Award Number: 9619714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen S. Broughton allen.broughton@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An Undergraduate research experience for six students over seven  weeks. 
              Computational group theory methods are employed to  explore the geometry of
              hyperbolic Riemann surfaces tiled by  triangles and the induced  tilings of the
              hyperbolic plane. All  tilings  considered generate large symmetry groups of
              the  surface, and the geometrical and combinatorial properties of  the  tiling
              are strongly reflected in the structure of the group and  the groupOs action on
              the geometry.  The geometric and  combinatorial problems need to be solved by
              massive computations  in the symmetry groups, as it is very difficult to
              visually  represent the complexities of these tilings.  Motivated by these 
              problems, students  will perform group theoretic experiments,   make
              discoveries and formulate conjectures by carrying out  computer calculations
              using the software package MAGMA. The end  goal will be to discover and prove
              theorems about  the geometry  and combinatorics of the surfaces and, of course,
              anything about  groups discovered along the way.   In addition to this
              technical  program, students will be engaged in a companion program to  develop
              their oral and written mathematical communication skills,  collaborative, and 
              other professional skills.  This will be  accomplished  through required oral
              presentations and technical   reports on their work and a close, positive
              working environment   among the students and the P.I. in the Theorodrome, the 
              computer laboratory/workplace devoted to the REU.
