Title       : Multidisciplinary Education using Curriculum Re-Engineering,Industry Partnership
               and Simulation Technology (MERIT 2000)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1998     
File        : a9619294

Award Number: 9619294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mladen Kezunovic kezunov@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Abur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Garng M. Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9619294  Kezunovic    The changes in the utility and related manufacturing
              industry, as well as consulting and engineering services have been driven by
              continuing de-regulation and increasing competition.  A new paradigm of
              operation where the customer becomes the focus is being established.  This
              approach not only redefines who the customer is. but what the customer wants
              and what are the options in achieving the goals of satisfying the customer.  An
              obvious consequence of this process is a need for a new profile of an engineer
              that can fit the new paradigm.  There is a wide consensus that the existing
              power engineering education does not offer the required solution.  As a result,
              the aaademia needs to "produce" an engineer with a new profile.      This
              strategy was pursued at the proposal preparation stage and will be continued
              throughout the project with a very clear goal to make the creation of the new
              education concept a joint effort between "producers" and "consumers" of the
              power engineers for the 21'st century.      The research approach will be to
              assemble inputs from the industry advisors reflecting the industry needs, make
              an assessment of the existing simulation technology, identify multidisciplinary
              issues to be included in the re-engineered curriculum, and identify the
              methodology and experimental examples for classroom and laboratory teaching. 
              An important contribution of this proposal will be incorporation of the new
              simulation technology into the teaching process to enhance student's analytical
              and practical skills.  In addition, the simulation tools will be used to make
              the teaching of the traditional power engineering topics more efficient and
              compressed so that the new multidisciplinary topics can be added to the
              curriculum.        This proposal is primarily focused on the undergraduate
              education with an addition emphasis on high school education.  The graduate and
              continuine education will  be considered as well.
