Title       : High Performance Computing for Large Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9619763

Award Number: 9619763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed H. Sameh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates high performance algorithms in the  areas of  model
              reduction algorithms for dynamical linear  systems, eigenproblem solvers, and
              iterative methods for sparse  nonsymmetric linear systems with one or multiple
              right-hand side  vectors.    The model reduction work is based on the rational
              Lanczos  algorithm which performs multipoint moment matching-based model 
              reduction with automatic point selection from a specified grid.  It uses a
              novel shifting strategy which exploits a mix of  imaginary and real positive
              scalar values that provide a  multiscale view of the frequency response of the
              dynamical system  being modeled.    The restriction to moment-matched reduced
              order models will be  relaxed in order to improve the efficiency of the model 
              production.  This will entail the development of new error  modeling techniques
              as well as the assessment of the effect of  the use of iterative methods to
              approximately solve the linear  systems that occur in each iteration of
              rational approximation  algorithms.  This will also drive the development of
              new  preconditioning and iterative method strategies.  A strategy for  point
              placement (rather than point selection from a predetermined  grid) will be
              developed and used in order to improve the accuracy  of the reduced order model
              and to drive a load balancing strategy  for the large grain parallel processing
              in a multilevel  parallelism implementation.    In the work on eigenproblems,
              technology will be transferred and  adapted from the rational Lanczos domain to
              Krylov-based  eigenproblem solvers.  This includes adapting the model reduction
               shift strategy to yield a multilevel approach to locate  appropriate sections
              of the complex plane in which eigenvalues  reside.  The choice of spaces used
              to form the projector will  also be updated via rational Lanczos technology.  A
              Gershgorin  disk-based alternative to Krylov-based approaches will also be 
              studied.  The approach is a generalization and improvement of  work by Varga
              and other s.  The methods natural multilevel  parallelism will be analyzed and
              exploited in an experimental  implementation.    The area of nonsymmetric
              sparse linear system solving via  preconditioned iterative methods supports the
              advances in the two  areas above, and also contributes to the state-of-the-art
              in  numerical algorithms.  Three basic tasks will be undertaken.  The  first is
              to continue work on a robust parallel preconditioned  iterative method-based
              package for the solution of nonsymmetric  systems.  This work will build on
              earlier efforts on the EN-like  family of methods, partitioned row projection
              schemes, and an  accelerated block Stiefel iteration adapted to nonsymmetric 
              systems.  Preconditioners based on eigenvalue deflation,  incomplete
              orthogonalization, and modified Krylov methods will be  considered.    The
              second system linear system solving task that will be  addressed is the
              development and analysis of a family of block  EN-like methods for linear
              systems with multiple right-hand  side vectors encountered in
              multiple-input-multiple-output  dynamical systems and applications such as
              electromagnetics.    Finally, the linear system solvers above will be adapted
              to  the situation encountered in model reduction -- multiple  linear systems
              defined by a matrix pencil (A,E), and a set  of scalar shifts with associated
              right-hand sides.
