Title       : Gelfand Pairs and Automorphic Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9619766

Award Number: 9619766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herve Jacquet hj@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9619766  Jacquet  The goal of the project is to study certain period integrals.
              Let G be a reductive group over a number field F; let H be a subgroup of G; we
              assume that over the algebraic closure of F the group H has an open orbit in
              the flag variety of G. If f is an automorphic form on G and t a suitable
              character of H the corresponding period integral is the integral of f times t
              taken over the adelic quotient of H. In many cases, it is conjectured that at
              every place of F the triple (G,H,t) satisfies Gelfand multiplicity one
              condition. Furthermore, it is conjectured that the period  integral is related
              to the value of an automorphic L-function at its center of symmetry. For
              instance, the value of the L-function may be essentially the square of a period
              integral. In other cases, automorphic representations that admit a vector f for
              which the integral is non-zero are especially interesting from the point of
              view of the Langlands program. In this proposal, the tool for studying the
              period integrals is a variant of the trace formula, the relative trace formula.
              There will be applications to the value of the L-functions at their center of
              symmetry. In some cases, it might be possible to prove that this value is
              non-negative. Other results will be more directly related to the Langlands
              program, and will provide information on the principle of functoriality or the
              structure of the L-packets. In general, this information cannot be obtained
              from the standard trace formula or the theory of dual pairs. The questions in
              local harmonic analysis which arise may be of independent interest. A notable
              example is a conjectural identity between certain Kloosterman integrals (or
              sums).  This proposal deals with the Langlands program, and  the Langlands
              program is part of number theory. Number theory is the study of the  properties
              of the whole numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From the
              beginning problems in number theory have  furnished a driving force in creating
              new mathematics in other  diver se parts of the discipline. The Langland's
              program is a  general philosophy that connects number theory with calculus;  it
               embodies the modern approach to the study of whole numbers.   Modern number
              theory is very technical and deep, but it has had astonishing applications in
              areas like theoretical computer science and coding theory.
