Title       : Robust, Adaptive and Dynamic Robotic Motion Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1999   
File        : a9619647

Award Number: 9619647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290001             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Reif reif@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Research  is  to  be conducted in several key  areas  of  robotic  movement 
              planning.  The  emphasis is on  robot  motion  planning  algorithms for
              autonomous robots.  A principal focus  is  on  the  investigation   of  motion 
              planning  problems  with   incomplete  information   or  changing  information 
              about  the  environment,  requiring the motion planning algorithm to be
              adaptive. Moreover,  the research considers movement problems with inherent
              errors  in  the  sensing and control, so the motion planning algorithms  must 
              be  robust to a lack of information on the position of the robot,  and  if
              possible the algorithms must be minimal: that is use  the  least possible
              amount of information about the robot position and  environment.   The 
              investigations  will  also  consider   motion  planning problems in
              environments which are dynamically changing;  these  will  require dynamic
              algorithms that respond to  changing  inputs.   The  research  will  involve 
              solving  motion  planning  problems  using  new formulations that have not  yet
               been  fully  investigated.   The  research  will concentrate  particularly  in
               emerging new areas in robotic movement planning that impact  most  strongly 
              the  overall  goals of adaptive, robust,  minimal,  and  dynamic  robotic
              algorithms.  Examples of topics to be researched  are  on-line  planning
              algorithms for unknown environments  which  are  randomized and/or may
              dynamically learn probabilistic models  of  the  environment, and pursuit
              movement games  (which  involve  movement  planning with an adversary).
