Title       : Module Based Multimedia Courseware Development for Power System Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9619267

Award Number: 9619267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. McCalley jdm@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vijay Vittal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald B. Sheble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subrahman S. Venkata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Venkataramana Ajjarapu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9619267  McCalley    The objective of this collaborative project between
              Iowa State University (ISU) and Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI) is to
              provide a course development approach to power system engineering that allows
              flexibility to today's fast-changing educational and industrial environment,
              increases learning efficiency via computer usage, builds on cooperative
              learning methods, modernizes course content, induces industry participation in
              academic course design, extends power system education into other engineering
              fields, and contributes towards attracting the very best students.  We will
              accomplish these goals via implementation of a modular course development
              approach whereby power system-related learning packets, called basic modules,
              are developed in the proposed work.  These basic modules, maintained and
              disseminated via the WEB, will each consist of a presentation, a library, and
              at least one MATLAB-based simulator.  Each basic module is self-contained yet
              narrow enough to be included as a component in quickly and easily developing a
              set of course material, and module modification is simple, thereby allowing for
              module adaptation in tailoring one or more to a specific need.  A clear and
              realistic plan for obtaining industry participation in module development is
              provided whereby industry is involved in the specification of the modules and
              ultimately their use through mini-courses held for employees.  We expect to
              provide a new direction in power systems education that will stimulate and
              motivate interest simultaneously from prospective and present students and
              engineers in industry, providing a linkage that is critical for maintaining
              quality power programs and producing highly educated engineers.  Our approach
              is also appropriate for use in other engineering disciplines, and we expect the
              interdisciplinary outreach embedded in this work will result in its wide
              dissemination, simultaneously offering the additional benefit of integrating
              power system problems into other curr icula.
