Title       : First-Order System Least Squares for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9619792

Award Number: 9619792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiqiang Cai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9619792  Cai       The investigator studies the numerical solution of partial 
              differential equations (including convection-diffusion,  Helmholtz,
              incompressible Stokes and Navier-Stokes, and  elasticity equations) by a
              least-squares formulation for an  equivalent first-order system.  First-Order
              System Least Squares  (FOSLS) formulates the original problem as an equivalent 
              minimization problem by applying a least-squares principle to an  equivalent
              first-order system.  Hence, it represents a general  methodology that can
              produce a variety of algorithms, depending  on such choices as the first-order
              system and the least-squares  norm, and that can lead to formulations that have
              substantially  different numerical properties (accuracy, adaptivity, and 
              complexity).  The project seeks a proper first-order system and a  proper
              least-squares norm for formulating the original problem so  well that the
              numerical process (discretization and multigrid  solution) becomes
              straightforward and optimal.  Certain finite  element methods for FOSLS
              minimization problems for second-order  elliptic and incompressible Stokes and
              Navier-Stokes equations  are of optimal accuracy in each variable (including
              new  variables).  Standard multigrid methods applied to the resulting  discrete
              equations have optimal complexity (i.e., computational  cost for full multigrid
              solution is proportional to the number of  unknowns.).  This project continues
              efforts on problems with  discontinuous coefficients, high Reynolds number
              flows, and  linear elasticity with general boundary conditions.       This
              project aims to develop a new computational method for  systems of parial
              differential equations that model the physical  phenomena of fluid flow.  The
              approach modifies existing  mathematical formulations for these processes, and
              leads to more  efficient and robust computational techniques than those 
              currently in use.  These new algorithms enable computer  simulations of a large
              class of problems in science and  engineering and mi nimize the need for costly
              experimental  measurements.
