Title       : Alkaloids of Importance in Plant-Insect Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9619213

Award Number: 9619213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Stermitz frslab@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Professor Frank R. Stermitz, of the Department of Chemistry of Colorado   State
              University, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for his   studies of
              alkaloids of importance in plant-insect interactions.  His   studies focus on
              the isolation, structure, biosynthesis, and insect   processing of alkaloids in
              conifers (pine, spruce, and fir trees).  The   structures of an array of
              2,6-disubstituted piperidine alkaloids is found   in the conifers are being
              elucidated by a combination of isolation, mass   spectral analysis, and
              spectroscopic methods, as well as by synthesis   and/or semisynthesis.  Plant
              feeding experiments with carbon-13 labeled   compounds appearing to be
              plausible biosynthetic precursors will   elucidate details of the synthesis of
              these alkaloids.  The ability of   spruce species to generate
              trans-disubstituted piperidines, whereas pine   species generate only
              cis-disubstituted compounds, will also be explored.    Analysis of
              conifer-feeding beetle, butterfly, and moth larvae and their   excretion
              products will determine how insects process the piperidine   alkaloids. 
              Finally, extracts of plants displaying activity against   Mycobacterium
              tuberculosis will be analyzed in order to identify   potential
              anti-tuberculosis agents.  With support from the Organic Synthesis Program,
              Professor Frank R.   Stermitz, of the Department of Chemistry of Colorado State
              University,   studies the occurrence in conifers (pine, spruce, and fir trees)
              of   compounds displaying biological activity.  The particular `alkaloids`  
              (naturally occurring nitrogen-containing compounds) found in these trees   are
              found in similar or identical forms in an astounding variety of other   natural
              sources, including the Mexican bean beetle, which synthesizes the   alkaloids
              itself, and poisonous frogs, which obtain the alkaloids from   unknown food
              sources.  Study of both the plant sources of the alkaloids   and the insects
              which feed upon them is expected to shed light on a   number of important
              issues, including the way in which insects circumvent   the defensive
              strategies of plants and possibly use ingested compounds to   deter their own
              predators.  In the course of related studies, plant   extracts were isolated
              which display activity against the bacillus which   causes tuberculosis.  These
              extracts will be analyzed in order to   identify new classes of compounds with
              potential therapeutic applications   against strains of tuberculosis resistant
              to current drug therapies.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
