Title       : Protein-Lipid Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9619859

Award Number: 9619859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269247             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Stewart Hendrickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9619859  Hendrickson  This research will focus on interactions of
              phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC) and sphingomyelinase
              with various lipid membrane systems.  The major points to be addressed are the
              mechanisms of action of these enzymes, substrate specificities, the way in
              which the enzymes interact with lipid interfaces, and the nature of activation
              by the lipid interface.  The kinetics of these enzymes will be studied using
              thiophosphate substrate analogs in continuous spectrophotometric assay systems
              with mixed-micelles or vesicles of substrate and other phospholipids or
              detergents.  Kinetics will also be studied with fluorescent-labeled lipids in a
              HPLC-based assay.  Protein-lipid interactions will be studied by fluorescence
              spectroscopy using intrinsic tryptophan or extrinsic substrate-analog probes,
              gel filtration, and centrifugation techniques.  The micelle and lipid bilayer
              vesicle systems used in these studies will be produced under carefully
              controlled conditions and will be characterized in order to understand their
              specific structures and any changes that may occur as a result of phospholipase
              activity.    Much enzymology has been done with soluble enzymes and substrates;
              however, many enzymes act at membrane interfaces.  The significance of this
              research lies in understanding the interactions of enzymes with lipid
              substrates at an interface.  The results of this research will provide new
              information about the recognition processes and mechanisms for enzyme binding
              at an interface, the activation processes that take place at the interface, how
              enzyme activity is regulated, and the mechanism of catalysis.
