Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Rising Political Participation of Senior
               Citizens: The Role of the American Welfare State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9619195

Award Number: 9619195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry E. Brady hbrady@bravo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Assertions have long been made in the comparative politics literature of
              political science that social movements and interest groups shape welfare state
              outcomes.  In the current era of fiscal constraint and welfare state
              retrenchment, elected politicians seek to support programs championed by vocal
              interest groups and politically active beneficiaries while cutting programs
              that benefit the politically quiescent.  While plausible, such assertions have
              not been backed by evidence.  This Doctoral Dissertation research project
              demonstrates, in the American case, that senior citizens, through their high
              rates of political participation, have been able to perpetuate their welfare
              state benefits while groups at lower levels of participation, such as the poor,
              have suffered program cuts.  Thus, the political participation of senior
              citizens constrains governmental decision-making and shapes welfare state
              outcomes because elected officials fear retribution from this vigilant and
              active group.  This dissertation project will employs a particularly valuable
              dataset, a series of 211 national cross-sectional surveys conducted by the
              Roper Organization ten times per year from September, 1973, through October,
              1994.  Each of the 211 surveys contains a battery of 12 participation
              questions, most of which are unavailable in other longitudinal surveys.  This
              project produces a concatenated dataset of the twelve participatory acts and
              available political and social covariates, a unique resource of 211 nearly
              monthly readings of political participation in America.  When publicly
              released, this dataset will provide a valuable addition to the political
              participation survey repertoire.  For this project, the dataset is crucial for
              three reasons:  it contains participatory acts like petition-signing and
              letter-writing unavailable in any other longitudinal dataset; encompasses the
              time period of interest, when seniors overtook nonseniors in their rates of
              participation as evidenced in other data; and, is the only monthly
              participation data available, which will show that senior participation is
              responsive to specific threats to welfare state programs.  This Doctoral
              Dissertation  research project promises to produce and interesting and
              important dataset for use by other scholars.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
