Title       : Undergraduate Research Experience in Biological Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9619732

Award Number: 9619732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Vaughan davaugha@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619732  Vaughan    ABSTRACT    This program provides an opportunity for ten
              advanced undergraduate students to conduct independent research during a
              ten-week summer period under the guidance of faculty in the Biological Systems
              Engineering Department at Virginia Tech.  The student participants will be
              involved in research in Land and Water Engineering and Biological Engineering. 
              The program is structured to create an environment for guided independent
              discovery and maturation of self-expression by the students.  The students will
              work in teams including faculty, graduate students and staff conducting
              research on current problems being investigated in biological systems
              engineering using state of-the-art facilities, equipment and instrumentation.  
               The goal of the program is to provide an active, rich, comprehensive research
              experience which will excite and motivate the students toward a research career
              in engineering for biological systems.  Students will practice the scientific
              method, enhance their thinking and reasoning abilities, sharpen their
              communication skills, gain further appreciation of the complexity and
              interdisciplinary nature of problems.  They will also gain hands-on experience
              in laboratory and field research methods, and learn how to be an active team
              member a focused and motivated group of individuals with diverse backgrounds.  
               Student participants will be involved in two overlapping research programs in
              Biological Systems Engineering - Land and Water Engineering and Biological
              Engineering.  Diverse research problem areas include a) environmental
              activities focused on determining the effects of land use and best management
              practices in water quality, and b) bioprocessing problems aimed at the
              development and production of industrial products from biological feedstocks. 
              Both areas of research seek to provide more sustainable crop and animal
              production and processing systems while protecting our soil, water, air and
              other natural resources.  ***
