Title       : Instrumentation for Large Scale Neuron Population Recording
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9619063

Award Number: 9619063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Woodward woodward@newton.neuro.wfubmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest U Sch of Med
	      Medical Center Blvd
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27157    336/716-4549

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The  overall goal of this instrument development for Systems Neurophysiology  is
               to  create  functional devices to enable recording from very large ensembles 
              of  neuronal  spike trains in behaving animals. The plan is to develop and
              integrate  three  tasks  to be done in parallel. First, a new fabrication
              process  will  be  employed to create thin film silicon recording probes, each
              with sixteen  sites.  The  probe  shapes and surface recording site properties
              will be  optimized  for  long-term  chronic  recording  to match the
              effectiveness  of  microwire  arrays  previously  perfected  by  the  P.I.
              Different  spacing  and  sizes  of  surface  recording sites will be patterned
              on the probe and different recording  surfaces  will  be tested. A novel
              technology for fabrication of flexible microcables  and  multichip  modules
              will be adapted to lead signals from the recording probes  to  external signal
              processing electronics. A second task is to create a design  for  a  VLSI
              microchip to detect and amplify- signals from 16 channels. and multiplex 
              signals  to  a  single  output lead. The chip will also  provide  switches 
              with  control  to apply test/stimulation to a selected input. Later goals will 
              be  to  produce  a  multisite  probe with integrated active electronics  and 
              to  create  multiple  probe  assemblies.  The processes to be  developed  are 
              exceptionally  favorable  for commercial production methods. A low-cost,
              high-volume commercial  product  will  be  facilited through later
              participation of  the  staff  at  the  Microelectronic Center of North Carolina
              (MCNC), Research Triangle, NC. A  third  task  is  to  assemble  a 
              demultiplexer with control hardware/software  and  an  advanced  digital 
              signal processing capability will be  added  to  an  existing  workstation to
              support spike sorting from 256 channels or more. All three  tasks  will  be 
              done in parallel to incrementally add function to an existing,  usable  system.
               This  complex, integrated project is made more feasib le by  preliminary 
              advances supported by NSF and elsewhere over past decade.         This  project
              aims to bring closur,9/to a decade-long development effort of  the  P.I.  and 
              his  associates. The aim was to create and demonstrate the  potential  large 
              scale  neuron ensemble recording for decoding of information in  patterns 
              within distributed neuronal activity. Multivariate statistical methods have
              been  applied to process the large volumes of data yielded by the new data
              acquisition  methods. Recent publications by this group and others on
              multichannel recordings  have  created  enthusiasm and momentum toward further
              advances  in  multichannel  recording and analysis instrumentation. Advances in
              this capability are critical  to  enable a basic paradigm shift in the study of
              conceptual issues in the study  of physiological neuronal networks.
