Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Models in Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9619952

Award Number: 9619952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Rogers rogers@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Beattie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Virginia Tech Summer Experience for Undergraduates in Mathematical  Models
              of Elastic Materials will concentrate on mathematical problems in  material
              science.  A broad segment of Virginia Tech's mathematics faculty  is involved
              in research on this subject and that involvement has generated  strong research
              ties to other departments and to industry.  The subject is  ideal for 
              introducing undergraduates to mathematical research because it  applies a wide
              range of mathematical disciplines to a readily  understandable physical
              setting.  Furthermore, it uses foundational  undergraduate mathematical
              techniques in new and challenging ways while  pointing to more advanced
              techniques needed for a deeper understanding.    The program will introduce
              undergraduate students to the mathematical  fundamentals of materials science, 
              expose them to a broad variety of  mathematical techniques and applications,
              and guide them in individual and  group  projects. The following are key
              components of the program.    1. The program will feature a broad mathematical
              approach that will expose  students to applications of partial differential
              equations, group theory,  and scientific computing.    2. The program will have
              a strong interdisciplinary component that will  expose the students to ideas
              and language of engineers, geologists, and  computer scientists.    3. The
              program will have a strong industrial component that will expose  students to
              the applications of mathematics in industry and government  labs.    4. The
              program will use its interdisciplinary nature to help students focus  on
              careers in mathematics and the sciences.    5. The program will use distance
              learning via the internet and  teleconferencing to build a team environment
              among the undergraduate  researchers and to help build the foundational skills
              needed for success in  the intensive six-week on-campus session.
