Title       : Algorithmic Development of Visualization Under Foveated Geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9619846

Award Number: 9619846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184788             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chee K. Yap yap@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the use of foveated geometries for  scientific
              visualization applications.  Two main motivations for  such geometries are (1)
              the analogy with biological vision  systems, and (2) their remarkably reduced
              pixel density that is  logarithmic in the radius of the visual field.  To
              compensate for  the loss of peripheral vision in foveated geometries, the 
              approach of active visualization is to allow the user interactive  control of
              several parameters of vision, including rapid saccades  and adjustable
              resolution.  These are new capabilities, to be  added to the more conventional
              navigational control.  Foveated  geometries will be a key to making current
              visualization systems  more robust, scalable and extendible.    The project
              will investigate three main areas:    - Algorithms and data structures for
              rendering and manipulating  foveated images.    - Wavelet theory and algorithms
              for a corresponding concept of  foveated multiresolution.    - Application of
              active visualization in "thin-wire models" of  computation such as the
              internet.      In a typical "thin-wire" visualization scenario, imagine an
              image  server with powerful computational resources, a client displaying 
              images with the the computational power of stock PC's,  and between them, a
              thin-wire.   In current visualization  applications, the bandwidth usage from
              client to server is  negligible but the bandwidth in the other direction is a
              severe  bottleneck.  In exchange for a modest amount of bandwidth going  from
              client to image server, active visualization is able to  remove this
              bottleneck.  Such a development can have major impact  on visualization.  ***
