Title       : Customizable Head Related Transfer Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1999  
File        : a9619339

Award Number: 9619339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564250             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Ralph Algazi algazi@ece.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              When  a  acoustic wave propagates from a sound source to the  ear  drum, 
              wavelength-dependent diffraction by the  torso,  head  and  outer ears or
              pinnae produce major changes in its spectrum.   The  nature  of  this 
              transformation depends on the location  of  the  sound source relative to the
              head, and is completely specified by  the  so-called head-related transfer
              function.  Because the head-  related  transfer function completely
              characterizes the  acoustic  information  available  for  sound localization, 
              it  has  become  central  to  any  scientific  study  of  spatial  hearing.   
              The  character  of  the  head-related transfer  function  varies  from  person
              to person.  These inter-subject variations are often quite  significant,  and
              individualized head-related transfer  functions  are  needed to obtain a
              faithful perception of spatial  location.  It  is  hypothesized that a
              physically-based model of  the  head-  related  transfer  function requires  a 
              small   number  of  free  parameters,  and  that  these  parameters  can  be  
              adapted   or  customized  to  individual  listeners  by  statistical   matching
               against  experimentally measured head-related transfer functions,  and by
              correlation with anthropometric measurements.  This effort  will  develop and
              validate head-related transfer function  models  using  a combination of the
              physical and mathematical approaches.  Extensive psychological experiments will
              be performed to validate  the  adequacy  of  the  resulting  filters.   This 
              research  has  significance for the development of novel man-machine 
              interfaces  and  interactive systems, for three-dimensional auditory displays 
              as well as for some biomedical applications.
