Title       : Southwest Regional Workshop on New Directions in Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9619881

Award Number: 9619881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19976              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Daniel Mauldin mauldin@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David DeLatte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfonso Castro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mariusz Urbanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9104,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9619881    This award is for support of a conference/workshop in dynamical
              systems at the Department of Mathematics of the University of North Texas. 
              Speakers at the workshop will include Professors Katok (Penn State), Keane
              (CWI, Amsterdam), Przytycki (IM PAN, Warsaw) and Strein (University of
              Amsterdam).  Participants in the workshop will include scholars form the
              Southwestern US and Northern Mexico.    Dynamical systems theory describes
              processes that develop over time. In particular, dynamical systems arise in
              physics (Lorenz map), biology and environmental studies (population dynamics)
              and chemistry (e.g. modeling the Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction). The
              development of the system depends on its initial state and parameters coming
              from the "environment."  It is of great importance that we understand the
              future behavior which may be exhibited by the system for the "majority" of its
              initial states; this corresponds to the description of so-called attractors to
              which the first part of the project is devoted. Also in the first part of the
              proposal we study how properties of some important dynamical systems depend on
              "environmental" parameters. Sometimes phenomena exhibited by a system are
              related to one another and information about some of them allows one to make a
              judgment about the existence of others; in other words phenomena coexist. A
              good example here is periodicity, i.e. cyclic occurrence of the same states in
              the system. It turns out that the existence of a cyclic process with a given
              period for some initial state guarantees that another cyclic process with a
              different period can be realized for a different initial state and the same
              environment.  In the second part of the project we plan to thoroughly study
              this relationship between different periods of cyclic processes in the same
              system.
