Title       : Applications, Algorithms and Extensions of Complementarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9619765

Award Number: 9619765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Ferris ferris@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Over the past few years, several robust algorithms have been  developed for
              solving nonlinear mixed complementarity problems,  along with software aimed at
              making these algorithms accessible  to researchers with applications that
              employ the complementarity  framework.  This proposal aims to continue and
              extend this work  by considering the complete solution process for
              complementarity  modeling in an interdisciplinary setting.  The emphasis of the
               proposal is on developing new practical computational methods  that will
              robustly solve the large-scale engineering and economic  problems that will be
              formulated as part of this proposal in  consultation with application experts. 
                In contrast to much of the algorithm work that has been carried  out to date,
              the solvers will be augmented with special purpose  techniques that will
              attempt to automatically convert models to  algorithmically advantageous forms
              and to diagnose deficiences in  a given model.  This will enable much quicker
              solution of many  applications, since the solution time of an algorithm is 
              typically much less that the time taken to develop, modify and  refine the
              underlying models.  It will be ensured that the  algorithms and tools being
              developed are general purpose, easy to  use and as informative to the user of
              the algorithms as possible.    A direct interaction with experts in several
              application areas  will determine how various physical phenomenon can be
              succinctly  modeled using the notion of complementarity.  As well as  providing
              an automatic translation mechanism to convert nonlinear  programs into mixed
              complementarity problems.  The project will  address the use of the
              complementarity framework for integrated  assessment models in economics and
              fracture problems in  structural engineering.
