Title       : Applications of Weighted Least Squares
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9619489

Award Number: 9619489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Vavasis vavasis@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project covers the development and analysis of new  algorithms for weighted
              least-squares problems and their  applications.  In many practical
              applications, the weights vary  by large factors, giving rise to
              ill-conditioned cases.  In the  past decade several authors independently
              proved a norm bound for  this case of an ill-conditioned weight matrix.  In
              previous work  the PI followed up on this norm bound with the discovery of a 
              stable algorithm for weighted least squares. ``Stable'' means  that the
              accuracy of the algorithm is not affected by ill-  conditioning of the weight
              matrix.    The norm bound and the stable algorithm turn out to have several 
              unexpected applications.  For example, a new interior point  method was
              discovered whose running time, unlike for all  previous interior point methods,
              does not depend on the numerical  data of the objective function.  Also, a way
              was found to stably  solve a class of finite element methods on which
              previously known  algorithms would have failed.    In this research project,
              weighted least-squares problems will be  pursued along several lines:    (1)
              iterative methods for weighted least squares will be      developed, as well as
              improved sparse-matrix methods,    (2) results for linear programming will be
              extended to      semidefinite programming,    (3) new algorithms will be
              invented for the highly nonlinear      problems arising in electric power
              networks, which have      at their core a generalized weighted least-squares
              problem,      and    (4) inverse finite element problems will be addressed.   
              The outcome of this project will be more accurate and more  efficient
              algorithms for optimization and simulation problems  arising in science and
              engineering.
