Title       : SimCalc: Democratizing Access to the Mathematics of Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a9619102

Award Number: 9619102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2816101            (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Kaput jkaput@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy Roschelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo B. Nemirovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9619102  kaput    Situations involving rates, accumulation, approximations,
              and limits occur in every citizen's everyday experience and pervade
              mathematics, science, and their use across virtually all arenas of human
              endeavor.  Furthermore, the actual content of the Mathematics of Change and
              Variation (MCV) is sowing at an unprecedented rate in the directions of
              dynamical systems and nonlinear science.  Yet only technical college students
              in traditional calculus courses normally gain access to even part of the MCV. 
              And to do so they must survive a long series of prerequisites that filters out
              most of their classmates, especially those from poorer backgrounds and
              neighborhoods.    SimCalc's long-term mission is to render practical and widely
              available to ALL students the opportunities, experiences and resources they
              need to develop masterful understanding and skill with the Mathematics of
              Change and Variation.    In this project, the SimCalc team expands upon prior
              work that (a) identified how to enable learning based on children's prior
              knowledge and cognitive capabilities with carefully designed activities,
              representations and devices (b) established the power of the MCV to reorganize
              and energize traditional mathematics topics, (c) created successful sample
              lessons in both traditional and novel content, (d) created a technological base
              for accelerating and deepenin@ learning and (e) proved the feasibility of an
              approach to MCV for young, inner-city, minority hildren.  This project
              progresses from relatively brief teaching experiments to long-term classroom
              engagement, and from testing of components in small subsets to full integration
              of physical, simulation and visualization tools, including inexpensive graphing
              calculators.    This intensive research effort will develop solutions to three
              critical problems, each an undeniable  prerequisite for enabling democratic
              access to the mathematics of change:    A. Classroom-based Research on @arning:
              How can we best combine the full range of cog nitive, linguistic, kinesthetic
              and cultural resources that ordinary students bring to us, with the affordances
              of practical new technologies, to enable extraordinary learning in realistic
              settings?    B. School-based Research on Curriculum Reorganization: How can
              integrating the MCV with important core mathematics produce the curricular
              efficiency and power absolutely necessary to make possible the new content
              needed by students of the next century?    C. Component-based Architecture for
              Enabling Technology: How can highly flexible suites of advanced technologies,
              which are required to learn the MCV, achieve scalable integration through wide
              author and developer participation based on common standards and open
              architectures?    A theme cutting across each line of research is adapting to
              diversity and constraint: student diversity, curricular diversity and
              pedagogical diversity.  Hence SimCalc will base most of its fieldwork in inner
              city schools and community centers, seeking to engage students typically
              excluded from advanced mathematics under tighter constraints than obtain
              elsewhere.  We direct our technology development toward an open, modular, plug
              and play architecture that provides the flexibility, integration, and framework
              for evolution to adapt to this diversity.  Finally, we hold to an overall open
              project architecture that invites and scaffolds work with research collaborate
              s and commercial partners.  These commercial partners, our interface with the
              larger community, provide both realistic constraints on the possible, and
              opportunity for massive national impact.  You are invited to visit the SimCalc
              web site at http://tango.mth.umassd.edu for more information.  ***
