Title       : REU: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Water Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9619782

Award Number: 9619782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge A. Ramirez ramirez@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Danny H. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith L. Hannah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619782  Ramirez    ABSTRACT      An REU Site will be established by the Water
              Center at Colorado State University (CSU) to provide research opportunities in
              the broad area of water resources.  The Water Center engages faculty and
              students from Engineering, Natural Resources, and Agriculture in
              multidisciplinary research approaches to water resources issues.  Fifteen
              rising seniors will be recruited each year from CSU and five collaborating
              Colorado public institutions.  The selected collaborating institutions have
              relatively large ethnic minority populations, many first-generation college
              students, and limited research opportunities.  We seek a cadre of students with
              a broad mix of disciplinary interests along with gender and ethnic diversity. 
              For the 8 week summer program, each student will work with a faculty mentor,
              commonly as a member of an established research group, and complete an
              independent research project.  Students will be housed together in CSU dorms
              and will participate in regular group activities.  These include a four-part
              ethics workshop, evening seminars, computer simulations, role-playing
              exercises, and field excursions, all designed to illustrate the scientific,
              sociologic, and economic complexity of water resource issues.  Near the end of
              the summer program, students will submit a written report and present their
              work in a closing symposium.  Each student will be invited to return to CSU in
              the Fall to participate in the Water Center Student Symposium, and again in the
              Spring to attend Hydrology Days, an annual CSU-sponsored, week-long
              professional conference.  Students will be encouraged to continue their work
              during the academic year, expanding it to a senior thesis, and presenting
              results at either the Fall Symposium or Hydrology Days.  Faculty contacts have
              been established at each of the 5 collaborating institutions to provide local
              support for non-CSU participants.  ***
