Title       : Support for Conference on Process Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9619917

Award Number: 9619917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Scott   (Principal Investigator current)
              Pradeep K. Agarwal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                D.M. Scott (DuPont) and P.K. Agarwal (U. of Wyoming)    Partial travel support
              will be provided to a group of  ten U.S. academic researchers to attend and
              present papers at the conference "Frontiers in Industrial Process Tomography"
              to be held April 9-12 in Delft (NL).  Process tomography is an emerging field
              of research because of the new experimental and computational techniques made
              available in recent years, and its potential use for on-line process control
              and in non-invasive laboratory experiments.  The topic has received a special
              attention in the European Community funding, and as a result there are
              outstanding advances in the field at several European universities including
              the Delft University.  The conference will address modeling, measurements and
              applications of multiphase and particulate flows.  The topic is highly
              interdisciplinary, and efforts have been made to bring the best qualified
              scientists and engineers at the meeting, including academic and industry
              researchers from Europe, North America and Asia.  The focus of the conference
              is on critical future developments needed to apply tomography technology to
              process engineering.  The meeting is held in conjunction with the "Control of
              Particulate Processes" conference at the same location.
