Title       : RUI: Fixed Points in Continua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1997  
File        : a9619981

Award Number: 9619981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Hagopian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Sacramento Fdn
	      6000 J Street
	      Sacramento, CA  95819    916/278-7381

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research project is based on a program that originated in 1912 with the
              Brouwer fixed-point theorem.  The central problem of the program is to
              determine whether every plane continuum that does not separate the plane has
              the fixed-point property .  R. H. Bing called this the most interesting problem
              in plane topology.  Aside from providing a beautiful generalization to
              Brouwer's theorem, a solution to this problem would represent the final step in
              a historical research effort that has involved many of our brightest
              mathematicians;  P. Alexandroff, R. H. Bing, K. Borsuk, and K. Kuratowski are
              among the international giants who have worked extensively on this famous
              problem.  Through the years a list of related problems has been developed, each
              of which has taken on a significance of its own.  Recently, the PI has solved
              two of these problems, establishing the fixed-point property for every
              simply-connected plane continuum and proving that every deformation of a
              tree-like continuum has a fixed point.  The techniques developed should lead to
              further advances in this program.    Topology is the study of properties that
              persist when geometric objects are bent, folded, shrunk, stretched, turned,
              twisted, or in any other way continuously transformed.  For example, when
              points are marked on a rubber band and it is stretched, the order in which the
              points appear does not change.  Other topological facts are more subtle.  Among
              these are the fixed-point theorems, results about points that remain in their
              original position after an object has been transformed.  Consider a cup of
              coffee that has been stirred (but not whipped) so that the surface of the
              liquid remains on top.  The Brouwer fixed-point theorem tells us that when the
              liquid stops moving, some point on the surface will be in the same place that
              it was before we started stirring.  There are a wide variety of interesting
              applications of this theorem in the literature.  It has been used to prove a
              well-known theorem on the existence of roots of  complex polynomials, the
              Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, as well as the existence of equilibrium points
              in an economy.  Fixed points of deformations also appear in a variety of
              scientific applications.  For example, in electromagnetic-wave theory, they are
              used to show that there are no isotropic antennas       and explain why most
              magnetic plasma containers are tori instead of spheres.  This project will deal
              with generalizations of this theorem.
