Title       : SUNFEST: Summer Undergraduate Program for Research Experience in Sensor
               Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9619852

Award Number: 9619852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181465             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Van Der Spiegel jan@ee.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619852  Van der Spiegel    ABSTRACT    The project provides 9 undergraduate
              student with summer research opportunities in the area of Sensor Technologies. 
              The goal is to attract and retain gifted students to a graduate career in
              engineering.  The REU Site is part of the Summer Undergraduate Fellowship in
              Sensor Technologies (SUNFEST) program of the University of Pennsylvania's
              Center for Sensor Technologies.  The Center provides the infrastructure for
              faculty and students to collaborate, exchange ideas, co-supervise students, and
              share resources.    Students are selected by a faculty committee based on their
              academic potential, interest in pursuing a research career, attitude towards
              graduate studies, advisors' recommendations, membership in under-represented
              groups, and research opportunities in the mother institution.  It is
              anticipated that about two thirds of the students will come from outside Penn. 
              The undergraduate students participate actively in a research project under the
              guidance of one or more participating faculty and graduate student.  Special
              emphasis is placed on broader interaction and communication of these SUNFEST
              fellows with the graduate students and faculty members.  The projects suggested
              to the students are chosen for their educational value, scientific merit,
              appropriateness for undergraduates, and the prospects for continued involvement
              after the summer.  Project topics include: chemical, optical, mechanical, and
              neural network based sensors; micromechanical systems, phenomena and
              micromachining; and sensor interfacing.    The students will also participate
              in a variety of hands-on workshops in order to give them the tools to do first
              rate research or enhance their oral and verbal skills.  These will include
              seminars on "Giving effective presentations", "Writing research reports",
              "Ethics in Science and Engineering" and "Use of electronic database searches". 
              Students will also have the opportunity to participate in social activities
              organized with faculty advisors.   ***
