Title       : Increasing the Availability of Materials for the Professional Development of
               Science and Mathematics Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a9619139

Award Number: 9619139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1619019            (Estimated)
Investigator: Iris R. Weiss iweiss@horizon-research.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Horizon Research Inc
	      326 Cloister Court
	      Chapel Hill, NC  275142296    919/489-1725

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    9619139  Weiss    As part of its teacher enhancement program, NSF has
              supported the development of materials to improve the content knowledge and
              pedagogical skills of K-12 science, mathematics, and technology education
              teachers.   The Foundation has also supported the development of materials
              designed to support the implementation of high quality instructional materials.
               This project is designed to identify those materials, evaluate them, and make
              them more available to the community of staff developers.      The specific
              activities will involve the following:    * Searching for existing teacher
              enhancement materials, including, but not limited to, those developed with NSF
              support;  * Describing and critiquing these materials;  * Creating a data base
              of available materials, searchable by such characteristics as target grade
              level range, disciplinary content, and medium (e.g., videotapes);  * Developing
              and field-testing dissemination  mechanisms such as CD-ROMs or Web sites for
              the quality materials;  * Describing the gaps in the landscape to assist
              funders and PIs in targeting future development efforts to areas of greatest
              need.    The project is being directed by Dr. Iris Weiss, President of Horizon
              Research, Inc.; collaborators include Dr. Anne Butler Kahle of Miami University
              of Ohio; Dr. Audrey Champagne of State University of New York at Albany; and
              Dr. Susan Friel of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, each
              supervising a cadre of master teachers, graduate students, and university
              faculty in reviewing teacher enhancement materials.  Partner organizations
              include the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the American
              Geological Institute, the Council of State Science Supervisors, the National
              Research Council, the National Science Teachers Association, and the National
              Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
