Title       : Descriptive Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9619880

Award Number: 9619880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173835             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander S. Kechris kechris@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: The general aim of this project is the development of the theory of
              definable actions of Polish groups, the structure and classification of their
              orbit spaces, and the closely related study of definable equivalence relations.
               This work is motivated by basic foundational questions, like understanding the
              nature of complete classification of mathematical objects up to some notion of
              equivalence by invariants, and creating a mathematical framework for measuring
              the complexity of such classification problems. This theory is developed within
              the context of descriptive set theory, which provides the basic underlying
              concepts and methods. On the other hand, in view of the broad scope of this
              theory, there are natural interactions with other areas of mathematics, such as
              the theory of topological and transformation groups, topological dynamics and
              ergodic theory, model theory, and recursion theory. One of the fundamental
              questions that arises in many fields of mathematics is that of classifying a
              given collection of objects that has been studied in this field. This amounts
              to providing a "catalog" or "listing" of these objects, in principle not unlike
              that of cataloging species in biology or stars and galaxies in astronomy. If
              such a classification is possible, one has a "complete" understanding of the
              mathematical structures involved.  Otherwise a more or less "chaotic" behavior
              is expected. It is thus very important to understand under what circumstances a
              classification is possible. This difficult foundational question is further
              complicated by the fact that what constitutes an acceptable classification is
              very much dependent on the particular field of mathematics studied, so the
              criteria for a "good" classification in one area might not be appropriate in
              another.  At its basic level, this project aims to develop a general
              quantitative theory, which in many situations can precisely measure the
              complexity of a classification problem and thus provide objective means by
              which one can decide,  in any given field, whether a satisfactory
              classification of the objects in question is possible. This is achieved by
              associating with each collection of objects to be studied an appropriate
              concept of "magnitude" or "size", which in a precise sense measures the
              difficulty of its classification problem. This new theory of "size" is
              investigated in this project.
