Title       : EPWG: Guiding Math/Science Talented Girls and Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9619121

Award Number: 9619121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $730382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Kerr BKERR@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esther Ratner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Veronica A. Burrows  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Robinson-Kurpius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619121  Kerr   Talented girls and women drop out of advanced math and science
              courses more frequently and choose college majors in science, engineering, and
              mathematics less often than do boys and men.  Native American, African
              American, and Hispanic girls are  particularly at risk for not achieving their
              career goals.  The high school counselors, administrators, and math/science
              educators are the guidance providers who are the missing links in nationwide
              efforts to change practices which discourage math/science talented girls and
              women.  This project is designed to:  (a) teach secondary counselors,
              administrators and math/science educators specific research-based techniques
              for guiding and encouraging math/science talented girls and women; (b) to
              increase these guidance providers' knowledge of and interest in careers in
              science, engineering, and mathematics; (c) to expand a successful program for
              providing counseling and encouragement to math/science talented at-risk girls;
              (d) to involve guidance providers in creating guidance plans and training
              colleagues in their own schools and colleges; and (e) to disseminate this
              information throughout the counseling, school administration, and math/science
              education professions.  The techniques taught are based on those developed for
              the NSF-sponsored project on career development for talented at-risk girls.  
              For three years, during the series of one-week summer seminars each year,
              counselors, administrators, and science educators in the southwest will be
              taught the knowledge and skills for guiding career development of math/science
              talented girls.  An experimental component will allow participants to work with
              talented at-risk girls one-on-one and to experience hands-on science activities
              together.  Three similar winter seminars will be offered to counselors at the
              nation's leading specialized schools for math, science, and technology, as well
              as southwest guidance providers.  A consulting team and a Handbook for Guiding
              Girls and Women will further d isseminate this knowledge throughout the
              counseling, school administration, and math/science education professions.
