Title       : Linking Undergraduates to Research on the Environment (L.U.R.E.)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9619699

Award Number: 9619699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeannie L. Darby jdarby@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debbie A. Niemeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619699  Darby    ABSTRACT      In an ideal academic setting, research should be
              an integral part of the undergraduate experience.  The individual or small
              group efforts that occur in a research setting are a vital complement to the
              more passive lecture-based instruction provided in most engineering courses. 
              The applications and innovations that can be demonstrated through research
              experiences can both motivate students to enter and persist in engineering and
              help prepare them for either graduate school or professional engineering. 
              According, the UC Davis Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
              proposes will offer an environmental engineering REU program that includes
              recruiting, selecting, educating, retaining and mentoring a total of 40
              undergraduate students over a five year period.    The program is aimed
              particularly at students from D-Q University (a two year community college and
              founding member of the American Indian Higher Education Consortium) and women
              and underrepresented minorities from UC Davis.  The overarching goals of the
              proposed project are to:  1) increase the visibility of environmental
              engineering as a viable career for Native Americans and 2) develop well rounded
              and independent students who can contribute professionally with thoughtful
              assessment and innovative solutions.    The project begins with a four week
              summer session introducing students to the principles of research and includes
              visits to campus facilities and research field and laboratory sites, attending
              seminars on preparing a research plan and scheduled time with faculty mentors. 
              The product of this four week session will be a student-faculty formal research
              contract for the upcoming academic year.  During the academic year, the
              students will participate in a structured research seminar series as well as
              research group meetings, conduct research according to their research contract,
              prepare presentations and progress reports and meet twice weekly with faculty
              mentors.  The major tangible product  of the academic year research will be
              preparation of an abstract and paper for spring submission the UC Davis
              Undergraduate Research Conference (URC) and the National Undergraduate Research
              Conference (NCAR).  In addition to the structured research experience, D-Q
              students will be provided guidance in course selection and transfer
              requirements to facilitate their preparation for transfer to a university with
              an approved engineering curriculum.  ***
