Title       : Multilevel Presentation and Query Processing in Multimedia Database Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9619812

Award Number: 9619812
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arif Ghafoor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shankar Moni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rangasami L. Kashyap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop a multimedia database management system
              with enhanced capabilities to handle heterogeneous monomedia queries and data.
              The development of this system caters to the computational and storage
              requirements while accommodating and exploiting the inevitable semantic and
              representational imprecisions inherent in such media. The underlying design
              philosophy of this system is based on multilevel data models and search
              mechanisms. These methodologies are designed to facilitate for the users the
              posing of various types of queries. These query types include the following:
              (1) low-level queries, such as finding objects in a multimedia database; (2)
              mid-level queries based on spatio-temporal semantics, such as locating events
              associated with multimedia data; and (3) high-level queries targeted towards
              searching pre-composed multimedia documents, based on constituent monomedia
              data, their spatio-temporal dimensions, and logical structure. The multi-level
              search mechanisms are tightly interlinked. Imprecision in the search results is
              modeled using a set of fuzzy parameters. The results of this research will
              provide a comprehensive framework for building wide variety of multimedia
              applications in commercial, educational, governmental and military sectors.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
