Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education (EDGE): A
               Transition Program for Women in the Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9619965

Award Number: 9619965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhonda J. Hughes rhughes@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sylvia T. Bozeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bryn Mawr and Spelman Colleges have established a program whose  explicit
              purpose is to increase the number of women and minority  students who
              successfully complete graduate programs in the  mathematical sciences.  This
              program, entitled "Enhancing  Diversity in Graduate Education (EDGE)," is
              designed to  strengthen the ability of the targeted student population to 
              successfully negotiate the transition from undergraduate to  graduate education
              in mathematics, and to succeed in those  graduate programs.  The program
              focuses primarily on recent  graduates of undergraduate mathematics programs
              who will attend  graduate programs in the mathematical sciences the following 
              fall.    For the past four years, the Principal Investigators have co-directed
              the NSF-sponsored Spelman-Bryn Mawr Summer Mathematics  Program, aimed at
              identifying and encouraging talented young  women to pursue careers in the
              mathematical sciences.  Now, as a  continuation of this effort, the two
              institutions are addressing  a persistent problem that continues to thwart the
              efforts of  earlier intervention programs, namely the attrition of talented 
              women and minority students from graduate programs in  mathematics.  Attrition
              for these groups is disproportionately  high, and students who are not
              successful in one program are  often lost from the pipeline altogether.    In
              order to realize its goals, the program helps students develop  a stronger
              background in the basic areas of analysis and algebra.   In addition, the
              program establishes mechanisms to provide  prospective female graduate students
              with (1) a clear  understanding of what will be expected of them in graduate 
              school, (2) the basic tools needed to increase both their  confidence and their
              ability to compete in graduate school, (3) a  support network aimed at keeping
              them in the mathematical  sciences once they have begun their graduate work,
              (4) a broad  perspective about mathematics and its connections to other 
              disciplines, and (5) an understanding of their own  strengths and  weaknesses
              under stress, in group study, and in a competitive  environment.    The
              structure of the program involves two basic components: (1)  an intensive
              summer program, and (2) a follow-up mentoring  program.  The summer program
              includes two six-week core courses;  four one-week minicourses on exciting
              areas of mathematical  research; and problem sessions aimed at preparing
              participants  for graduate qualifying exams.  The mentoring program involves 
              graduate institutions in the identification of appropriate  mentors who will
              serve as advocates for the participants from the  beginning of their graduate
              study.  A continuing support network  is provided by the Principal
              Investigators, student participants,  and graduate student mentors.  In
              addition, the project includes  a comprehensive study, done in conjunction with
              a sociologist  experienced in investigating issues involving gender and science
               in higher education and at the professional level, whose aim is  to determine
              the effectiveness of the program in helping students  to negotiate the various
              stages of their graduate education.    Over a period of four years, between
              forty and fifty women, at  least half of whom are from underrepresented
              minority groups,  will be directly supported in their efforts to persist to the
               Ph.D. degree in the mathematical sciences.  As a result, it is  expected that
              the success rate of women and minorities in  graduate programs in the
              mathematical sciences will increase,  beginning with the rates at participating
              institutions.  The  evaluation process will also provide the mathematics
              community  with intensive data about the experiences of minorities and women 
              in graduate programs in the mathematical sciences.
