Title       : National Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a9619020

Award Number: 9619020
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86486251           (Estimated)
Investigator: Francine D. Berman berman@sdsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sidney E. Karin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4066      PART FOR ADVANCED COMP INFRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This action executes a cooperative agreement between NSF and the National
              Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure (NPACI) at the University
              of California - San Diego (UCSD), under the direction of Dr. Sid Karin via NSF
              award ASC 9619020. The cooperative agreement will be operational for a period
              of five years and is the result of a proposal submitted to NSF solicitation,
              "Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure" (PACI), NSF 96-31. 
              The PACI program builds on and replaces the NSF Supercomputer Centers Program
              established in 1985  The program focuses on newly emerging opportunities in
              high performance computing and communications, providing flexibility, both to
              adapt to rapidly evolving circumstances and to meet the need for high-end
              computation, in order to enable continued U.S. world leadership in
              computational science and engineering.  NSF, through this program, will provide
              access for researchers to high performance computing systems, with associated
              highly trained staff and researchers necessary to develop and optimize their
              use.  The emergence of scalable parallel systems, high performance networking
              and high bandwidth and large capacity mass storage systems creates the
              opportunity for a national infrastructure consisting of a number of
              geographically distributed sites strongly coupled to high end computational
              resources and to each other via high speed communications networks.    NPACI
              will lead the deployment and evolution of a national-scale metacomputing
              environment that will benefit the national user community in all fields of
              computational science and engineering. This infrastructure will integrate
              compute and data servers, and employ the talents of computer and computational
              scientists to guide its evolution. It will leverage the activities of many
              projects. The metacomputing environment will be extended to enable not only
              numerically intensive but also data-intensive computing. To that end,
              infrastructure will be developed and deployed to enable analysis  of extremely
              large data collections from application output, remote-sensing and
              instrumentation-derived data, and data in widely scattered, discipline-specific
              databases. Three technology areas which are central to creating a metacomputing
              environment will initially be the basis for NPACI: Adaptable, Scalable
              Tools/Environments; Data-intensive Computing; and Interaction Environments.
              Several scientific applications have also been chosen that will motivate,
              guide, and validate development and integration of the NPACI infrastructure.
              Molecular Science, Neuroscience, Earth Systems Science, and Engineering will
              initially be focused on as areas ripe for scientific discovery and technology
              development. NPACI will integrate computational science and engineering
              education activities into the infrastructure, building on successful education
              and outreach efforts within the partnership. Particular emphasis will be placed
              on outreach to underrepresented minorities, women, and new communities.    The
              Partnership will concentrate on providing advanced hardware, enabling
              technology, leading edge work in application technology, education, training
              and outreach. Included in this award is the first incremental payment to UCSD
              and its partners for FY98 which covers general operating expenses including
              equipment.
