Title       : A Multimedia Introductory Course in Electric Energy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9619320

Award Number: 9619320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Bohmann ljbohman@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Mork  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel N. Schulz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis O. Wiitanen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9619320  Bohmann    The goal of this project is to revitalize the education
              of power engineers by making the   student's first exposure to the material new
              and exciting, and by making the material more relevant to   he changing
              industry.  We will develop an introductory course in Electric Energy that is
              updated to  address the needs of all electrical engineers.  The course will be
              exciting for the students and driven by the needs of industry.  It will cover
              all aspects of the field of electrical engineering including power systems,
              energy conversion, and power electronics.  The course will be modular in nature
              so that it can be used in a one quarter course, a one semester course, or a
              full year course.  Consequently, engineering faculty can successfully argue for
              this course's inclusion into the core curriculum of any Electrical Engineering
              Department.    The material will be suitable for sophomore or junior college
              students and it will be packaged on a CD-ROM.  Updates will be available
              through the internet.  Some of the highlights of the course are:    * The
              courseware will consist of course notes, case studies, exercises, simulation
              programs, and visual demonstrations.    * The material will be arranged to
              satisfy a variety of student learning styles.    * Recent advances in
              mathematical education, such as the use of symbolic software (Maple,
              Mathematica), will be integrated into the material.    During the project,
              Michigan Tech's Electrical Engineering Department will use the material for a
              two-quarter sequence required for all EE majors.    The project team will be
              lead by faculty from MTU's Electrical Engineering Department and will include
              faculty from Business, Social Sciences, Civil and Environmental Engineering,
              and Mechanical Engineering.  The project will be guided by an industrial
              advisory board of about 12 members, drawn from a wide spectrum of the electric
              power industry.  This will include electrical equipment manufacturers,
              utilities, independent power producers, power mark eters, and consultants. 
              They will have input into both the content and presentation methods of the
              course.  A two-day workshop, held in the spring of 1997, will bring together
              this advisory board and the Michigan Tech project team.  The workshop will
              develop a detailed outline of the course as well as discuss the presentation of
              the material.  The advisory board will also review progress on a periodic basis
              as we develop the course material, offering comments and suggestions for
              improvement.
