Title       : Polyelectrolyte-Colloid Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9619722

Award Number: 9619722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Dubin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9619722  Dubin    The interaction of polyelectrolytes with colloidal particles 
              and surfaces is central to a many industrial processes and  biological
              phenomena, such as dispersion stabilization and  flocculation, and the binding
              of. proteins to DNA. Since  these interactions are predominantly coulombic,the
              PI will  study systems in which key electrostatic quantities --  colloid
              surface charge density, polymer linear charge  density, and ionic
              strength,--can be systematically varied.  The polyelectrolytes will be both
              cationic, such as  poly(dimethyldiallylammonium chloride), and anionic, such as
               poly(acrylamido-2-methylpropanesulfonate) and copolymers  thereof. The
              colloidal particles studied will be micelles,  vesicles, proteins and
              dendrimers. Some of these systems  have individual significance, e.g.
              polyelectrolyte-protein  complexes for protein separations,
              polyelectrolyte-micelle  complexes for removal of trace organics, and
              polyelectrolyte  vesicle complexes for drug delivery.  One of the goals will 
              be to evaluate two very distinct theoretical treatments. The  first predicts
              second-order phase transitions for  polyelectrolyte adsorption on oppositely
              charged surfaces  (large particles.  The second describes the binding of 
              charged ligands (small particles) to polyions within the  context of counterion
              condensation theory. In addition, a  number of questlons related to specific
              experimental systems  will be addressed: (a) Do mlcelies restructure upon
              binding  to polyions? (b) Can the "spacer effect" of nonionic co-  surfactants
              be quantitatively explained? (c) What is the  state of proteins in complexes
              and coacervates, in terms of  tertiary structure, rotational freedom, and
              enzyme activity?  (d) What is the microstructure of protein-polyelectrolyte 
              and micelle-polyelectrolyte coacervates? and (e) How does  polyelectrolyte
              adsorption affect liposome permeability?  %%%%  This project is in the area of
              colloidal particles, surfaces,  and polyelectrolytes, whose interactions have
              importan t  implications to a number of biological and industrial processes 
              ***
