Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Undergraduate Program in Mathematical Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9619991

Award Number: 9619991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Carl Panetta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Paullet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Bertram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Penn State Erie's REU Program in Mathematical Biology will involve
              undergraduates in one of the richest and fastest growing fields of mathematics.
               It affords the six participants the opportunity to pursue research in one of
              several areas of mathematical biology: cancer modeling, pattern formation in
              active media, and the modeling of electrically excitable cells.  The only
              prerequisites are the successful completion of a course in ordinary
              differential equations and an interest in biology.  Throughout the four-week
              period of the program students will work in teams on different aspects of a
              current research problem in mathematical biology.  The biological underpinnings
              of the problem will be discussed in detail during the first week and will
              motivate the subsequent mathematical analysis.  Mathematical methods introduced
              during the program will include phase plane analysis and bifurcation theory. 
              Students will have access to Pentium computers running the Linux operating
              system and will learn the mathematical software package XPP, a powerful tool
              for phase plane and bifurcation analysis.  Seminars will be given throughout
              the program by both faculty and student participants, and the program will
              culminate with a written report and presentation by each team on their results.
                 Participation will result in many benefits to the students.  First, they
              will see the importance and applicability of mathematics by participating,
              first hand, in the solution of a research problem from biology.  Second,
              through team work they will learn the value of cooperation and the ability to
              work with, and communicate technical information to, others.  Finally, the
              experience will give the participants exposure to the excitement and hard work
              involved in scientific research, and will provide motivation for continued
              study in mathematics or the sciences.
