Title       : Undergraduate Research Experiences in Electrical Engineeringat the University of
               Minnesota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a9619750

Award Number: 9619750
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484342             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori E. Lucke lucke@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Ernie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619750  Lucke    ABSTRACT    As we enter the 21st century, it is essential that
              a more culturally diverse group of individuals be encouraged to pursue careers
              in science and engineering.  Consequently, the primary objective of this REU
              site program in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
              Minnesota will be to provide women and minority undergraduates, and
              undergraduates from non-research universities, with a challenging and rewarding
              introduction to research in electrical engineering.  Because our Department's
              current efforts involving undergraduate research experiences focus mainly on
              our own undergraduates, we intend to utilize the REU site program as a vehicle
              to involve students from outside the University of Minnesota, with a strong
              emphasis on recruiting women and underrepresented minorities.  The program
              centers around a ten week intensive summer research experience in which
              students will be paired with faculty mentors.  The main focus of the students'
              participation will be through active involvement in research with complementary
              educational activities, including a weekly seminar series focusing on their
              research projects, career seminars/field trips, and specialized workshops on
              assorted topics.  As a capstone to their REU experience, each student will
              prepare a final written report and give a presentation at a concluding poster
              session.  Social interaction between students and faculty will be enhanced
              through organized parties/outings, with additional student-student interaction
              provided by the community living environment in the dormitory housing
              arrangements.  Continued follow-up contact with the students after the ten week
              summer program will provide for additional student involvement in the research
              community and for evaluation and refinement of the program.  ***
