Title       : TECO: Carbon Balance of a Wheat Ecosystem from Source to Sink in Response to
               Free-Air CO2 Enrichment and Soil Nitrogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1998 
File        : a9619047

Award Number: 9619047
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard W. Wall   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew N. Webber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Kimball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Floyd J. Adamsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USDA, Agricultural Res Ser
	      800 Buchanan Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94710    510/559-6071

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9652613  Wall    The  uncertainty  regarding whether plants  and  ecosystems
               will  respond  to  elevated atmospheric CO2 when nutrients are  lacking  under
               field  conditions is one of the most  important  questions  facing  global 
              change research.  To help resolve this  quandary,  two  CO2 by soil nitrogen
              experiments are being conducted on  the  wheat  ecosystem  in  an  open  field 
              using  the  free-air   CO2  enrichment  (FACE) approach.  This proposal covers
              two  important  components  of  the carbon cycle -- photosynthesis  (source) 
              and  belowground  biomass distribution (sink) -- and thus will  insure  that 
              all  important physiological processes that are  explicitly  influenced by
              atmospheric CO2 enrichment are incorporated  within  an  accurate 
              comprehensive  plant  growth  model  responsive  to  elevated  CO2  and 
              changing  climate  variables  called  ECOSYS.  Besides validating ECOSYS with
              regard to the interactions of  CO2  and  soil  nitrogen  supply, other
              important  objectives  are  to  determine  the interactive effects of elevated
              CO2  and  limiting  soil  nitrogen  supply  on (a) acclimation 
              (down-regulation)  of  photosynthesis  and  (b)  root  growth  and  plant-soil 
              nutrient  status.    Measurements  of  individual  leaf  and   whole-canopy 
              photosynthesis,  respiration, and transpiration rates  are  being  made 
              throughout the season to quantify the diurnal and  temporal  source  of  carbon
               into  the  wheat ecosystem.  Individual  leaf  photosynthesis  will be
              integrated to whole-plant  and  community  level and compared with measurements
              of whole canopy CO2 and  H2O  vapor  fluxes.  Similarly, soil cores are being
              taken at  several  crop  growth  stages,  frozen, and stored.  Nitrogen  and 
              carbon  content  of the root tissue will also be ascertained to determine  if
              any atmospheric CO2 concentration influences the C/N ratio.
