Title       : Photodynamic Azobenzene Functionalized Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9619373

Award Number: 9619373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sukant K. Tripathy Sukant_Tripathy@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jayant Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Tripathy  9619373    The principal objective of this grant is the detailed 
              investigation of a novel phenomenon recently observed under  NSF-DMR funding. 
              A number of NLO polymers with tailored  molecular architectures including
              Interpenetrating Polymer  Networks were fabricated.  A large number of the
              NLOphores  incorporated in these systems were based on azo dyes.  In  fact azo
              chromophores have been extensively employed in  designing NLO polymers over the
              past decade.  In the course  of the study on optical recording under NSF-DMR
              funding,  laser-induced surface relief holographic grating formation  on a
              number of azo-dye containing polymer films was  observed.  Large amplitude
              (>1000 A) holographic surface  relief gratings on azobenzene containing NLO
              polymer films  were optically produced significantly below the glass 
              transition temperature without any subsequent processing  steps.  It has been
              established that the recording is not  due to a thermal process.  Early
              research also indicates  strong polarization-dependent writing behavior.  Such
              large  scale motion of polymer chains significantly below Tg and  its
              relationship to incident light polarization and  intensity variation is unusual
              and begs careful study and  interpretation of the phenomenon.  The focus of
              this  proposal is 1) to design and synthesize polymers with  different chemical
              structures and 2) to investigate the  surface grating formation process under a
              variety of optical  exposure conditions to explore the mechanism of this novel 
              process.  The role of each structural element (i.e., the  chromophore side
              groups, the polymer backbone, and the  spacers between them) will be
              systematically investigated in  these polymers.  The roles of photo-induced
              processes of the  chromophores (such as photoisomerization and photo-induced 
              orientation of the azobenzene groups) in creation of the  relief gratings will
              be examined.  Cooperative motions of  the polymer backbones along with the
              chromophores will be  investigated.  The effect s of changing wavelength, 
              intensity, and polarization of the writing beams will be  explored.  A
              comprehensive experimental investigation of the  mechanism will help establish
              a theoretical model for the  process.  %%%  This project will provide
              fundamental understanding in the  area of novel surface-grating techniques for
              electro-optical  applications.  ***
