Title       : Computer Graphics Tools for Understanding Tensor-Valued Volume Data: A Painting
               Metaphor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9619649

Award Number: 9619649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139620             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Laidlaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This multi-disciplinary research project will investigate,  apply, and evaluate
              new computer graphics tools for  understanding vector- and second-order
              tensor-valued volume  data.  The efficacy of the tools will be evaluated by the
               extent to which they generate insight into several specific  physical
              phenomena: fully-developed turbulent flow, the  progression of disease in a
              mouse analogue of multiple  sclerosis, and the neonatal development of the
              mouse brain.  The application of the new techniques and collaboration with 
              researchers in other fields provides the opportunity to  validate the
              techniques and ensure that they are responsive  in addressing the scientific
              problems.    The techniques will be developed using a painting metaphor.  For
              centuries artists have used a divide-and-conquer  approach to creating
              paintings, representing different  aspects of a scene in different layers of
              paint.  In  addition, artists use brush strokes, with their many 
              characteristics of texture, size, shape, color, and opacity,  to represent
              important features of a scene on a canvas,  depicting the essence of the scene
              and eliminating  unnecessary detail.  Both techniques, and the collective 
              artistic experience in using them, can be applied to  computer graphics in the
              context of displaying volume data.  Techniques for understanding vector-valued
              and tensor-valued  volume data stand to benefit particularly, because volumes 
              contain so much information and because tensor and vector  values have many
              relevant, interdependent aspects.  Existing  techniques are limited in their
              ability to abstract the data  effectively and to display the many relevant
              aspects of the  data simultaneously, but the new techniques will address  both
              of these problems.  As a result, they will be more  effective in generating
              insight into the physical phenomena  measured as well as in communicating the
              insight.  Because  the techniques will be developed with application to three 
              specific problems in two disciplines, they are likely t o  have broader
              application.
