Title       : System Support for Scalable Distributed Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9619371

Award Number: 9619371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mustaque Ahamad mustaq@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As internetworked computing becomes pervasive,  common  services will be
              accessed by a large number of widely  distributed clients. Thus, scalable
              implementations of such  services must deal with (1) large number of clients,
              and (2)  high latencies that will be common among widely distributed  nodes. 
              One approach for reducing server load and  communication costs is to create
              multiple instances of  a  service close to client groups that frequently access
              it.  Also, when possible,  resource rich clients can cache  service state to
              avoid communication latency for common  accesses. Service state replication and
              caching both lead to  multiple copies of the service state and lead to the
              problem  of consistency maintenance across copies when service state  can be
              updated (e.g., to support interactions across  clients). The focus of this
              project is on the  characterizations of consistency levels that are appropriate
               in large scale systems with diverse sets of applications.  In addition, 
              scalable protocols will be developed  to provide both read and write access to
              service state  without requiring communication with all nodes that may have 
              copies of the service state.  A distributed object based  middleware will be
              implemented to support scalable service  and it will employ object caching  and
              replication to  enhance service access performance and scalability. This 
              middleware will be used in the development and evaluation of  services targeted
              to the home that are reached via a variety  of communication media such as POTS
              and cable  networks.
