Title       : Adding Domain Knowledge to Inductive Learning Methods for Classifying Texts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a9619713

Award Number: 9619713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Ashley ashley+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research focuses on improving current methods for learning to classify texts
              by incorporating knowledge from an expert domain model. The goal is
              automatically to classify the texts of legal opinions in terms of the factors
              that apply to the cases described. Factors -- stereotypical fact patterns
              tending to strengthen or weaken the underlying legal claims in a case, and
              their relations to legal issues -- are a kind of expert domain knowledge useful
              in legal argumentation. The program takes as inputs the raw texts of legal
              opinions and assigns as outputs the applicable factors. The program's training
              instances are drawn from a corpus of legal opinions whose textual descriptions
              of cases have been represented manually in terms of factors. The problem is
              hard because the language of the opinions is complex; the mere fact that an
              opinion discusses factors does not necessarily imply that those factors
              actually apply to the case. Starting with several existing inductive and
              statistical learning algorithms, this research assesses whether adding four
              different kinds of domain knowledge improves the algorithms' performance: (1)
              domain knowledge about factors and the legal issues to which they relate; (2)
              general information about the structure of legal opinions; (3) information
              about the statutes quoted in an opinion; (4) information about those cases
              cited in an opinion whose factors are known. The work also explores (a) how to
              combine inductive and analytical techniques to deal with small numbers of
              training instances and (b) how best to combine successful inductive,
              statistical, and knowledge-based methods. Using domain knowledge to guide
              automatic text classification integrates information retrieval, machine
              learning and AI knowledge-representation techniques, will help scale up
              case-based reasoning systems, and alleviate the problem of assessing the
              relevance of texts in increasingly large on-line databases.
