Title       : Modelling Adhesion and Adhesive Metal Transfer to Improve Aluminum Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2001   
File        : a9619353

Award Number: 9619353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Adams jim.adams@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1765,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9619353  Adams  This award is a GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic  Liaison
              with Industry) grant which is co-funded by the  Division of Materials Research
              and Directorate for  Mathematical and Physical Sciences' Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  It involves collaborative  research between
              Arizona State University and ALCOA.  The  grant has two objectives.    One
              objective is to use density functional theory methods to  determine adhesive
              energies between aluminum alloys and  selected tool coating materials.  The
              electronic structure  of each system will be analyzed to determine the critical
               factors that control adhesion.  This study will yield the  first reliable
              database on metal-coating adhesion energies,  including the effect of the most
              common alloying elements  (Cu, Mg, Si, Mn, Zn).  This database will serve as an
               invaluable design tool for almost all aluminum manufacturing  processes that
              involve load transmission through  tooling/workpiece interface.    The second
              objective of the research is to simulate adhesive  metal transfer at the atomic
              scale.  This will involve some  small-scale quantum molecular dynamics
              simulations, and some  larger-scale empirical molecular dynamics simulations. 
              Simulations will focus on small scale plastic deformation  during bulk forming
              processes.    Finally, based on results of this work, selected coating 
              materials will be tested by the ALCOA adhesive wear research  group using an
              adhesion balance in ultrahigh vacuum.  Altogether, these studies will aid in
              the selection of  coating materials for aluminum forming processes such as 
              rolling, extrusion, forging and continuous casting.  %%%  This award is a GOALI
              (Grant Opportunities for Academic  Liaison with Industry) grant which is
              co-funded by the  Division of Materials Research and Directorate for 
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences' Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities. 
              It involves collaborative  research between Arizona State University and ALCOA.
               The  grant has two objectives.  Firs t, calculations will be made  of the
              strength of adhesion between aluminum alloys and  various materials which are
              used for coatings in aluminum  processing.  These results will be helpful in
              designing  aluminum manufacturing processes.  Second, simulations of  adhesive
              metal transfer at the atomic level will be done.  The focus will be on plastic
              deformation during metal  forming.  The results of the calculations and
              simulations  will be tested in ALCOA laboratories.  ***
