Title       : The Austin Collaborative for Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2001   
File        : a9619033

Award Number: 9619033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5059324            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula Gustafson pgustafs@austin.isd.tenet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Fox  (Principal Investigator former)
              A.C. Gonzalez  (Principal Investigator former)
              Norma Jost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen Barrera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pascal D. Forgione  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Ann Rankin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Philip Uri Treisman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Kay Psencik  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              David Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Austin Independ Sch Dist
	      1111 West Sixth Street
	      Austin, TX  787035399    512/451-8411

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9619033  Fox    The Austin Collaborative for Mathematics Education is a
              54-month NSF Local Systemic Change project at $5,059,324.  Austin Independent
              School District collaborates with the College of Education and the College of
              Letters and Sciences at the University of Texas at Austin and with the Charles
              A. Dana Center at the University of Texas.  Estimated cost-sharing from
              partners is $ 2,906,011.  The project targets all approximately 2400 K-8
              teachers of mathematics.  Each teacher will participate in at least 126 hours
              of formal professional development in summer workshops, institutes with
              students, and academic year sessions along with at least 120 hours of campus
              level support and classroom coaching, linked with the implementation of
              comprehensive, standards-based instructional materials in mathematics -
              Investigations in Number, Data, and Space in grades K-5 and the Connected
              Mathematics Project in grades 6-8.    The Austin Collaborative seeks to 1)
              build on sound and proven practice in mathematics education, 2) implement
              consistent and proven mathematics curricula by providing a common learning
              experience for every teacher in every school, and 3) create a professional
              development strategy that is intensive, on-going and a part of every teacher's
              day, every day.    Intensive staff development will be conducted by grade
              level, beginning with grades 5 and 6 in the first year and moving outward each
              year so that once a student starts, there will be no gaps in the delivery of
              the new standards-based mathematics program.  In year 2, grades 4 and 7 are
              targeted.  The summer institute will coincide with a lab school experience in
              which teachers and principals try out some of the new materials and strategies
              with summer school students.  Release days during the following school year
              will give teachers the opportunity to share experiences, reflect and ask
              questions.  Cohort teachers will come together in the second summer and the
              following school year.  The third component will be campus based  and will
              include work of designated campus mathematics specialists who conduct training
              and coach or team teach with teachers in the building.  District level
              mathematics specialists are attached to implementing schools for regular
              classroom visits and coaching.    Campus mathematics specialists and principals
              will have a minimum of 102 hours of leadership training above the content and
              pedagogy and materials training that all teachers will have.    Evaluation of
              the Austin Collaborative for Mathematics Education will focus on student
              achievement of all student groups, including scores on the state mandated
              assessment, TAAS; percentage of students passing pre-algebra and algebra;
              end-of-course exam results for Algebra 1; and enrollment in advanced AISD
              mathematics courses.  Other indicators of the Collaborative impact will be the
              administrative support on each campus for teacher collaboration time, community
              support, coordinated districtwide professional development, the retention of
              new teachers, and electronic communication among teachers and their
              presentations at professional meetings.
