Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in Environmental Monitoring and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9619886

Award Number: 9619886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah I. Nelson WA4317@UOKMVSA  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jess W. Everett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619886  Nelson    ABSTRACT    The University of Oklahoma School of Civil
              Engineering and Environmental Science (CEES) proposes an 8-week REU at an
              interdisciplinary research site at a closed landfill in Norman, OK, with the
              goal of encouraging undergraduates to pursue research careers.  Women,
              minorities, disabled persons, and students at other institutions are the
              primary focus.  Our objectives are to (1) allow participation in active
              environmental research with an interdisciplinary team, (2) encourage
              student-student and student-faculty interaction through the formation of 2
              student research teams, (3) provide valuable field and laboratory research
              skills, and (4) maintain longterm contact with students to encourage research
              careers.  Although a separate project, the REU will capitalize on NSF-funded
              research at the landfill.  A common theme of REU activities is understanding
              the physical, chemical, and biological processes that transform the landfill
              environment.  Student Team I will characterize the physical state of ground and
              surface water at the landfill, and develop a predictive, physics-based model. 
              Soil cores extracted from the landfill will be characterized, and kringing will
              be used to develop a complete soil map of the landfill cap.  Plant species will
              be enumerated, and evapo-transpiration measured.  Students will learn to
              utilize meteorologic and soil moisture data obtained through remote sensing. 
              Geographical information information systems (GIS) will be calibrated and
              verified with site-specific data.  Students will also assist in evaluation of
              hydrodynamic processes via a forced characteristics of the leachate from the
              landfill, and examine chemical and biological interactions between soil and
              dissolved organic compounds present in the leachate.  Soil column will examine
              interactions of leachate with soil, and pre- and post-column leachate samples
              will be analyzed with GC/MS and HPLC to study biodegradation and
              bioavailability.  Results will be used to conduct human health a nd ecological
              risk assessments.  Other student activities will include 24-hour safety
              training, field trips to an EPA lab and a Superfund site, and presentation of
              research results at the annual Norman landfill conference.  ***
