Title       : EPWG: ATHENA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9619060

Award Number: 9619060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $710552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela S. Clute pamela.clute@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank S. Romero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619060  Clute   The project establishes a comprehensive web of links for women
              helping women to create supportive environments across  universities and public
              schools to provide encouragement, guidance and educational opportunities to all
              females involved, focusing upon the areas of mathematics and the sciences. 
              University faculty are linked with college majors and 7th and 8th grade female
              students, and college majors are linked with teacher consultants, 7th and 8th
              grade female students, and professional women in organizations such as AAUW.  
              The ATHENA project is to provide tutoring, instruction, and mentoring  services
              to annual cohorts of seventh and eighth grade female students.  These services
              are provided by female college mathematics and science majors to supplement the
              mathematics and science curricula at the middle schools.  The college majors
              are to use the Math and Science Professional Resource Center at University of
              California-Riverside to help the 7th and 8th grade female students complete
              homework, research papers, and other academic assignments and activities.  The
              center also is to be used for parent involvement activities to expose them to
              the world of mathematics and science and potential careers for women.  Through
              the project, the female college mathematics and science majors  learn about the
              teaching profession, receive academic and financial support, obtain experience
              in providing classroom instruction, have access to a broad range of resources,
              and receive support and encouragement from faculty mentors and teacher
              consultants to pursue teaching as a career.  Mentoring relationships are to be
              created by linking faculty from the University of California-Riverside, who do
              research and teaching in their respective fields, with the college majors. 
              Their training includes specific courses on effective strategies for teaching
              and learning mathematics and science.  The faculty mentors provide
              encouragement and support for the college majors to collaborate in preparing
              present ations and research papers for presentation at professional
              conferences.
