Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Memories of Childhood: True versus False Reports
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9619034

Award Number: 9619034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail S. Goodman ggoodman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Goodman  9619034  The current debate concerning the validity of recovered
              memories of childhood sexual abuse has significant theoretical and legal
              implications.  This research promises to answer several important questions
              pertinent to the debate.  First,  what are the effects of interviewers'
              expectancies on adults' true and false reports of childhood events?  Second,
              what are the effects of guided visualizations combined with high expectancy on
              recovering memories of childhood.  Third, what distinguishes adults true from
              false memories?, What are laypeople's abilities to discriminate between true
              and false memories? And, finally, what individual differences are important in
              the creation of false reports of childhood events.  Two experiments focusing on
              expectancy and visualization and their effects on false reports are being
              conducted.  Community residents and college students serve as participants. 
              Family members provide information about childhood events and false memories
              are created by the investigators.  Analyses of variance and correlational
              methods are used to analyze the data.  The results will provide fundamental
              information about reconstructive memory as well as shed light on the current
              legal controversy regarding false memory.    %%%  The current debate concerning
              the validity of recovered memories of childhood sexual abuse has significant
              theoretical and legal implications.  This research promises to answer several
              important questions pertinent to the debate.  First,  what are the effects of
              interviewers' expectancies on adults' true and false reports of childhood
              events?  Second, what are the effects of guided visualizations combined with
              high expectancy on recovering memories of childhood.  Third, what distinguishes
              adults true from false memories?, What are laypeople's abilities to
              discriminate between true and false memories? And, finally, what individual
              differences are important in the creation of false reports of childhood events.
               Two experiments focusing on expectancy  and visualization and their effects on
              false reports are being conducted.  Community residents and college students
              serve as participants.  Family members provide information about childhood
              events and false memories are created by the investigators.  Analyses of
              variance and correlational methods are used to analyze the data.  The results
              will provide fundamental information about reconstructive memory as well as
              shed light on the current legal controversy regarding false memory.    ***
