Title       : Extending Description Logics for Data Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a9619979

Award Number: 9619979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262193             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Borgida borgida@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An Information System (IS) can be viewed as managing a model of some slice of
              reality for the purpose of   supporting inquiries. A variety of problems in
              information management, including database design, query   optimization and
              seeking/integrating appropriate source of data, are known to benefit from
              knowledge   concerning the semantics of the application problem. Research on
              knowledge representation and   reasoning therefore has significant potential
              applications in IS. Description Logics (DLs) are a family of   knowledge
              representation schemes that allow one to describe and define concepts
              describing objects in   terms of their membership in classes and their
              inter-relationships to other objects. They have the   advantage of well-defined
              semantics and well-studied properties concerning the complexity of deductions, 
               including some efficient implementations. DLs have already been applied by
              researchers, including the   author, to data management tasks such as
              intelligent data exploration and schema integration. This   project
              investigates extensions of DLs that are motivated by the specific desire to
              support the development   of better information systems. The extensions involve
              (1) making DLs more expressive as query and view   definition languages by
              allowing variables to appear in descriptions for the purposes of pattern
              matching;   (2) providing features for capturing uniqueness constraints, which
              express domain semantics very relevant   to databases and query optimization;
              and (3) capturing significant aspects of Event-Condition-Action   rules used in
              active databases, with the goal of supporting tools for reasoning about the
              consistency,   interaction and inter-relationship of rules. The resulting
              languages and reasoners will support improved   capture of data semantics,
              expressing more selective queries and presenting them more effectively,  
              evaluating queries more efficiently, and the development of tools that help
              manage the DBMS components   (schema, rules, etc.).                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
