Title       : Collaborative Research: RIDGE: Dispersal Potential of Hydrothermal Vent Animals:
               Larval Energetics, Depth Regulation and Field Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9619606

Award Number: 9619606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig M. Young youngc@hboi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harbor Branch Ocean Inst
	      5600 Old Dixie Highway
	      Fort Pierce, FL  349467303    407/465-2400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1319,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                 Young       9619606                            The dynamic
              habitats at deep-sea hydrothermal vents  are temporally ephemeral and often
              separated from the  nearest comparable habitats by hundreds-to-thousands of 
              kilometers. Nevertheless, the physiologically unique  organisms that depend on
              active vents not only maintain  stable populations, but also colonize new vent
              sites within  months after they appear. This paradox raises two major 
              unanswered questions about the biology of vent animals: 1)  Do larvae of vent
              animals disperse between distant vent  sites? and 2) If so, how do they do it?
              These questions are  central to understanding how vent populations and 
              communities persist over ecological time and how vent  species persist over
              evolutionary time. Presently, we know  virtually nothing about how long larvae
              of vent species live  in the plankton, how far they disperse, or what
              biological  and physical parameters influence their dispersal ability.      
              The three Principal Investigators will combine their  expertise in cold-water
              larval physiology (Manahan),  deep-sea larval ecology (Young) and larval
              dispersal models  near hydrothermal vents (Mullineaux) to investigate the 
              biological and physical factors that influence dispersal of  vent larvae. This
              interdisciplinary study will: 1) develop  methods and high-pressure equipment
              for rearing vent larvae  at in situ pressures and temperatures; 2) measure the 
              metabolic requirements and changes in energy content during  larval development
              in order to estimate larval lifespans; 3)  characterize the roles of vertical
              swimming and buoyancy in  determining how larvae position themselves vertically
              in the  field; 4) determine if the physiological tolerances for  pressure and
              temperature change during larval development;  5) determine the distribution
              and abundance of larvae in the  water column above vent sites; and 6)
              incorporate larval  attributes (distributions, vertical motions, physiological 
              tolerances, metabolic requirement s and energy stores) into  hydrodynamic
              models developed by collaborating physical  oceanographers to investigate the
              retention times,  trajectories and fluxes of dispersing larvae.  The  studies 
              will be the first comprehensive investigations of the larval  biology of the
              unique hydrothermal vent fauna and will be  conducted near 9N on the East
              Pacific Rise. This information  will significantly increase our understanding
              of larvae in  deep-sea environments, while providing data sets for  comparison
              to larval biology in polar and temperate oceanic  regions.
