Title       : Theory of Dense Hydrogen and Correlated Quantum and Classical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9619854

Award Number: 9619854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil W. Ashcroft nwa@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9619854  Ashcroft  This theoretical grant supports a broad-based research 
              program dealing with various properties of condensed matter  systems.  There
              are three specific topics to be studied:  dense and metallic hydrogen; general
              many-body theory; and,  density functional theory.    Theoretical studies will
              be done on dense and metallic  hydrogen and will include transport properties
              of dense  fluid hydrogen; novel broken symmetry states; pairing of  pairs; and,
              persistence of proton-pairing.  Under general  many-body theory, topics will
              include effective electron-  electron interactions in reduced dimensions;
              instabilities  in layered systems; two-component quantum systems and 
              generalized scaling; revisiting lithium as a model system  for Eliashberg
              equations of superconductivity; and, helium  in a periodic field.  Topics in
              density functional theory  will include studies of fullerenes and intercalated 
              fullerenes; the Born-Green equation;  the average-ion mixing  rule; statistical
              description of the dynamic crystalline  state; and, coarse graining and the
              inhomogeneous electron  gas.  %%%  This theoretical grant involves research on
              a wide variety  of topics from condensed matter physics - the study of atoms 
              and molecules in condensed states such as liquids and  solids.  Of particular
              current interest will be the study of  hydrogen, the most abundant element in
              the universe and  usually in a gaseous state, and its properties as it enters 
              a metallic state in which it can conduct electricity.  Other  topics of study
              will include superconductivity and the study  of fullerenes - a new form of
              carbon.  ***
