Title       : National Computational Science Alliance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a9619019

Award Number: 9619019
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80705195           (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Reed reed@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Smarr  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4066      PART FOR ADVANCED COMP INFRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This action executes a cooperative agreement between NSF and the National
              Computational Science Alliance (the Alliance) at the University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), under the direction of Dr. Larry Smarr via NSF award
              ASC 9619019. The cooperative agreement will be operational for a period of five
              years and is the result of a proposal submitted to NSF solicitation,
              "Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure" (PACI), NSF 96-31. 
              The PACI program builds on and replaces the NSF Supercomputer Centers Program
              established in 1985  The program focuses on newly emerging opportunities in
              high performance computing and communications, providing flexibility, both to
              adapt to rapidly evolving circumstances and to meet the need for high-end
              computation, in order to enable continued U.S. world leadership in
              computational science and engineering.  NSF, through this program, will provide
              access for researchers to high performance computing systems, with associated
              highly trained staff and researchers necessary to develop and optimize their
              use.  The emergence of scalable parallel systems, high performance networking
              and high bandwidth and large capacity mass storage systems creates the
              opportunity for a national infrastructure consisting of a number of
              geographically distributed sites strongly coupled to high end computational
              resources and to each other via high speed communications networks.  The
              National Center for Supercomputing Applications  has joined with its partners
              to create an Alliance whose principal mission is the integration of the many
              computational, visualization and information resources into a national-scale
              "Grid". The Grid links the Alliance together and provides access to its wide
              variety of resources to the national scientific research community. Using high
              performance networking the Grid will link the highest performing systems to
              mid-range versions of these architectures, and then to the end-users'
              workstations, thereby creating a national Power-Grid. The Allia nce Grid will
              interconnect dozens of visualization and virtual reality displays, massive data
              stores, and remote instruments, while Alliance developed software "glue"
              unifies them for collaborative problem solving.  The Alliance will also create
              integrating structures for information and resources distributed on the Grid,
              making its content useful for education, training and outreach.  Special
              emphasis will be placed on outreach to underrepresented minorities, women and
              other pertinent areas.  The partnership members have been chosen because of
              their individual commitments to work together as a team, enabling advances to
              be achieved by a new level of national-scale multidisciplinary collaborative
              research.       The Alliance will concentrate on providing advanced hardware,
              enabling technology, leading edge work in application technology, education,
              training and outreach.  Included in this award is the first incremental payment
              to UIUC and its partners for FY98 which covers general operating expenses
              including equipment.
