Title       : Dissertation Research: Grouping Patterns and Foraging Strategies in Two
               Sympatric Mangabey Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9619281

Award Number: 9619281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Doran ddoran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study will investigate the determinants of group size, cohesion, and
              inter-group spacing in two mangabey species, Cercocebus galeritus agilis and
              Cercocebus albigena, that live in the same areas of the Mondika Research
              Station, Central African Republic.  These two mangabey species reportedly
              differ in their grouping patterns despite their morphological and ecological
              similarities. C. albigena reportedly lives in relatively stable social units,
              whereas C. galeritus groups often fragment into subgroups, yet at other times
              aggregate into large hordes (or 'supergroups').  The study proposed here will
              test hypotheses of how specific ecological factors (such as fluctuations in
              food availability) and social factors (such as dominance hierarchies, and the
              presence of infants and estrus females) influence group size, cohesion, and
              spacing.  Methods will include behavioral sampling of the two mangabey species
              as well as ecological sampling to monitor the availability of food in their
              environment.  Results of this study will enhance our understanding of the
              evolution of primate sociality.  In addition, this study will provide the first
              long-term data on social organization and foraging strategies in two sympatric
              mangabey species.  The behavioral data collected can be used with morphological
              and molecular data to address the puzzling issue of mangabey phylogeny and
              affinities with other old world monkeys such as baboons and macaques.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
