Title       : Research Experience in Information Systems and Electrophysics for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9619749

Award Number: 9619749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Cassara cassara@rama.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yao Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619749  Cassara    ABSTRACT    Polytechnic University seeks continuing funding
              for an ongoing research program that for eleven years has been training
              electrical engineering and computer science students during the summer before
              their senior years in the area of information systems and electrophysics. 
              Students will be recruited from a variety of other schools, including primarily
              undergraduate institutions which are not research intensive.  Approximately
              50%-75% will be students enrolled at schools other than polytechnic to provide
              an opportunity for a rich interchange of ideas.  Every effort will be made to
              attract at least 40% of participants from the minority and women student body. 
              The addition of a female faculty member as Co-PI, Professor Yao Wang, will help
              with recruitment of additional women interns and early announcement of
              internship awards will help attract top minority students who are heavily
              courted by many other academic and industrial summer programs.  The research
              environment will be enriched by additional undergraduate students funded from
              other sources.  Each participant will have regular meeting with an individual
              faculty mentor to plan work and review progress throughout the eleven week
              program.  Project topics in Information Systems will include image
              communication, VLSI, multivariable feedback control, wireless information
              networks, robotics, cache memories, and control systems.  Project topics in
              electrophysics will include microwave-plasma interaction, computational
              electrophysics, power systems and magnetic levitation.  All will benefit from
              extensive interactions with participating faculty and graduate students. 
              Participants will have informative tours of our research laboratories at both
              the Brooklyn and Farmingdale campuses.  There will be two or three seminar
              presentations to the group by leaders from industry, universities or government
              agencies.  A tour will be arranged at a nearby industrial lab or National
              Laboratory.  The program will terminate with a two- day research review during
              which each student will make a 20 minute formal presentation and answer
              questions.  A formal final written report of professional quality will be
              required of all participants.  A monetary prize will be awarded to the best
              project.  ***
