Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Relationship in Free-Ranging Adult Red-fronted
               Brown Lemurs (Eulemur Fulvus Rufus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1997     
File        : a9619440

Award Number: 9619440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6880               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Glander glander@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Prosimian primates exhibit a variety of inter-individual relationships.  Some
              lemur species live in large multi-male, multi-female groups, and a number of
              researchers have suggested that these groups are actually collections of
              male-female pairs.  This field study of wild red-fronted brown lemurs at
              Anjamena, Madagascar will be conducted to record spatial proximity, grooming
              interactions, mating strategies, and aggressive interactions among this lemur
              species.  Field observations on behavior will be augmented by paternity
              exclusion tests of offspring born during the study period with DNA testing. 
              This detailed, long-term project will verify the suggestion that large
              multi-male, multi-female groups are composed of discrete male-female pairs. 
              Behavioral data and paternity determinations will allow testing of the
              hypothesis that male-female pairing protects against infanticide in this
              species.  Additionally, hypotheses developed to explain male-female
              relationships in baboons will be tested with the data collected here on lemurs.
               This permits consideration of lemurs in the broader context of social
              relationships across other primate species and thus facilitates a better
              understanding of lemur behavior through wider species comparisons.  The study
              will also test the broader applicability of these hypotheses across the primate
              order.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
