Title       : Fostering Undergraduate Astronomical Research in the Southeast: The SARA REU
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9619939

Award Number: 9619939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83837              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew A. Wood wood@wd.astro.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry D. Oswalt  (Principal Investigator former)
              James R. Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary D. Henson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Scott Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Rumstay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1215,7915,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Oswalt    The Southeastern Association for Research in Astronomy
              (SARA) wishes to  continue its participation in the NSF Research Experiences
              for  Undergraduates (REU) program.  The REU program run by SARA is unique in 
              that the host site is not a single institution, but rather a consortium  of
              five universities in the southeastern U.S., which operates a one  meter class
              automated telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory near  Tucson , Arizona. 
              The preparation of students for careers in science and engineering is 
              emphasized through one-on-one collaborations with faculty who are  experienced
              undergraduate student research mentors.  Over a dozen  research projects are
              offered, ranging from spectroscopic studies of  minor planets, to the
              determination of the Galactic disk age from  observing white dwarf stars, to
              target of opportunity observations of  active galactic nuclei.   At least 10
              REU students annually will use  the SARA Observatory in Arizona during the
              course of their summer  research. In addition, multi-day workshops will expose
              each of them to  astronomy as practiced at two to three SARA institutions
              during their  summer internships.  At the conclusion of the summer all students
              will  present a talk and prepare a paper for publication based on their  summer
              research.  Continuing collaboration with their mentors and the  presentation of
              papers at national meetings after the summer program is  supported.    The
              NSF/REU summer intern program is the core of SARA's effort to  become a new
              center for undergraduate education and research in  astronomy for the
              southeastern U.S.  Our recruiting effort to attract  undergraduate students
              will encompass the entire U.S., and will include  a strong commitment to
              attracting minority applicants, gender equality  and student diversity.
