Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) in Rural Transportation Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9619786

Award Number: 9619786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darlene P. Butler dpb@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra C. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619786  Butler    ABSTRACT      The University of Arkansas (UofA) has become a
              primary rural transportation research center through the existence of the
              Mack-Blackwell National Rural Transportation Center (MBTC).  The MBTC is a
              collaborative effort of several colleges and departments at the University of
              Arkansas and other colleges and universities, corporations, and government
              entities.  The MBTC focuses on education, research and technology transfer to
              improve the quality of rural life through transportation.  The primary
              engineering departments involved with the MBTC at the University of Arkansas
              are Industrial, Civil, and Computer Systems.  The aforementioned departments
              have utilized undergraduate researchers in numerous research projects and would
              like to be able to involve more undergraduate students in research projects. 
              Thus, it is proposed that a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site
              be developed at the University of Arkansas which will focus on rural
              transportation engineering research.  The proposed program will increase the
              participation of undergraduate researchers on rural transportation research
              projects and will facilitate significant interaction between faculty and
              graduate and undergraduate students.    The MBTC has sponsored many research
              projects which examine the various aspects of rural transportation.  The
              projects have involved social, economic psychological, technical, managerial,
              logistical and operational issues and thus have facilitated interdisciplinary
              studies.  The proposed REU will incorporate projects from several different
              engineering departments with each project having as its central them rural
              transportation.  This REU is unique in that a rural transportation research
              focus is taken that involves faculty advisors from several disciplines working
              together to find the most effective and economical methods of transportation to
              benefit rural living.  ***
