Title       : Bay Area Schools for Excellence in Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a9619066

Award Number: 9619066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carole Stearns                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5358364            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Hustler jhustler@pausd.palo-alto.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eve Bressler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bess Stephens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Bubenik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Palo Alto Unified
	      25 Churchill Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  94306    415/857-5197

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619066  Hustler    The Bay Area Schools for Excellence in Education (BASEE) is
              a partnership between Hewlett-Packard Company and eight school districts in
              California's Silicon Valley (Cupertino Union School District, Los Altos School
              District, Menlo Park School District, Mountain View School District, Palo Alto
              Unified School District, Redwood City School District, Santa Clara Unified
              School District and Whisman School Districts).  Together the districts include
              74 elementary schools, over 1900 teachers and 44,000 students in a geographic
              region that includes much of the Mid-Peninsula region of the San Francisco Bay
              Area. The districts began working together in 1992 to launch district-wide
              kit-based hands-on elementary science programs.     The BASEE collaborative
              offers science training to teachers via three different strands. Strand I
              introduces teachers to the science kits and is designed for new teachers and
              those new to the curriculum; Strand II provides ongoing professional
              development for teachers ready to focus on content background connected with
              effective teaching strategies. Strand III provides leadership opportunity for
              those wishing to solidify their science background while sharing their
              expertise at school sites. There is a separate strand for administrators that
              supports their supervision of science teaching and helps them create a vision
              for science in their schools.    The collaborative has created a variety of
              offerings to meet the various time needs of teachers. There are summer
              institutes, evening programs during the school year, grade level meetings and
              district staff development days. Prior to attending these sessions, each
              teacher has the opportunity to assess his/her own needs in the area of science
              with connections to math and technology. Some of those needs are met by BASEE
              programs, while others are funded with dollars directed to the schools for site
              decision-making.    Substantial in-kind support from HP and the participating
              districts augments the NSF grant.  Addi tional monetary support has been
              pledged over the five year period from three local foundations: the William and
              Flora Hewlett Foundation, the David and Lucile Packard Foundation and the Noyce
              Foundation. The partnership also draws on the rich resource of scientists,
              engineers and other volunteers from the local community, HP employees and
              others, such as members of the local chapter of American Women in Science.
