Title       : Research Experience for Minority Undergraduates in Advanced Composite Piping
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9619503

Award Number: 9619503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Su-Seng Pang mepang@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619503  Pang    ABSTRACT      The objectives of this project are to: (1)
              enhance the technical and educational backgrounds of minority students by
              offering more collaborative research activities; (2) increase the number of
              minorities entering graduate school by providing vital information and
              necessary training for their admission to, and success in, graduate school; and
              (3) assist minority students in their development towards obtaining employment
              in high level engineering jobs.  Minority student sin their junior and senior
              years of study will participate in this project.  They will be recruited from
              Louisiana State University, the state's flagship institution, and Southern
              University, the largest HBCU (Historically Black College and University) in the
              nation.  The 16 selected student per year will participate in several composite
              piping research programs of the investigators, funded by various federal and
              state agencies as well as industry, including the newly funded NSF Joint
              Faculty Appointment Program between Majority Black/Majority White Institutes
              entitled "Development of SU/LSU Joint Engineering Research and Educational
              Program in Composite Piping Systems."  Present programs are currently
              supporting faculty as LSU/SU, research associates, graduate students,
              equipment, and supplies, but without enough resources for supporting
              undergraduate students.  This REU project, if funded, will support (minority)
              undergraduate students who participate in this REU project with the NSF Joint
              Faculty Appointment Program and other research grants, thereby maximizing the
              benefits and impact.  Parallel with the research component, each participant
              will receive professional counseling and instruction necessary for planning to
              attend graduate school, with particular attention given to admissions and
              funding.  Participants will attend monthly seminars dealing with improved
              technical writing, graduate school survival for minorities, and ethical issues
              in engineering.  The investigators have confidence that t he program will be a
              successful national model of how a historically black and majority white
              institution can jointly develop and assist minority students in developing
              research skills needed for industry, as well as graduated school.  ***
