Title       : Restructuring Power Engineering Education to Meet New Challenges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9619306

Award Number: 9619306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215762             (Estimated)
Investigator: Badrul H. Chowdhury   (Principal Investigator current)
              A.H.M. S. Ula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry Cupal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Pierre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond G. Jacquot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9619306  Chowdhury    Changes in the utility operating structure, increased
              competition in a deregulated environment, lower  margins of stability and
              constrained expansion plans are all trends that point to future   developments
              that should provide ample challenge for engineers throughout the industry, On
              the other  hand, advances in power electronics, computer science and
              microprocessor technology are  opening doors for power engineers to provide
              practical solutions to problems.  Expanded automation  of transmission and
              distribution systems will be an important key to making the best use of 
              utility resources in the future.  The development of semiconductor devices for
              high voltage, high   current applications, the so-called second silicon
              revolution, is already bringing about   fundamental changes in industrial
              equipment and utility networks, The intent of the proposed project  is to steer
              the power engineering curriculum to meet these new challenges.  The overall
              objectives are  to form a coalition of industry practitioners and academic
              personnel to examine long-term educational  needs in the power engineering
              discipline.  The plans will include (1) curriculum changes to   incorporate
              changing trends in the industry, (2) new educational tools, such as simulators
              and   innovative software for computation and visualization, (3) computer-aided
              laboratory exercises,  (4) computer-enhanced classroom lectures, (5) creating
              active learning environment by introducing  concepts of learning-by-doing, (6)
              involving the community colleges in distance courses, and (7)  involving high
              schools students in summer programs.  We firmly believe that there is a need to
              teach more breadth of topics and spread the topics in power engineering over a
              number of courses outside of the core power courses.  Learning can be enhanced
              if the application of a specific concept ties sub-disciplines of electrical
              engineering together.  We need the cooperation of industry representatives who
              can guide us to implement progra ms that are practical and useful.  The
              deliverables in this project will include software that are appropriate for
              student use in labs and classroom; the design of a simulator for studying the
              performance of FACTS devices; and the methodology of the course restructuring
              process.
