Title       : State-Space Reduction for Flexible and Approximate Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9619554

Award Number: 9619554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228029             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weixiong Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Flexible  and approximate computation considers how  to  allocate  limited 
              computation  resources and trade  solution  quality  for  reduced  
              computational  cost  in  order  to   optimize   overall  performance of an
              autonomous system or agent.  The goal  of  this  research is to develop
              general, effective, and efficient  methods  for flexible and approximate
              computation.  The approach, based on  heuristic  state-space search, consists
              of a  set  of  reductions  that  help to restrict search effort to the most
              promising  areas  of  a problem space.  Specifically, a state-space reduction
              is  a  process  of  reducing a state space that is difficult  to  search  into 
              a  less  complex state space that is easier to explore  and  more  likely to
              contain high-quality solutions.  After reduction,  the optimal goal in the
              reduced state space is found and used  as  an   approximate  solution  to  the 
              original  problem.    Better  solutions  can  be  found incrementally, with 
              refined  reduction  processes.   One  important issue in flexible computation 
              is  to  find  performance profiles of a computation which measure  system 
              performance  in  terms of required computation  resources.   This  research 
              also considers how to construct closed-form performance  profiles  by 
              analyzing  the expected complexity  of  state-space  search  algorithms.  The
              results of this  research  will  provide  effective methods for real-time
              scheduling and on-line searching,  and provide intrinsic insight into the
              computational behavior  of  state-space search methods.
