Title       : Ground State and Photochemical Reactivity of Triplet Carbenes in the Crystalline
               Solid State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9619344

Award Number: 9619344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel A. Garcia-Garibay mgg@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Miguel Garcia-Garibay, of the Department of Chemistry and  
              Biochemistry at the University of California at Los Angeles, is supported   by
              the Organic Dynamics Program for his studies of the ground state and  
              photochemical reactivity of triplet carbenes in the crystalline solid   state. 
              Carbenes are generated photochemically by extrusion of molecular   nitrogen
              within crystals of their arylalkyldiazo precursors.  Specific   substrates are
              chosen to allow the investigation of intramolecular   1,2-hydride and
              1,2-phenyl migrations as well as hydrogen abstractions.    Professor
              Garcia-Garibay examines the correlation between solid-state   structural
              aspects of the precursors and reaction trajectories of the   resultant
              carbenes, studying both the energetics of the reaction   processes and their
              potential application in the synthesis of organic   compounds through
              stereoselective solid-state carbene rearrangements.  Although the chemistry of
              carbon compounds, forming the basis of organic   chemistry, is dominated by the
              preference of this element to form bonds   to four other elements, compounds in
              which carbon is bonded to only two   other elements are also known.  These
              so-called carbenes, which arise as   intermediates in a number of important
              chemical transformations, display   a variety of intriguing properties,
              including high reactivity and a   propensity to undergo molecular
              rearrangements.  Professor Garcia-Garibay   harnesses the chemistry of these
              reactive carbenes by generating them   within crystalline hosts, thereby
              permitting the physical and chemical   examination of their structures and
              chemical reactions.  These studies   address both fundamental issues regarding
              the chemistry of carbenes and   practical issues regarding the use of carbenes
              in the controlled   synthesis of important organic compounds.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
