Title       : Intrinsic Stress and Grain Alignment in Diamond Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9619520

Award Number: 9619520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346206             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian W. Sheldon Brian_Sheldon@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Rankin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara L. Walden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1774,9161,9232,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9619520  Sheldon    One problem with CVD deposition of diamond on many 
              substrates is that the intrinsic stresses in the diamond  film are larger than
              the stresses caused by the  film/substrate thermal expansion mismatch, which
              causes the  diamond film to spall off or the substrate to bow.  Post- 
              deposition annealing does not remove these intrinsic  stresses.  Recent work by
              the PI's group  has determined  that an intermediate annealing step, after
              significant grain  impingement, but before a dense film was formed, can 
              minimize intrinsic stress in the diamond film, and reduce  the spallation.  The
              intermediate annealing step alters the  film microstructure in such a way to
              reduce stress evolution  during subsequent diamond film growth.  Preliminary
              electron  microscopy studies (ex situ SEM and in situ TEM hot-stage 
              experiments) indicate that contacting diamond grains rotate  during annealing. 
              A reasonable explanation for the observed  stress reduction is that grain
              rotation results in better  crystallographic alignment between adjacent grains.
               Subsequent growth on top of these grains can then form more  stable grain
              boundary configurations that are less  susceptible to the relaxation mechanisms
              that can induce  intrinsic tensile stress.  The proposed research would study 
              the fundamentals of this phenomenon in order to optimize and  control stress
              levels in diamond and other thin films.  The  research will be performed by a
              Focused Research Group  consisting of the PI (CVD/thin films), and 2 co-PIs (a 
              transmission electron microscopist/crystallographer and a  physicist/Raman
              spectroscopist).  %%%  One problem with CVD deposition of diamond on many 
              substrates is that the intrinsic stresses in the diamond  film are larger than
              the stresses caused by the  film/substrate thermal expansion mismatch, which
              causes the  diamond film to spall off or the substrate to bow.  Post- 
              deposition annealing does not remove these intrinsic  stresses.  Recent work by
              the PI's group  has determined  that an  intermediate annealing step, after
              significant grain  impingement, but before a dense film was formed, can 
              minimize intrinsic stress in the diamond film, and reduce  the spallation.  The
              proposed research would study the  fundamentals of this phenomenon in order to
              optimize and  control stress levels in diamond and other thin films.  The 
              research will be performed by a Focused Research Group  consisting of the PI
              (CVD/thin films), and 2 co-PIs (a  transmission electron
              microscopist/crystallographer and a  physicist/Raman spectroscopist).  ***
