Title       : A New Generic Indexing Technology for Digital Library Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a9619915

Award Number: 9619915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273538             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Freeston freeston@alexandria.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terence R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There has been no significant change in the dynamic indexing methods supporting
              database systems since the invention of the B-tree over twenty-five years ago.
              And yet the whole classical approach to dynamic database indexing has long
              since become inappropriate and increasingly inadequate: we are moving rapidly
              from the conventional one-dimensional world of fixed-structure text and numbers
              to a multi-dimensional world of variable structures, objects and images, in
              space and time. This project is based on a new multi-dimensional indexing
              technology which rejects conventional benchmark criteria in favor of a natural
              principle intuitively understood by users: the more information given to guide
              a query, the faster the response - regardless of any particular instantiation
              pattern. As a result, conventional relational indexing becomes much more
              flexible, with some classes of query improving on average by an order of
              magnitude, while retaining the logarithmic storage and update characteristics
              of the B-tree. But the main feature of the technology is its applicability to a
              much wider range of data types -- from nested relations to logic clauses, and
              from spatial objects to pictorial images. Two specific areas show particular
              promise: the efficient indexing of large rule bases, and substantially improved
              performance of very large and mission-critical GIS (geographic information
              systems) applications. Digital libraries will be used as an initial focus for
              enhanced support and as testbeds for comparative performance evaluation.
