Title       : Minneapolis Public Schools Systemic Change in Science Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9619341

Award Number: 9619341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia K. Freitag                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5034214            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Johnson MPSSUP@MPLS.K12.MN.US  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Hutchinson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Craig Vana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alice M. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Hoben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan K. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Rudnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Goren  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Minneapolis Public Sch
	      
	      Minneapolis, MN  55413    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619341  Hutchinson    This 5-year Local Systemic Change project in Minneapolis
              proposes  to reach approximately 1600 grades K-8 teachers in 62 elementary  and
              8 middle schools.  All teachers will receive a minimum of 100  hours of
              professional development in science and 300 leadership  teachers will be
              involved in 240 or more.  The professional  development is expected to provide
              all Minneapolis teachers with  the science content knowledge and instructional
              skills they will  need to implement the district's new inquiry- and
              standards-based  science curriculum for grades K-8.  Principals and school 
              administrators from the district's elementary and middle schools  will
              undertake professional development to enhance their leadership  skills in the
              alignment of science curriculum, instruction and  assessment in their schools. 
                An important goal of all the proposed project activities is to  change the
              belief systems that have perpetuated the public  perception that science is not
              for all children.  A coalition of  science professionals has been formed that
              includes Minneapolis  teacher leaders and district administrators, higher
              education  faculty, informal science educators, and representatives of local 
              corporations and community organizations.  A substantial effort is  underway in
              Minneapolis to recruit teachers who represent the  diverse groups represented
              in the schools' student population,  which is now 63 percent students of color.
               Approximately 25  percent of the new teachers hired in the last five years are
              from  groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.  One  component of
              the Minneapolis Local Systemic Change project will be  to develop stronger
              linkages between the Minneapolis Public Schools  science program leadership and
              the state's higher education  institutions that train the majority of future
              Minneapolis  teachers, with the goal of moving preservice teacher training in 
              science closer to the MPS standards for science curriculum,  instruction and
              assessment.  The serv ices of the district's two  science centers that have
              traditionally provided hands-on science  instructional materials to elementary
              school teachers will be  expanded to include materials distribution to middle
              school  teachers and science professional development coordination for the 
              district.  Principals and science leadership teachers at the school  sites will
              determine the scope of services offered by the centers  as part of a "buy-in"
              plan to be implemented over the five-year  term of the project.  Teachers at
              8-10 "model schools" will  experiment with various approaches to aligning the
              science  curriculum with best practices in instruction and assessment.    The
              request is for $5,034,214 with cost share estimated as  $3,454,449.
