Title       : Summer Research Participation Program for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9619868

Award Number: 9619868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William R. Gordon                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur M. Michalek arthur.michalek@roswellpark.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin A. Mirand  (Principal Investigator former)
              Craig R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roswell Pk Cancer Inst
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  142630001    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9125,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The NSF-REU program at the Roswell Park site presents upper-division science
              majors pre-graduate-school summer experiences.  Participants are selected from
              applicants across the United States with an emphasis on the admission of
              underrepresented minority candidates and women.  Selected graduate faculty
              members of the Roswell Park Division of the State University of New York at
              Buffalo serve as major advisors for the fifteen students admitted to the
              program.  The scientific field that NSF REU participants enter is in the
              general area of molecular and cellular biology.  Student efforts will be
              full-time in scope and offer a pre-graduate research experience in the
              lifestyle of a graduate student in the basic sciences.  This is a key factor in
              a student's decision-making process before choosing a field of study and
              formally applying to graduate programs.  The culmination of a 10-week
              laboratory experience is the student oral presentations in a Mini-Science
              Conference and poster session.  Other experiences scheduled during the summer
              include attendance at the NSF distinguished seminar series, a career counseling
              sessions, and weekend cultural and social activities.  Evaluation data
              demonstrate that such programs are highly effective in encouraging students to
              pursue scientific careers.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
