Title       : Engineering Analysis of Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a9619652

Award Number: 9619652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Smith Bob_Smith@isr.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evan M. Relkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Hiiemae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gustav A. Engbretson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven C. Chamberlain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619652  Smith    ABSTRACT      The purpose of this proposal is to strengthen
              and solidify the program in undergraduate research in the Department of
              Bioengineering and Neuroscience (BEN) of the Syracuse University College of
              Engineering and Computer Science.  A group of ten students will be invited to
              participate in ongoing research at BEN each summer for five years.  Research
              will involve an engineering analysis of function and structure in living
              systems, and in particular two main areas: sensory processing and
              skeletomuscular biomechanics.  The program will be housed in the Institute for
              Sensory Research (ISR), a world class research institute devoted to studies of
              the sensory systems of vision, hearing and touch.  Work in sensory processing
              will be carried out in the research laboratories of ISR, while that in
              biomechanics will occur at the nearby Laboratory for Undergraduate Biomechanics
              at Syracuse University, and the Orthopedics Laboratory of the SUNY Health
              Science Center.  Particular projects will involve both animal and human systems
              and such areas as 1. The electrical anatomy of the neural plexus in the
              horseshoe crab eye; 2. Information processing in the vertebrate retina; 3.
              Fundamentals of human stereoscopic vision; 4. Dynamic responses of auditory
              nerve fibers; 5. Acquisition and analysis of physiological responses of the
              human auditory periphery; 6. Mechanical properties of cervical spine tissues;
              7. Replacement for the interosseous membrane of the human forearm; 8. Calcium
              flux changes in bone exposed to low frequency electromagnetic fields; and 9.
              The design and development of a swallow monitor.  Students will compare
              analytical approaches and instrumentation needs in the various areas and seek
              commonalities and differences in the variety of methods of engineering analysis
              of living systems.  They will also participate in an ethics symposium covering
              such areas as use of animals and humans in scientific experiments, the ethics
              of science, and the challenge of diversity in the  engineering community.  In
              this way, it is hoped to help in the development of bioengineers skilled in
              both technical areas and the ability to build a better world  ***.
