Title       : PLAN-IT EARTH (Paring Learners and Nature with Innovative Technology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9619009

Award Number: 9619009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $533484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marylin Lisowski cfmfl@eiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Illinois Univ
	      600 Lincoln Avenue
	      Charleston, IL  619203099    217/581-2921

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619009  Lisowski    PLAN-IT EARTH is a partnership between teachers (grades
              9-12), and  scientists from the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, 
              Science Coordinators from the Illinois State Board of Education and  the
              Illinois Regional Offices of Education, science educators from  the
              Environmental Education Association of Illinois and the  Illinois Environmental
              Education Advocacy Consortium.    The design of this project facilitates the
              development and  strengthening of teachers'/students' background knowledge of
              basic  science concepts and enhances inquiry pedagogy through  environmental
              field-based learning experiences.  The teacher  enhancement sessions will
              provide experiences that will highlight  ecological concepts, processes and
              related teaching strategies.   Classroom and field instruction will focus on
              science concepts and  processes associated with prairie, wetland, stream, agro,
              urban and  forest ecosystems.    Through this program, established teacher
              leaders will coordinate  and implement a series of field-based environmental
              monitoring  projects and classroom activities on these six ecosystems.  The 
              Monitoring of projects is aligned with the efforts of the Illinois  Department
              of Natural Resources' Critical Trends Assessment Project  (CTAP).  Teachers and
              students alike, will be involved in  contributing to a systematic base of
              empirical information.   Validated indicator protocols will allow for data
              analyses that  identify and describe the contents and conditions of Illinois' 
              forest, streams, prairies, agro, wetlands, and urban systems.    The intensive
              residential summer program, offered at three regional  sites (North, Central,
              Southern Illinois University), will engage  30 participants per site annually. 
              Each will focus on two Illinois  ecosystems per year.  Participants will focus
              on science concepts,  instructional strategies, technological applications, and
              research  techniques.  Eight follow-up sessions will engage participants at 
              each of the regional sites mo nthly for all 90 participants.   Follow-up
              sessions will focus on continued enhancement of science  content and science
              instruction, mentoring strategies, technology  usage and dissemination
              strategies.  Data submission will occur on  an established basis from all
              estimated 6,000 participating  students.    Maintenance of a network system for
              sharing will occur through a  home page on world wide web, newsletters
              specifically for the  project and special sessions at the anual state science 
              conventions.
