Title       : EPWG: Sisters in Science: Intergenerational Partnerships in Science, Engineering
               and Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9619021

Award Number: 9619021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $842432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penny L. Hammrich phammric@thunder.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Henkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9619021  Hammrich   The proposed multi-faceted initiative is designed to
              increase science/math literacy of fourth and fifth grade girls, contribute to
              the professional growth of current and future teachers, and increase the
              involvement of volunteers and families in the education of Philadelphia's
              children.  Building linkages among schools, parents, community members, and
              SEM-related organizations is an underlying strategy that ultimately will impact
              on the long term sustainability of this project.  By enhancing the capacity of
              current and future teachers, families, and volunteers, to promote science and
              math literacy among girls, the project will supplement other systemic
              initiatives recently begun by Temple University and the Philadelphia School
              District.  "Sisters in Science" builds upon a successful multi-generational
              model project funded by National Science Foundation.  The overall goal of the
              proposed project is to increase interest and literacy in science and
              mathematics among grade school African American, Asian, and Hispanic girls in
              six Philadelphia urban schools.  Specific objectives include increasing girls'
              interest in science and mathematics and enhancing their attitudes toward
              science and mathematics.   The project involves the girls, their families, and
              their teachers in the targeted schools, and undergraduate elementary education
              students.  Retirees and minority women currently employed in SEM fields will
              serve as volunteers.   Boys will be involved in the classroom component of the
              project.  The project is to provide a two-year intervention at a crucial
              juncture in the formation of girls' attitudes toward and achievement in science
              and mathematics.  In Year 1, the program involves students, parents, and
              teachers in two 4th grade classes in each of the six elementary schools.  In
              Year 2, these students (now 5th graders) continue to engage in program
              activities, while a new group of 4th graders enters the program.  The same
              process occurs in Year 3.  It is anticipated that this th ird 4th grade group
              will continue the program after the grant period has ended.  The project has
              five components:  (1) Teacher training.  Teachers will participate in a
              one-week intensive professional development program and monthly curriculum
              planning meetings that familiarize them with gender equity issues and teaching
              strategies that facilitate girls' learning of science and math.  (2) The
              classroom activities take place once a week for one hour in each of the
              designated classrooms.  The PI, undergraduate elementary education students,
              and volunteers will work with classroom teachers to implement activities that
              are gender-sensitive and focused on the urban environment.  (3) The
              after-school program for the fourth grade girls is weekly at each of the
              schools and involves girls in environmental service learning projects.  The
              after-school program for the fifth grade girls meets twice monthly on Saturdays
              at each school.  (4) A two-week summer program focuses on "city rivers."  (5)
              Family education.  Special family events will be held on a quarterly basis and
              parents will be sent "Tip Sheets" and home activity ideas on a regular basis.
