Title       : STIMULATE: Modeling and Automatic Labeling of Hidden Word- Level Events in
               Spontaneous Speech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a9619921

Award Number: 9619921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $769968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth E. Shriberg ees@speech.sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas Stolcke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Most  current  NLP  techniques expect input  resembling  read  or  constrained 
              speech.  When  applied to spontaneous  speech,  such  techniques encounter two
              serious difficulties. First, spontaneous  speech  contains  surface phenomena
              relating to non-propositional  aspects of the input, such as disfluencies and
              discourse markers.  Second, spontaneous speech lacks overt punctuation for
              segmenting  the  input  into  meaningful  units.   For  effective  NLP,  such 
              phenomena  should be overtly marked in the input; current  speech  recognizers,
              however, produce only a raw sequence of words.   The  goal  of this project is
              to augment speech recognition models  to  output  word  sequences  annotated
              for  these  phenomena,  termed  "Hidden  Word-Level Events" (HWEs). New models
              are  developed  to  allow   recognition  of  HWEs  to  occur  in  tandem  with 
               word  recognition.   HWE  recognition is  based  on  a  combination  of 
              acoustic  and language models, extending the standard  components  found  in 
              current systems.  The new models also capture prosodic  characteristics  of 
              HWEs,  including  intonation  and   duration  patterns.  The prosodic
              information is combined with  statistical  language  models describing the
              distribution of HWEs in  relation  to  lexical  and  syntactic units. Results 
              should  significantly  enhance  our ability to process spontaneous speech
              automatically;  the  research  will  also  further  our  basic  understanding 
              of  spontaneous speech.
