Title       : Numerical Methods for large Eigenvalue Problems: Parallizable Fast Algorithms
               and Inner-Outer iterations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9619452

Award Number: 9619452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongyuan Zha zha@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research project consists of two major parts:  parallelizable fast
              algorithms for large dense eigenproblems  and inexact/inner-outer iteration
              methods for large sparse  eigenproblems.    Techniques of rational
              transformation and matrix-squaring  for designing parallelizable fast
              algorithms for large dense  eigenproblems have been developed which only use
              matrix-  matrix multiplications and  QR decompositions as building  blocks. Now
              a general theory is to be established to  encompass the class of algorithms 
              developed and to also  provide guidance to the derivation of  new algorithms. 
              Error analysis, robust deflation techniques and stopping  criteria which are
              extremely important for the practical  implementation of the algorithms will be
              fully investigated.  This part of the research will result in deeper 
              understanding of the theory of a new class of generalized  eigensolvers and
              deliver a class of algorithms that are  truly of high parallel efficiency and
              robustness.    Efficient algorithms for eigenproblems of partial  differential
              equations is the major topic of the second part  of this research. Inner-outer
              iteration type of algorithms  will be developed for the subspace iteration and
              Lanczos  algorithms and the insight obtained will be applied to the  PDE case.
              It is demonstrated that different iterative  processes behave quite differently
              with respect to the  distribution of the accuracy of each inner iteration, and 
              each iterative process needs a careful analysis in order to  find the
              distribution strategy that will give the minimum  number of total inner
              iteration steps. Two algorithms, the  variable-accuracy inner-outer iteration
              method and the  successive inner-outer iteration method will be further 
              analyzed and their convergence behavior explained. A PDE  eigenproblem will be
              solved by putting an iterative process  such as the Lanczos method in a Hilbert
              space setting. At  each Lanczos  iteration step, the matrix-vector 
              multiplication corresponds to solving a boundary value   problem for the
              differential operator, and different  discretizations will be used to enhance
              efficiency.  The  research will result in deeper understanding and provide 
              sound theoretical results of various iterative processes for  solving large
              sparse eigenproblems in the setting of inexact  matrix-vector multiplication.
              It will also give more  efficient algorithms for solving  large sparse
              eigenproblems  that arise in many science and engineering areas.
