Title       : Development of an REU Site for Tropical Limnology Associated With the
               International Decade of East African Lakes (IDEAL) Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9619458

Award Number: 9619458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $788391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew S. Cohen acohen@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9619458  Cohen, Andrew S.   University of Arizona  Title:
              Development of an REU Site for Tropical Limnology Associated  With the
              International Decade of the Eastern African Lakes (IDEAL)  Program    This
              award supports the development of an REU Site summer program  in tropical lake
              studies for American undergraduate students.  Ten  to twelve students will
              spend six weeks per year learning the  fundamentals of physicochemical,
              biological and geological  processes in tropical lakes through intensive
              training and  independent research projects.  The Program will be located in 
              Kigoma, Tanzania, on the shores of Lake Tanganyika, Africa, a  world-class
              natural laboratory for investigating a wide variety of  scientifically
              significant questions about how tropical lakes work.   This site takes
              advantage of the faculty's record of research on  the lake and familiarity with
              local and regional logistics.   Additionally the program will reap unique
              benefits from a planned  association with a simultaneous and identical program
              for African  undergraduates, to be funded separately by the United Nations 
              Global Environmental Facility (GEF) program for Lake Tanganyika.   The program
              will also take advantage of facilities and capital  equipment on site from the
              GEF program and the Tanzania Fisheries  Research Institute, Kigoma Station. 
              The program faculty  collectively span a board range of research expertise in
              aquatic  biology, physical and chemical limnology, climatology and 
              geolimnology.  All are currently engaged in active research  programs on the
              lake and will offer students the opportunity to  become involved in research on
              scientifically significant  questions.  This program aims to become a central
              focus activity  for highly motivated students from around the country who are 
              planning a research career in tropical limnology and  paleoclimatology.  More
              broadly, it is intended to stimulate  interest in the importance of tropical
              lake studies in  understanding global change processes and  as an early-warning
              study  area for understanding freshwater ecologic changes that have not  yet
              occurred in the U.S.  This effort is coordinated through the  International
              Decade for the East African Lakes (IDEAL).
