Title       : Two Dimensional Polymerizations in Supramolecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9619887

Award Number: 9619887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Armstrong nra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9619887  O'Brien  Several methods to polymerize supramolecular assemblies have 
              been introduced in recent years.  These new and evolving  chemistries open
              opportunities to prepare novel biomolecular  materials with particular
              properties of interest to both  biological and material sciences.  Success in
              the design and  reproducible preparation of new materials requires a clear 
              understanding of the polymerization processes used to modify  the assemblies. 
              %%%  The objective of this proposal is to advance our  understanding of
              polymerizations in organized media in a  manner that permits the utilization of
              the emerging  information to control the properties of polymerized 
              supramolecular materials and to prepare novel macromolecular  architectures. 
              The reasonably well-developed understanding  of linear polymerizations in
              bilayers is complemented by the  emerging picture of crosslinking
              polymerizations in  bilayers.  Polymerization of monomeric lipids in an
              assembly  proceeds in a linear or crosslinking manner depending on the  number
              of polymerizable groups per monomeric lipid.  Lipids  that contain a single
              reactive moiety in either of the  hydrophobic tails or associated with the
              hydrophilic head  group yield linear polymers.  Polymerization of lipids with 
              reactive groups in each hydrophobic tail yields crosslinked  polymers.  In
              contrast the polymerization of lipids that  have different reactive groups
              (bifunctional amphiphiles) in  the same hydrophobic tail does not necessarily
              yield  crosslinked polymers, because if the groups are  insufficiently
              separated the correlation of the  polymerization paths could produce ladder
              polymers rather  than crosslinked polymers.  The preferred reaction path will 
              depend on several factors including the nature of the spacer  group, the extent
              of conformational and diffusional freedom  within the molecular assembly, and
              the reactivity of the  polymerizable groups.  In order to obtain a clearer 
              understanding of the effect of these factors on the  preferred p olymerization
              process in organized media this  research will examine each in turn with a
              family of newly  designed bifunctional amphiphiles.  The findings from these 
              studies will be used to select bifunctional monomers for the  preparation of
              ladder-like copolymers composed of dissimilar  polymers, e.g. poly(diene) and
              poly(acrylate).  The  objective is to utilize our understanding of the 
              polymerization process in organized media to create novel  soluble copolymers
              that are not readily available through  solution polymerizations.  In addition
              these polymerization  studies will aid in the design of bifunctional fatty
              acids  for the crosslinking polymerization of monolayers or  multilayers in a
              manner that does not modify the hydrophilic  head group of the amphiphile. 
              Finally the research will  utilize the understanding of crosslinking processes
              in  organized assemblies to prepare novel phthalocyanines for  the
              stabilization of discotic liquid crystals.  ***
