Title       : RNA Synthesis on Minerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9619149

Award Number: 9619149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282300             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Ferris ferrij@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor James P.   Ferris
              studies the synthesis of ribonucleic acids on minerals. This work,   carried
              out in the Department of Chemistry at Rensselaer Polytechnic   Institute,
              focuses on clay mineral-mediated formation of phosphodiester   linkages between
              ribonucleotides.  Suites of RNA oligomers containing   random sequences of
              thirty to fifty bases with a high proportion of   3',5'-phosphodiester linkages
              are produced via RNA primer elongation on   montmorillonite clay.  These
              oligomers are tested for catalytic activity   in order to provide a laboratory
              demonstration of the transition from   prebiotic chemistry to catalytic
              activity as postulated by the RNA world   scenario for the origins of life. 
              Clay-catalyzed synthesis of homochiral   RNAs from racemic nucleotides is also
              explored, helping to shed light on   the origins of chirality.  Plausible
              activating groups for the synthesis   of RNA on mineral surfaces are chosen to
              represent those likely to have   been prevalent under primitive earth
              conditions, and inhibitor studies   are carried out in order to help direct the
              search for other minerals   with comparable or superior catalytic capabilities.
               Many unanswered questions remain about the origins of life, beginning at   the
              very basic chemical level of how the first catalysts (materials which  
              facilitate the reactions of other molecules) evolved.  Professor Ferris  
              examines the role of clay minerals in catalyzing the formation of   molecules
              representing the possible precursors to life, focusing on the   synthesis of
              ribonucleic acids (RNA) which in turn may function as   catalysts for the
              synthesis of still more complex molecules.  These   studies also address the
              fundamental question of how life's molecules   acquired the unique structural
              feature of chirality, wherein many   biologically active molecules display a
              three-dimensional structure   distinct from that of their mirror image (just as
              a right hand differs   from a left hand).                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
