Title       : RUI: Pulsars and the Interstellar Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9619493

Award Number: 9619493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Stinebring Dan.Stinebring@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1216,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Stinebring    Turbulence in the interstellar medium provides the
              support needed to  keep the gas from collapsing into a pancake.  Evidence from
              pulsar  observations indicates that a turbulent cascade of energy may exist 
              over 12 orders of magnitude in scale size from 10 to the eighth (one  hundred
              million) cm to 100 parsec. This turbulent cascade is not well  understood,
              although high mass stars probably account for much of the  energy input to the
              cascade through stellar winds, ionization, and  supernova explosions.  In
              particular, the dissipation of turbulent  energy into heat at some scale size
              less than 10 to the tenth (ten  billion) cm must occur, but the details of the
              mechanism and the  physical conditions under which this happens are sketchy.   
              The research to be carried out is aimed at determining the strength of  the
              turbulent cascade at a size scale around 10 to the tenth cm and  smaller and to
              learn more about the dissipation mechanism.    The main technique employed will
              be the observational study of radio  pulsar scintillation in the weak
              scattering regime.  This is an  opportune time to embark on such a study since
              both the upgraded  Arecibo, Puerto Rico telescope and the soon-to-be-completed
              Green Bank  Telescope will provide outstanding opportunities for pulsar 
              observations above 1 GHz.  This is the frequency range in which weak 
              scattering phenomena can be studied effectively.    The phenomenon of
              image-splitting, in which the pulsar image separates  into two or more distinct
              pieces due to scattering in the transition  regime between strong and weak
              scattering, will also be explored. The  goals are the same: to better elucidate
              the strength of the electron  inhomogeneity spectrum in the Galaxy and to seek
              evidence for a  dissipation scale.    High time resolution studies of bright
              pulsars will also be undertaken  using a well-known VLBI recording system, the
              S2 system, to obtain  baseband sampled data.  These observations, which can be
              conducted at  several observat ories (and observing frequencies)
              simultaneously, will  allow high-precision monitoring of pulsar dispersion
              measures.  This  provides additional information about the electron
              inhomogeneities in  the Galaxy. As a secondary effort, the baseband sampled
              data will also  be analyzed to study brief and intense radio emission from
              pulsars in  order to better understand the emission physics.    Undergraduate
              students from Oberlin College will be centrally involved  in all of these
              projects and will participate in observations,  analysis, and the presentation
              of the results.
