Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Dating Quaternary Deposits and Soils with TIMS U-Series
               on Pedogenic Carbonate and Silica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9810209

Award Number: 9810209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Ludwig kludwig@bgc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berkeley Geochronology Cen
	      2455 Ridge Road
	      Berkeley, CA  947091211    510/644-9200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810209  Ludwig    Funds are requested to further develop and apply TIMS
              (Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometry) U-series dating to pedogenic carbonate
              and silica.  The research will seek to understand the potential and limitations
              of U-series dates on chemically/mineralogically-characterized, micro-sampled
              clast rinds by detailed work in two climatically and lithologically and
              distinct areas.  Two localities will be studied, using techniques that build on
              the results of recent, independent studies by the PI's.  Kyle Canyon (Nevada)
              provides a sequence of carbonate-clast alluvial deposits and morphologic
              surfaces ranging from Holocene to >780 ka, whereas the Wind River Basin
              (Wyoming) provides a sequence of granitic-clast dominated alluvial deposits
              from Holocene to early Pleistocene age.  In both localities, the Quaternary
              geology and pedology have been well studied by one or more of the investigators
              of this proposal.    This is a collaborative proposal among 3 institutions: Ken
              Ludwig and Warren Sharp at the Berkeley Geochronology Center will be
              responsible for sampling and uranium-series analysis, using the new TIMS
              facility and clean lab at BGC; Ron Amundson at U.C. Berkeley and Oliver
              Chadwick at U.C. Santa Barbara will provide field and laboratory expertise in
              Quaternary geology and pedology, as well as familiarity with the study
              localities.  All of the named investigators will participate in the chemical
              and microscopic characterization of the pedogenic carbonate and silica, and
              Amundson will be responsible for the stable-isotopic work and interpretation.  
               The single-sample/single-date approach developed by Ludwig and J.B. Paces for
              a recent study at Crater Flat, Nevada, in which sub-millimeter laminae of
              individual carbonate/silica rinds are micro-sampled to avoid detrital
              contamination, will be applied to carefully-characterized clast rinds of the
              deposits in both localities.  The limitations of the approach will be explored,
              including the reliability of the detrital 230Th corrections , the textrual and
              geochemical indicators of open systems, and the practicality of extending the
              method into the Early Pleistocene using 234U/238U.  Analyses of Holocene
              clast-rinds.  Knowledge of this time-lag (and its variability in different
              climatic and lithologic contexts) will be essential in using U-series dates of
              innermost clast-rinds to date the Quaternary deposits themselves.  Some
              development of micro-sampling techniques will be required to explore the limits
              of sample size and spatial resolution, but this can be done with relatively
              modest equipment.  The laboratory challenges involve mainly those of
              small-sample 230Th analyses, in which one of the PI's has extensive experience.
                 The results of the dating studies will be applied to understanding the
              history and timing of erosion and sedimentation in Kyle Canyon, and of glacial
              events in the Wind River Basin.  A limited number of stable-isotope analyses
              will be used to evaluate the usefulness of the rinds as a paleoclimate record
              as well as to check for open-system histories of the mid-and early Pleistocene
              rinds.
