Title       : Dissertation Research: Inka Imperial Expansion into Northwest Argentina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9810839

Award Number: 9810839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence N. D'Altroy tnd1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Terence D'Altroy, Mr. Clarence Gifford will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Continuing his previous research in the
              region, he will investigate ten Inka-period sites in the Calchaqui Valley,
              located in the province of Salta, northwest Argentina. The Inka empire, the
              largest in the pre-Columbian New World, was centered at Cuzco in the highlands
              of Peru and extended from Ecuador in the North, through Peru, Bolivia and into
              northwestern Argentina. With only a simple technology and lack of wheeled
              vehicles the Inka were able to weld a myriad of distinct ethnic groups into a
              larger functioning entity. Archaeologists wish to understand the mechanisms
              through which they achieved this feat. Based on both ethnohistoric and
              archaeological evidence, it appears that a variety of strategies were employed.
              Some cases involved direct conquest and the imposition of a new set of rulers
              and administration. In others, the local leadership was coopted and allowed to
              remain in power. In some areas fortifications and desecrate Inka enclaves were
              constructed while in other regions, favors and the manipulation of ritual and
              religious symbolism and were used to achieve the desired end. The Calchaqui
              Valley marks the approximate Southern limit of the Inka empire and thus
              provides a particularly relevant venue to study this process. Preliminary data
              indicate that the situation was complex. Forts and other Inca structures are
              present, yet at the same time a significant amount of local culture was
              preserved and many sites indicate a blend of local and Inca influence. Through
              the surface mapping and excavation of a series of sites, Mr. Gifford will
              examine local-Inka relationships. The two groups had distinct architectural
              styles and used different types of pottery. Inka ceramics have been studied in
              detail in other regions and it is known what types of vessels served religious
              and other symbolic as opposed to utilitarian purposes. This allows many
              activities conducted at sites to be determined.  This research is important
              because it sheds new light on mechanisms of political and social organization
              in technological simple societies. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and contribute to training a promising young scientist.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
