Title       : Dissertation Research: Study of an Ancient Maya Bajo Community in Northwestern
               Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9810002

Award Number: 9810002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Patrick Culbert tpc@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Patrick Culbert MS Julie Kunen will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. Building on one season of preliminary fieldwork, she
              will continue survey and excavation at the archaeological site of La Milpa.
              Located in northwestern Belize this large lowland Mayan settlement contains a
              range of structures which vary in size from small household size mounds to
              major monumental structures. Most interesting perhaps is the presence of a
              system of reservoirs and drainages that regulated the storage and release of
              water to different areas of the site. This suggests a high degree of
              centralized water management and control. Also associated with the site are
              low-lying swampy areas known as `bajos.` These features have been the focus of
              much speculation because many researchers believe that these areas were
              significantly altered by purposeful human modification and served as highly
              productive field systems. They believe that bajo agriculture allowed Mayan
              peoples to achieve population densities unusual in lowland tropical settings. 
              MS Kunen will conduct extensive excavation in one bajo to search for cultural
              modifications. She will prepare a detailed vegetation map since evidence
              indicates that fine grained variation in vegetation patterns provides
              indications of human manipulation of soil. During her preliminary work MS Kunen
              located a number of sites located near the edge of the bajo and she will survey
              and excavate them. She wants to understand the social organization of the
              prehistoric La Milpa inhabitants and wishes to test the idea that variation in
              household size and status is determined by their relative placement on the
              landscape in relation to agricultural resources. Because her work is part of a
              larger project, she will be able to compare the settlements she excavates to
              those located in non-bajo areas.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will shed light on how the prehistoric Maya with a relatively
              simple technology were able to achieve high population densities in a resource
              poor environment. It may provide new insight into the principles of Mayan
              social organization and will assist in training a promising young scientist.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
