Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: An Investigation of the Performance of
               Superplasticizers for Concrete Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9810979

Award Number: 9810979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Syed Qutubuddin sxq@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9810979
Qutubuddin

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by a US team including Professor Syed Qutubuddin of Case Western
              Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio and Dr. Samy M. Shendy, Senior Research
              Scientist at Master Builders in Cleveland, Ohio, and an Egyptian team including
              Dr. Magdy M.H. Ayoub, of the National Research Center in Cairo, Egypt and
              Professor Abdelgawad M. Rabie, Dean of the faculty of Science at Ain Shams
              University in Cairo, Egypt.  The research objective is to understand the
              effects of chemical structure and molecular weight of superplasticizers
              (polymers) on adsorption behavior, dispersability and dispersability retention
              of cement particles.  The goal is to understand the mechanism of
              superplasticizer adsorption on cement surfaces.  The factors that cause
              undesirable air entrainment with some superplasticizers will also be explored. 
              The research will lead to the development of advanced superplasticizers with
              higher performance and lower cost. 

Scope:  This award is for collaboration
              between two experienced groups of scientists in the US and Egypt, to study the
              chemistry of cement additives (polymers) that can increase its strength while
              making it more fluid for easier workability.  Dr. Qutubuddin is an expert in
              colloidal and interfacial phenomena, particularly surfactant and polymer
              systems.  Dr. Ayoub is working in the areas of coating and dispersions.  Dr.
              Shendy will represent the industrial experience in this work, being a scientist
              at one of the leading organizations in construction materials.  Dr. Rabie is an
              expert in polymer chemistry, and will be involved in the characterization and
              synthesis of superplasticizers.  The results of their collaboration would be
              useful for the construction industry in Egypt and the United States.  This
              proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign collaboration in
              areas that benefit both sides.   This project is being supported under the
              US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
              in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities. 

