Title       : The Politics of Intellectual Identity in American Social Science, 1945-1985
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9810635

Award Number: 9810635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Solovey solovey@asuvm.inre.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research project examines the ways in which politics, broadly defined,
              shaped the ongoing debate about `intellectual identity` in American social
              science from 1945 to 1985.  This debate has centered on the question of whether
              the social sciences are part of a unified scientific enterprise, or whether
              there are fundamental differences between them and the natural sciences.  This
              issue has been intimately linked to other important matters concerning the
              status and influence of the social sciences within the broader society.  This
              study will show that the problem of intellectual identity obtained heightened
              national significance in the U.S. during the post-WWII period.  In examining
              the relationship between national politics and the social sciences, this study
              will focus on  federal science policy, namely the role of the National Science
              Foundation in funding social science research.  The NSF serves as a means to
              illuminate certain fundamental questions about the post-war development of
              social sciences in the United States.  Drawing on insights contained in recent
              studies about the political shaping of American Science, this study explores
              some of the ways in which national politics shaped the debate about what
              counted as social science in the first place, about whether social science
              inquiry was of a piece with investigations in the natural sciences, and about
              whether the social and natural sciences were all cut from the same cloth.  Such
              questions were central to the development of federal science policy for the
              social sciences over the decades; they were thus important in decisions about
              what areas of the social sciences were eligible for funding; and they served as
              a common area of concern for the political and academic communities.  From a
              long-term perspective, the prominence of such questions at NSF makes this
              agency an imporant part of the much larger story about the intellectual
              identity of the social sciences.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
