Title       : Incorporating Social Arrangements into Economic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9810693

Award Number: 9810693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339735             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Mailath gmailath@econ.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Postlewaite  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Andrew Postlewaite  This grant funds the continuation of the PIs' research on
              economic models that incorporate social arrangements among agents. This work is
              based on the idea that in most societies, there are goods and decisions that
              are determined through standard markets and, in addition, there are some that
              are not.  People group themselves together in many ways for productive and
              social activities. In general, people care (often deeply) about which groups
              (firms, partnerships) they are members of. Positions at prestigious law firms,
              investment banking companies, on the board of trustees for Ivy League
              universities or the Metropolitan Museum of Art are highly sought. At first
              pass, there appear to be many people with roughly similar qualifications, some
              who obtain the positions and some who do not. Moreover, many of the people who
              do not obtain the position appear to be willing to pay substantially to obtain
              such a position. Markets don't seem to mediate well the process by which these
              groups form and evolve. If every person to whom a law firm makes an offer is
              ecstatic about receiving it, why doesn't the law firm lower the wage until the
              marginal person is indifferent to receiving the offer or not? Why is it that
              memberships to boards of trustees and clubs are not openly bought and sold in a
              normal market manner if they are so desired? A major source of the nontrivial
              interrelationship between economic market behavior and social arrangements is
              due to the strict preferences that people have over these social arrangements,
              and the resulting incentives that people have to take actions to affect their
              ultimate position. For example, do workers or firms have an incentive before
              hiring takes place to make excessive investments in order to improve their
              hiring prospects? We propose to investigate why it is that markets may not
              efficiently mediate group formation, and so to understand the incentives that
              people have to affect their social arrangements.  The multiplicity of
              equilibria stemming from different social arrangements is a valuable tool in
              understanding differences in economic behavior and performance across
              economies. It is important to understand why different societies are governed
              by different social arrangements. The second part of the proposal focuses on
              two questions. The first is: How do different social organizations arise? We
              propose to study models in which the social arrangements within a community
              change in response to experience. In particular, we will study how agents can
              develop `authority` in environments in which it is efficient for people to take
              a common action. The second question concerns how the economic nature of the
              environment affects the set of equilibrium social arrangements. A modeling
              approach is described that, taking as given an intrinsic concern for status,
              investigates how status can be determined. In some societies education
              determines status, birth in others, and wealth in yet others. How does the
              nature of interactions between members of a community affect the determinants
              of status?                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
