Title       : Understanding the Changing Roles of Scientists and Scientific Information in
               Natural Resource Decision Making: A Pilot Study with the LTER Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1998    
File        : a9810029

Award Number: 9810029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75164              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Shindler shindleb@ccmail.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter List  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brent S. Steel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denise H. Lach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              While most theorists and participants expect that-including ecological
              scientists and information will improve the quality of complex natural
              resource-decisions, there is little empirical research that clearly verifies
              such benefits. And, there is-increasing experiential evidence that tensions
              between the distinct institutional needs and cultural-values of decision makers
              and scientists may preclude the effective use of science in such-decisions. The
              goal of this pilot study is to determine whether it is possible to capture and
              measure-the attitudes and expectations of participants in resource decisions
              about the changing roles of-ecological science and scientists in a world of
              decentralized governance, shared power,-collaborative management, and citizen
              mistrust of experts and government resource agencies. The-pilot study is
              designed to determine whether complex issues related to the expectations,
              needs, and-uses of scientists and scientific information can be operationalized
              clearly enough to be measured-through a structured protocol that can be
              administered to a wide array of participants in natural-resource decision
              making. Data for this study will be collected primarily through in-depth
              interviews with-a wide variety of Pacific Northwest participants in natural
              resource decision making. Participant-groups will include LTER scientists,
              federal and state natural resource managers and decision-makers, as well as
              individuals in the Central Cascades who have been involved in resource-decision
              processes. Data from the qualitative interviews will be used to operationalize
              issues of-concern, particularly available roles for ecological science and
              scientists as well as the institutional-and cultural features that provide
              incentives and constraints for the effective use of science in-decision making.
              Questions for a structured survey protocol will be developed from these
              issues.-To test the protocol for reliability and validity, we will conduct a
              mail-out survey with a sample of-individuals in the Pacific Northwest who are
              involved or interested in natural resource decision-making. Data will be
              collected and managed with the potential for replications at other
              LTER-research sites as well as other research programs or projects.-If
              successful, the protocol developed and tested in this pilot effort-can be
              administered to a wide array of individuals involved in natural resource
              decision making in-order to understand the expectations and beliefs that all
              participants have about-the role of ecological science and ecological
              scientists in those processes. We will be able to better-describe how
              participants in decision processes view the nature and functions of science
              in-those processes, how participants' perceptions of the role of-science affect
              efforts to involve ecological information and scientists in
              management-processes and public outreach efforts, and how participants perceive
              different roles that scientists may play in natural resource-decision making.
              This research will also provide empirical support for issues raised by
              social-scientists about tensions between the need for scientific expertise in
              complex decision making and-democratic participation in problem solving.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
