Title       : Ethnicity and Exchange in the Northern Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9810477

Award Number: 9810477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89659              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamara L. Bray   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cristobal Landazuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Tamara Bray and Cristobal
              Landazuri will conduct one season of research in the Pimampiro district in
              northern Ecuador. The district lies at the extreme eastern end of a semi-arid
              deeply incised river valley in the northernmost highlands of Ecuador at
              approximately 1600 meters above sea level. The drainage is one of the few that
              breach the western cordillera to empty into the sea and thus it occupies an
              unusual and important geographic position. Ecuador, in common with other Andean
              countries, is characterized by three distinct physiographic zones. A dry
              Pacific coastal zone, a central mountainous region and an eastern lowland
              tropical rainforest. Because of their close proximity and the fact that each
              zone contains unique and valuable resources, archaeologists have focused on the
              political and economic strategies employed by prehistoric peoples and attempted
              to determine the extent and nature of trade and interaction across these areas.
              A series of states and empires arose in many parts of this broad region and
              scientists wish to understand the extent to which the desire and need to
              control resources from several zones played a role. It is in this context that
              Drs. Bray and Landazuri's research is important. Because of its highland
              position and its easy connection to both Pacific coast as well an Amazonian
              lowlands, Pimampiro provides an excellent venue to examine the extent and
              nature of interaction.         Using a three pronged approach the researchers
              plan to examine regional networks of exchange. Although a prehistoric state did
              not arise in Pimampiro the investigators believe that extensive tans-zonal
              interaction took place. They will conduct archaeological excavation, examine
              extensive early Spanish descriptions of the region and analyze botanical
              remains recovered from prehistoric features. On the basis of preliminary
              survey, they have decided to focus attention on the site of Shanshipampa.
              Located on an alluvial terrace of the river valley, the site's most notable
              feature is a large rectangular stone pavement 31 meters long by 6 meters wide.
              The pavement contains sculpted motifs which indicate close ties with the
              eastern lowlands. Two adjacent carved stone monuments contain images of monkeys
              and snakes suggestive of tropical lowland fauna. Through excavation of both
              agricultural surfaces and house mounds it should be possible to determine the
              crops produced (and whether they served as trade goods) and also the ethnicity
              of the inhabitants. On the basis of descriptions in ethnohistoric documents it
              is possible that lowland peoples resided in specific parts of the valley and
              the researchers wish to determine if this in fact occurred.       This research
              is important for several reasons. It will help to fill an important geographic
              gap in the archaeological record and provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will also provide insight into the large scale
              inter-regional subsistence adaptations.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
