Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Polymer Fillers and the Role of Interfacial
               Rheology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a9810529

Award Number: 9810529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Granick sgranick@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for the support of a collaborative research project
              between Dr. Steve Granick, Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at
              the University of Illinois in Urbana/Champaign, and Dr. A. Levent Demirel,
              Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Koc University in Istanbul, Turkey.  The
              two scientists plan to study the role of polymer-solid interfacial interactions
              by direct quantitative measurement of interfacial rheology, relating
              measurements on model systems (at the University of Illinois) with more
              practical measurements of systems of more immediate practical importance (at
              Koc University).  Variables of interest include polymer molecular weight,
              degree of crystallinity, and intensity of polymer-filler attraction.   Scope:
              The problems to be addressed in this research are relevant to a wide range of
              practical problems in polymer processing and polymer structure-property
              relations.  This project will enable the researchers from the US and Turkey to
              work in each other's laboratories.  It fulfils the objective of advancing
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and
              Turkey to combine complimentary talents and conduct research in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence.  The US and the Turkish collaborators have
              track records of prior successful international collaboration.  This project is
              funded jointly by the Division of International Programs, the Division of Civil
              and Mechanical Systems and the Division of Material Research.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
