Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating Ecological 
Restoration with
               Terrestrial Arthropods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9810941

Award Number: 9810941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8898               (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa Savage forests@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SAVAGE, M. and LONGCORE, T.  This doctoral dissertation research will monitor
              and compare terrestrial arthropods at three ecological restoration sites and
              nine comparison sites that represent a continuum of conditions from undisturbed
              to highly disturbed. All sites will be sampled monthly for one year using
              pitfall traps and these data added to an existing 4 year data set from the
              comparison sites. Plant diversity and structure at all sites will be measured.
              The results will be analyzed to further three important goals in restoration
              research. 1) Reference conditions will be defined for the terrestrial arthropod
              communities in coastal sage scrub, both in terms of species composition and
              general measures such as diversity and percent exotic species. 2) Community
              development on restoration sites will be investigated and related to known
              successional models. For example, the study will test whether the guild
              structure on restoration sites is similar to that found for old field sites. 3)
              Quantitative measures will be developed to evaluate the relative success of
              unreplicated restoration attempts. Data from restoration and comparison sites
              will be ordinated using multivariate techniques to determine if their
              terrestrial arthropod communities can be used to discriminate among them and
              evaluate the restoration sites relative to the comparison sites. Vegetation
              data will be used to test whether differences among restoration and comparison
              sites are explained by plant diversity or structure. The proposed project will
              contribute to knowledge about restoration ecology and insect community ecology.
              By relating successional concepts more closely to restoration attempts, the
              project can illustrate the opportunities for the use of restoration sites as
              experiments to address questions in community ecology and biogeography. Both
              restoration ecologists and environmental policymakers should find conclusions
              about the capability of restorations to support arthropod diversity of value in
              designing future restoration plans.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
