Title       : SGER: The Theory, Algorithms, and Applications of Network Flows Integrated with
               the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9810359

Award Number: 9810359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99136              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Orlin jorlin@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9810359  Orlin  This grant provides funding to develop, implement, and
              experimentally test a new neighborhood search heuristic for solving a broad
              class of partitioning  problems.  These partitioning problems are typically
              characterized by a two-phase decision process. In the first phase, a set of
              objects is partitioned into clusters; in the second phase, each cluster is
              sequenced or configured optimally. The decision problem is to partition the set
              of objects into clusters so that the sum of the costs of optimal configurations
              within clusters is minimum.  Examples of partitioning problems include: vehicle
              routing problems, multi-facility location problems, clustering problems in
              statistics, parallel machine scheduling problems, telecommunications network
              design problems, nurse scheduling, exam scheduling, and various other
              scheduling problems.  This grant will develop the cyclic exchange neighborhood
              search technique.  Neighborhood search techniques seek out improvements in a
              solution by making small changes to the solution.  In the cyclic exchange
              neighborhood approach, items may shifted between multiple clusters. Algorithmic
              approaches, analyses, test cases, and software will be developed and will be
              made freely available to other researchers via the World Wide Web.  Algorithm
              animations will be provided to help users visualize algorithms.  In addition,
              outside users will be able to submit problems for solution at the web site.  If
              successful, the results of this research will lead to more effective heuristic
              algorithms for solving several types of partitioning problems. Moreover, this
              research will provide a unified approach for solving partitioning problems that
              can be specialized to various problem types easily. Many of the subroutines for
              this generic approach can be reused. The web site will also provide  software,
              algorithm animations, and test cases that will facilitate the development of
              algorithms for partitioning problems by other researchers.  ***
