Title       : Intergration of Research and Education in the Applied and Computational
               Mathatical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9810726

Award Number: 9810726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2750186            (Estimated)
Investigator: Loyce M. Adams adams@amath.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Guttorp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Greenbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall J. LeVeque  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9177,9178,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9810726
Adams

The University of Washington VIGRE Project involves a broad
              spectrum of faculty in the departments of Applied Mathematics, Mathematics, and
              Statistics at the University of Washington. This builds on an
              inter-departmental program, the Bachelor of Science Degree Program in Applied
              and Computational Mathematical Sciences (ACMS), which was recently implemented
              at the undergraduate level and is jointly administered by these three
              departments together with the Department of Computer Science &
              Engineering.

A key component of the UW VIGRE Project is the use of
              cross-disciplinary research groups to increase the involvement of students from
              all three departments, at all levels, in group-oriented research. There are
              also a  number of existing programs such as the Statistical Consulting Service,
              the Applied Math Clinic, and Journal Clubs, which introduce graduate students
              to research and consulting. All of these will be developed further to include a
              broader set of students and be better integrated between departments.

The
              new ACMS major requires all students to take several courses in mathematical
              modeling.  These involve case studies, group projects, and write-ups that are
              critiqued and rewritten.  The growth of these courses has resulted in new
              staffing needs, which presents an excellent opportunity for vertical
              integration.  By using TAs to work intensively with groups of undergraduates,
              the courses can be an extremely valuable experience for both sets of students. 
              Postdoctoral Fellows, with student TAs, will teach additional sections of the
              courses and help develop new case studies and projects based on their own
              research expertise.  A new course on Communication in the Mathematical Sciences
              is being developed which will teach students to communicate mathematical ideas
              both orally and in writing, to  non-mathematicians as well as to specialists.
              This curriculum will be used by students in all three departments, at both the
              advanced undergraduate and beginning graduate level.  A  diverse internship
              program is also being developed and all students will be encouraged to
              participate.

A number of K-12 outreach programs have already been developed
              within the mathematical sciences departments.  VIGRE-supported graduate
              students and Postdoctoral Fellows will be encouraged to get involved in these
              activities.  This involvement will provide
valuable training for our Fellows
              and introduce them to the culture of
outreach, as well as providing a service
              to the community.

This award will support 18 graduate students per year on
              VIGRE Fellowships, spread between the three departments, with 2 quarters of
              support each year plus summer.  This will be combined with 1 quarter each year
              of a University-supported TA position, with training and mentoring.  Students
              will typically receive three years of such support, augmented by other funding.
               Over the 5-year grant period we intend to support 6 Postdoctoral Fellows, with
              3 years of support for each (half coming from University for half-time
              teaching).  Each Fellow's teaching will be spread between the three departments
              and each Fellow will have faculty mentors in at least two of the departments,
              and will be required to be involved in inter-departmental activities. The best
              undergraduates will be encouraged to become involved in research through the
              research groups, the ACMS Honors Program, an active REU program,and mentoring
              by graduate and postdoctoral Fellows.  Funding for 9 undergraduate research
              experiences each year will help to support this activity.

This project is
              being supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of Elementary, Secondary and
              Informal Education.



