Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Identifying IndigenousMedicinal Plants and
               Developing Techniques to Aid in Their Domestication and Use in Agroforestry
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9810300

Award Number: 9810300
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51389              (Estimated)
Investigator: Garry T. Ford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5956,5991,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810300  Ford    The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables  U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-  four months of research
              abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and experimental 
              conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral
              research  visit by Dr. Garry Ford to work with Dr. Erick C. M.  Fernandes at
              the International Center for Research in  Agroforestry (ICRAF) in Nairobi,
              Kenya.    Dr. Ford is going to identify indigenous medicinal plants  and
              develop soil and plant management techniques to aid in  their domestication and
              use in agroforestry systems.  He  will do an ethnobotanical survey of plants,
              in the Embu and  Machakos districts of Kenya, that are used by the local 
              people as medicines.  A detailed plant-material survey will  be conducted for
              the selected phytomedicinal plant species  to determine their ecotype range. 
              Also geo-referenced data  sets will be gathered for each species and compiled
              in a  geographic information system (GIS) software package.  This  information
              will be useful to gain knowledge of  agromedicinals and mechanisms for their
              conservation at the  community level.      In addition to collaborating with
              Dr. Fernandes, Dr. Ford  will have the opportunity to further his studies by 
              attending international bioresources/natural products  workshops and
              conferences held in Kenya and other parts of  Africa, fostering collaborations
              with his African  colleagues.      ***
