Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Recovery of Phosphates from Their Wastes by
               Column Flotation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a9810983

Award Number: 9810983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hassan E. El-Shall helsh@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative project by a US team
              headed by Dr. Hassan El-Shall, Professor in the Department of Materials Science
              and Engineering and Associate Director of Research in the NSF Engineering
              Research Center (ERC) for Particle Science & Technology at the University of
              Florida and an Egyptian team headed by Dr. Aziza A. Youssef, Professor of
              Mineral Technology, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute
              (CMRDI) in Cairo, Egypt.  The ERC and CMRDI teams plan to conduct a systematic
              study using more efficient techniques to recover phosphate values from tailings
              from beneficiation of phosphates in Egypt.   Beneficiation of Egyptian
              phosphate produces tailings, which are disposed of, despite the fact that they
              contain fine phosphate, whose grades are higher than plant feed in many other
              parts of the world.  Because of its fine size and clay content, mechanical
              cells can not recover such materials.   Flotation techniques such as column
              flotation will be studied as methods for recovery of fine phosphates from
              tailings.  A small pilot plant will be developed in this project and would be
              available for small industries in Egypt for further evaluation of other
              materials.  Scope:  This award will allow collaboration between Egyptian and US
              scientists who have complementary capabilities which are needed to carry out
              the proposed research.  The CMRDI will carry out specific tasks including
              surveys of resources and needs in Egypt, sample collection and
              characterization, the construction of a pilot scale column, pilot testing and
              model evaluation, as well as economic evaluation.  The ERC will carry out
              parametric studies, model development and optimization, and will work with the
              CMRDI on training of Egyptian personnel.  The two collaborating teams are well
              qualified and experienced in the area of material processing.  The US team is
              especially experienced in fine particulate studies and processing.  This
              proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign collaboration in
              areas that benefit both sides.   This project is being supported under the
              US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
              in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.
