Title       : GOALI: A Recursive, Closed-Loop Production Methodology for Agile Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9810011

Award Number: 9810011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolando Quintana quintana@vlobos.me.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin Lankford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1465,1504,9147,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9810011
Qunitana
	This award provides funding for the development and
              implementation of an adaptive, closed-loop production control algorithm and
              concomitant hybrid pull system.  The algorithm and its associated tactical
              production control software will regulate production in such a way as to meet
              the production quota with a small amount of excessive inventory.  A recursive
              control methodology featuring the use of a Kalman Filter will be employed to
              estimate the state of the production system.  The Kalman Filter statistically
              weighs differences between actual and expected number of good pieces produced,
              and hence, indicates, on a near real-time basis, the adjustments to the product
              flow that will meet the production quota.  The adaptive process control
              algorithm will be implemented on one of two identical lines.  An experiment
              will compare the line controlled with the proposed system against the line with
              the traditional push system.  The measures of effectiveness will include
              meeting the production quota on time, the amount of work-in-process inventory,
              and accumulated shipping inventory.
	The primary goal of this work is to
              determine the parameters that will affect accumulation and starvation of
              product, and to design adaptive techniques that will regulate production flow. 
              If successful, the results of this research will lead to an integrated
              environment for agile and lean production control.  This can positively impact
              industry with sequential manual assembly; particularly those with high
              turnover, unstable supply chains and variable yield rates.  The adaptive,
              recursive production control system will help these manufacturers to supply
              small quantities of a large mix of products rapidly, economically and
              on-demand, while maintaining surge capacity to meet peaks and valleys in demand
              levels.  The research  will also contribute to the analytical tools and
              modeling techniques for production and inventory control problems.


