Title       : Prices and Trading Patterns in Markets with Asymmetrically Informed Traders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9810481

Award Number: 9810481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Wooders jwooders@bpa.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diego Moreno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award support preliminary research into price formation and patterns of
              trading in decentralized markets where agents have asymmetric information.  In
              markets with many agents and negligible transaction costs economists tend to
              ignore the institutional framework governing traders interactions, and instead
              apply the notion of Walrasian (competitive) equilibrium to generate predictions
              of transaction prices, trades, and final allocations. This approach has proved
              to be useful in application, and yields accurate predictions in laboratory
              experiments for centralized markets. Nonetheless, while there are many markets
              where trade is centralized (e.g., stock and commodities markets), many other
              important markets (e.g., housing and labor markets) are characterized by
              decentralized trade.   In this project we introduce a model which is a stylized
              representation of naturally-occurring decentralized markets. The defining
              features of our model, and of such markets, are that (i) finding a partner with
              whom to trade is time consuming and therefore costly, (ii) prices are
              determined by bilateral bargaining, (iii) when bargaining traders take account
              of their opportunity to return to the market and search for a new partner, and
              (iv) the scarcity or abundance of buyers (sellers) affects the delay a seller
              (buyer) experiences before finding a partner. We also assume preferences are
              private, which augments the descriptive realism of our model. In contrast to
              the existing literature concerned with price formation under asymmetric
              information, no restriction is imposed on traders' possible bargaining
              positions.  In addition, we conduct market experiments in which trade is
              decentralized.  These experiments constitute a `stress test` of supply and
              demand theory, i.e., a test of the theory in a situation where it might not be
              expected to perform well, and provide data which allow for a test of the rich
              set of predictions for prices and trading patterns generated by our game
              theoretic analysis. In our basic experimental market there is one time entry,
              complete information, and a relatively short time horizon (to allow for many
              repetitions in one session, thereby giving the subjects the opportunity to come
              to have common expectations). This experimental design is flexible enough that
              it can be conveniently modified to introduce different conditions on entry and
              information, as well as different trading institutions, enabling us to explore
              other issues (efficiency, convergence, etc.) which may motivate further
              theoretical research.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
