Title       : Composite Interaction of Steel Frame Members and Reinforced Concrete Walls Under
               Seismic Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9810005

Award Number: 9810005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome F. Hajjar hajjar@struc.ce.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol K. Shield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arturo E. Schultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  9810005  Hajjar  This project presents a combined computational/experimental
               effort focusing on the seismic behavior of the interface between  concrete
              walls and steel frame members in composite wall  structural building systems. 
              The work targets the development of  comprehensive, nonlinear, static and
              dynamic analysis procedures  for modeling composite wall building structures,
              including the  behavior of the steel/concrete interface; and achieving a more 
              through understanding of the composite cyclic interaction between  RC walls and
              steel framing. Composite structural wall systems  provide excellent strength
              and stiffness to withstand both  service level drift and ultimate forces from
              seismic events.    The objectives of the research include the development of a 
              finite element formulation for the seismic analysis of composite  reinforced
              concrete walls with surrounding steel framing, the  quantification through
              experimental testing of the combined  cyclic shear and tensil strength of
              headed hear studs and  deformed bar anchors embedded in concrete panels, and
              the  verification and calibration of the shear and axil strength  interaction
              relations under monotonic and cyclic loading for  connectors used in practice
              used in practice.    A three-dimensional, nonlinear finite element to model to 
              simulate the cyclic interaction at the steel/concrete wall  interface will be
              formulates.  A series of experiments will be  designed to document the cyclic
              interaction along the interface  between RC walls and surrounding steel
              framing.  The analyses  will feature a geometrically and materially nonlinear
              finite  element formulation, using a new fiber-based finite element for  the
              shear connectors and appropriate continuum elements for the  concrete in the
              interface region, align with stress-space  plasticity formulations for both the
              concrete and steel.  The  ultimate goals is the development of clear guidelines
              for: 1)  incorporating the steel-concrete interface behavior in both  linear
              and nonlinea r analyses of composite wall systems; and 2)  detailing the steel
              frame-concrete panel connection to achieve  desirable performance goals.   
              This project is supported under the fourth year competition of  NSF 94-154. 
              ***
