Title       : STTR Phase I: Immunomagnetic Biosensor for Detection of Pathogens in Food
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9810541

Award Number: 9810541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Pierson arthurhpierson@worldnet.att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pierson Scientific Assoc
	      5 Robandy Road
	      Andover, MA  01810    978/475-8171

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9810541  Pierson   This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
              project aims to develop a portable fiber-optic biosensor that has the potential
              to provide rapid and sensitive procedures for pathogen detection.  A
              fluorescence biosensor has been developed to detect Salmonella in food samples
              and will be converted into a viable commercial product.  The instrument will
              utilize immunomagnetic microspheres to capture pathogens and fluorescent
              labeled antibodies in a one-step operation for detection.  After labeling the
              target cells on microspheres, the complex will be magnetically focused in front
              of optical fibers for excitation and detection of the fluorescence labeled
              organisms.  A modulated diode laser will be sued to decrease interference from
              ambient light and increase sensitivity.  Focusing the immunomagnetic beads has
              the potential to eliminate interference from the background solution, and
              increase the sensitivity and speed of the assay, making this applicable for
              detection of pathogens in the field.  The USDA Hazard Analysis and Critical
              Control Points (HACCP) program is designed to ensure safe food supplies and
              food production operations.   This program is designed to prevent contamination
              during processing and will require monitoring of E. coli and Salmonella at
              slaughterhouses and raw meat processing operations.  Current microbial testing
              methods are either sensitive or rapid, but the combination of both qualities is
              an unfulfilled goal.   This project will result in both rapid and sensitive
              testing for Salmonella and other food pathogens such as E. coli Camplobacter,
              and Vibrio sp.
