Title       : LTER: The Niwot Ridge LTER Research Program 1998-2004: Controls on the
               Structure, Function & Interactions of Alpine & Subalpine Ecosystems of the
               Colorado Front Range
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a9810218

Award Number: 9810218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Seastedt tims@culter.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Townsend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Wessman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9810218
Seastedt
The Niwot Ridge LTER employs a program of long- and
              short-term manipulative experiments and long-term monitoring to study biotic
              and ecosystem responses and feedbacks to interannual variation in climatic and
              atmospheric inputs. The 45-yr climate record shows that the alpine tundra at
              Niwot Ridge is experiencing increased amounts of precipitation; similar
              measurements of atmospheric nitrogen inputs begun in the early 1980's
              demonstrate increased atmospheric nitrogen deposition. Redistribution of
              snowpack by wind amplifies and attenuates these inputs across the alpine tundra
              and subalpine forest and meadows. Descriptive and manipulative studies designed
              to understand the consequences of these phenomena in terms of ecosystem
              structure, function and fluxes are proposed. Concurrently, questions on
              influence of treeline on nitrogen redistribution and ecosystem response, and
              test of hypotheses on controls of treeline are also presented.
              

Interpretation of biotic responses to changing inputs requires a
              hierarchical perspective that explicitly acknowledges the evolutionary history
              of the biota, the paleoecological record, and the current interactions among
              ecosystem components. The inclusion of the subalpine provides not only new
              ecosystem comparisons, but also generates a separate line of questions
              regarding the biotic and biogeochemical significance of ecotones. At treeline,
              vegetation structure appears to control snowpack rather than vice-versa, and
              therefore the consequences of enhanced snowpack and accompanying N deposition
              are under biotic as well topographic controls. In essence, the mesoscale
              snowpack model is overridden by a higher order constraint, the controls on
              treeline. The proposed research outlines a series of descriptive and
              manipulative studies to identify these controls. 

Niwot Ridge is the only
              multidisciplinary, long-term alpine and subalpine study site on the continent.
              As such, the site is an essential benchmark for local, regional and national
              networks that measure ecological phenomena and biological response to
              human-induced changes in climate and atmospheric chemistry. Accordingly,
              emphasis is placed on documenting research and archiving data for current and
              future scientists. This research is a continuation of studies initiated in
              1981, and is based upon research and databases begun in the 1950s. Continued
              support of this long-term research program will allow these investigators to
              build upon the significant research accomplishments in alpine ecosystems at
              Niwot Ridge.

