Title       : STTR Phase I: Automated Immunosensors for Multiple Herbicides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9810458

Award Number: 9810458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99690              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Ozanich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alitea-Berkeley Instr
	      2655 Einstein Avenue, Suite 103
	      Richland, WA  99352    509/946-7409

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1402,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9810458  Ozanich       This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
              project will significantly improve the quality and speed of immunoassays by
              integrating a "renewable column" with an existing automated microliter liquid
              handling system.  The renewable column will be used to trap antibody-coated
              microparticles, while allowing the efficient addition of reagents during
              mixing, washing and incubation operations.  An electromagnetic trap and a
              mechanical piston trap will be compared based on analytical performance, cost
              and practicality.  Feasibility of the approach will be demonstrated by
              measuring atrazine in environmental waters using an enzyme-linked
              spectrophotometric detection method. The use of immunoassay test kits for
              measuring herbicides in environmental waters is increasing dramatically. While
              immunoassays can be performed in the field, they require many manual operations
              that are slow and prone to errors.  Oftentimes, these assays are performed with
              no standardization or interference checking, which puts the quality of the data
              produced into question. The flow injection immunosensor system is expected to
              be more accurate than manual immunoassays and five times more precise. 
              Ten-fold reductions are anticipated for analysis time and 100-fold reductions
              in the consumption of costly antibodies may be possible using a
              regenerating/renewable column.  The resulting instrument will be easy to use
              and produce consistently high quality data.        This instrument would be
              ideally suited for cost-effective monitoring of pesticides and herbicides in
              environmental waters.  In addition, the general design of the system would
              provide great flexibility in the choice of the method of sample processing and
              detection.  Important "spin-off" products could be developed with minor changes
              in hardware and implementation of new methods.  Other potential applications
              include measuring contaminants in soil extracts and rapid measurement of
              herbicide and pesticide residues in food extracts.
