Title       : The Chinese "Scientific Community" at Century's End: Definition, Leadership,
               Changing Social Roles, and International Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9810256

Award Number: 9810256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Suttmeier petesutt@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since the early 1980s, China's science and technology system has been subject to
              a series of reforms and-reoganizations, new national R & D policies and
              programs have been introduced, major commitments have been made-to graduate
              education in the sciences, and extensive international ties have been
              established. The technical personnel emerging from these years represents the
              core human resource-pool for the critical challenges China faces at century's
              end. In terms of international salience, these include the-challenges of the
              global economy; managing-the severe environmental consequences of rapid
              economic growth; and providing for national security. This project seeks to
              provide a better understanding of the collective character of-the pool of
              Chinese technical personnel, its capabilities for meeting the needs of a
              rapidly changing China, its expected-role in the next century, and how these
              characteristics pertain to Western conceptions of a `scientific
              community.`--Work on the project begins with a systematic review of the many
              efforts to build modern institutions for science in-China during the 20th
              century, including those of the Mao era (1949-1976), and shifts to an
              examination of-the post-Mao reform policies as these have influenced
              professional life and the development of a sense of  community.  This work
              primarily will involve reviews of secondary literature in Chinese and English.
              After this initial work, the-project will begin to define and characterize the
              current population of Chinese technical personnel in terms of its-size,
              disciplinary composition, levels and modes of training, institutional
              environment, patterns of communication and-social stratification, and degrees
              of cosmopolitanism. This work will review governmental statistical sources-and
              analytical reports by Chinese policy analysts and STS researchers, and include
              interviews with Chinese scientists both in-China and the United States.--The
              final part of the study will examine the economic and political roles of the
              scientists. Reform-policies have introduced powerful commercial incentives into
              the Chinese research environment which some-observers see as distorting of
              scientific missions and disruptive to community building. Other reform policies
              have-enhanced the political standing of scientists and increased scientists'
              roles in policy making. Using both documentary-materials and interviews, the
              project will explore the changing nature of the linkages between science and
              economy,-and between science and state.--In spite of China's growing
              international importance, there have been no major studies in English of
              scientific-development in China for almost a decade. This study is therefore
              likely to attract considerable attention-from those seeking to understand the
              roles of science and technology in China's future and from those interested
              in-understanding the concept of `scientific community` in contemporary
              non-Western settings. China has a large pool-of technical talent, but misguided
              policies in the past prevented this talent from becoming a coherent and
              functioning-community. As a result, quality graduate education and scientific
              research were retarded, technological innovation-was frustrated, and major
              national development decisions were made - with debilitating economic and
              environmental-consequences - without sound technical judgments. The policies
              introduced since the late 1970s have been intended-to correct these errors and
              to allow for the building of a vibrant scientific community--The study
              proposed, in assessing where this process of community building now stands and
              what its future prospects-are, will be of interest to professional students of
              China, to STS professionals, and to policy communities which seek-to understand
              China's future course.-                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
