Title       : Cognitive Diagnosis with Multinomial Response Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1999  
File        : a9810202

Award Number: 9810202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis Tatsuoka   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tanar Software
	      21 Crown Road
	      Trenton, NJ  08638    609/883-8831

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this study is to extend the capabilities of cognitively
              diagnostic adaptive testing to incorporate multiple response outcomes.  The
              cognitively diagnostic adaptive testing methodology of interest employs
              underlying cognitive models that are finite partially ordered sets (posets). 
              Main research objectives include understanding how to incorporate misconception
              and erroneous response information into cognitive poset models, establishing
              techniques for identifying erroneous responses that are both cognitively and
              statistically interesting, and extending a data-analytic framework for model
              fitting and analysis of items to the case when items have more than two
              different class conditional response distributions.  Having the means to
              validate implementation of the methodology through data analysis is critically
              important, as the underlying cognitive processes are complex and latent. 
              Markov Chain Monte Carlo estimation techniques will be employed.  Cognitively
              diagnostic adaptive testing can form the basis of `intelligent` tutoring
              systems.  Incorporating multinomial responses should allow such systems to
              utilize response information more fully, provide enhanced cognitive information
              about students, and perhaps even classify students with fewer number of items. 
              Cognitively diagnostic adaptive testing can be viewed as an important
              statistical tool for cognitive measurement.  Implementation involves building
              focused cognitive models, which gives insight into the processes of
              problem-solving.  The resulting methods of this research will be applied to
              actual data from a linguistics domain.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
