Title       : III-V Image Sensors with Optical Outputs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9810549

Award Number: 9810549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey W. Taylor gwt@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810549
Taylor
The objective of this program is to demonstrate, characterize
              and develop a technology which incorporates a image sensor within a Ill-V
              optoelectronic integrated circuit monolithically.  The pixel is based upon the
              formation of an inversion channel at a GaAs heterointerface.  The approach
              builds upon existing technology demonstrations which have shown that an
              inversion channel interface can be created that produces a Heterostructure
              Field Effect Transistor (BYET) that is mutually compatible in structure and
              fabrication with a Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Laser (VCSEL).  The
              integration of these components will enable transmission of image data from the
              chip in optical form, A key innovation is the use of carbon doping in the form
              of CBr4 to create the effect of a resistive gate structure which has already
              been recognized as an effective method to achieve high frequency operation. 
              The use of the p doped gate structure will permit the use of ion implants to
              create the unidirectional charge transfer barriers that are necessary for
              uniphase operation.  The sensor is expected to have superior charge capacity,
              higher frequency operation, lower dark current/dynamic range and lower
              background noise than existing approaches in Ill-V material systems.

The
              existing approaches to Ill-V CCD devices use a deposited cermet resistive layer
              upon the grown wafer to improve transfer efficiency.  With this method,
              conduction between gate electrodes and increased gate leakage current are
              problems.  Furthermore, the interelectrode potential barriers remain a problem
              in practice, because the electrodes on the cermet layer are at least 4000 A
              above the surface.  The deposited layer also aggravates the interface trap
              noise problem.  With the inversion channel approach proposed here, the
              resistive layer is grown within the @E structure and all electrodes are within
              a few hundred A of the interface.  Furthermore the HFET electronic circuits
              have as-grown enhancement thresholds of 0.3 V so that threshold nonuniformity
              is not the problem of traditional Ill-V digital circuits.  Of most
              significance, is the fact that FFEMT and MESFET technologies have not been able
              to easily integrate the laser device, This natural compatibility is the key
              advantage of the inversion channel structure and enables a single chip solution
              to the high speed transport of imaged data-

The inversion channel approach
              uses solid source MBE growth of the vertical cavity structure, p doped layers
              via (BI-4 for ohmic contacts and resistive layer formation, deposited
              dielectric top stacks, and oxidized AlAs layers for critical current guiding in
              the laser.  A single fabrication sequence consisting of self-aligned refractory
              gate contacts and ion-implanted channel contacts is proposed to implement the
              circuit.  The technology implementation required here builds upon the principal
              investigators prior work in fabricating HYETs and VCSELS.
***

	 

