Title       : Chemical Sensors for CVD Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9810176

Award Number: 9810176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Kuech Kuech@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur B. Ellis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal Title:    Chemical Sensors for CVD Processing  Proposal
              Number:   CTS-9810176  Principal Investigator:  Arthur B. Ellis and Thomas F.
              Kuech  Institution:    U. Wisconsin - Madison    The proposed research
              objective is to attain better physicochemical understanding of the interfaces
              between doped II-VI and III-V semiconductor surfaces and chemisorbed gases of
              III-VI compound semiconductor precursors. Prior work demonstrated that the
              semiconductor photoluminescence can be made more or less sensitive and
              selective with respect to adsorbate by appropriate surface passivation or
              modification. This work will produce a description of surface bonding and Fermi
              level of the substrate upon exposure of GaAs to SeS2, and structural changes of
              CdSe upon adsorption of silapentanes. Techniques to be used include
              photoreflectance spectroscopy, synchrotron IR absorption to detect Fermi level
              changes, and scanning probe microscopy. Surface modification will be performed
              with metalloporphyrin films, bifunctional molecules like phenylenediamine and
              dendrimers, and also by molecular imprinting by polymerization around analyte
              molecules.  Heterostructures produced by MO-CVD will consist of ZnSe atop GaAs
              and CdSe atop GaSb. The buried interfaces will characterized from the
              photoluminescence response. Practical sensors will be tested for the gases
              adsorbed during the metallo-organic vapor phase epitaxy process. The
              Chemistry-Chemical Engineering collaboration has a strong influence both on the
              research and the educational impacts of this work. The immediate applicability
              of these fundamental results to CVD gas detection can be extended to the
              detection of hazardous gases, explosives, and food quality.
