Title       : Institute for Environmental Bioinorganic Chemistry (IEBIC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9810248

Award Number: 9810248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7080000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois M. Morel morel@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Groves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter R. Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Spiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George McLendon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,9156,9179,9198,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Environmental BioInorganic Chemistry (CEBIC) at Princeton
              University, directed by Dr. Francois M. M. Morel, supports an interdisciplinary
              research program on trace metals in the environment as well as a wide range of
              educational activities, including summer workshops for K-12 teachers, public
              lectures, conferences, and a web site.  CEBIC is supported as an Environmental
              Molecular Science Institute (EMSI) and jointly funded by the NSF Division of
              Chemistry and MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and by the Chemical
              Sciences Division of the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Department of Energy.
               

Metalloenzymes affect the behavior of trace metals that are essential for
              the proper functioning of ecosystems but are also pervasive contaminants
              emitted by many industries.   CEBIC will investigate a number of natural
              metalloenzymes and metal-binding compounds that influence the behavior of iron
              in the global carbon cycle.  Interdisciplinary teams of CEBIC participants will
              study intracellular and extracellular binding of metals and their uptake by
              aquatic microbes, the role of metalloenzymes in the microbial uptake of
              inorganic carbon and in the respiration of organic carbon, and the role of
              enzymes in the use and loss of nitrogen, a key limiting element in marine
              waters.  Results of interconnecting laboratory, field, and modeling studies
              will be incorporated into an overall model of metal dynamics and carbon
              cycling. The Institute is expected to have a major impact on applying
              bioinorganic chemistry methods to the environment and on building a knowledge
              base for development of new approaches to bioremediation of trace
              metals.

The twenty-three member team of investigators includes ten faculty
              from four Princeton departments, three from Rutgers University, four from the
              University of California (Santa Cruz, Santa Barbara, and San Diego), one from
              McGill (Canada), plus four researchers from Exxon Research and Engineering Co.
              and one from Brookhaven National Laboratory.   Approximately 5 postdoctoral
              fellows, 11 graduate students, and 5 undergraduates will participate each year.
