Title       : Environmental Molecular Science Institute on Chemical Sources and Sinks at
               Liquid/Solid Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9810367

Award Number: 9810367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4441489            (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Flynn flynn@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,9156,9177,9179,9198,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Environmental Molecular Science Institute (EMSI) on Chemical Sources and
              Sinks at Liquid/Solid Interfaces at Columbia University, directed by George W.
              Flynn and Richard M. Osgood, supports an interdisciplinary research program on
              the behavior of contaminants in subsurface environments as well as a wide range
              of educational activities, including special programs for K-12 teachers, high
              school students, and the public.  This Institute is jointly funded by the NSF
              Division of Chemistry, MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and
              Directorate for Education and Human Resources and by the Chemical Sciences
              Division of the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Department of Energy.

The
              Institute is organized into three collaborative research groups:  molecular
              scale processes on mineral surfaces and in pores; fundamental chemical and
              biological reactions and transport processes in microscopic porous media; and
              macroscopic chemical transport and dispersal.  The results at the three length
              scales (molecular, microscopic, macroscopic) will provide input to a chemical
              and transport model that will be tested in the "real world" by partners at
              industrial laboratories and at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). 
              Particular emphasis will be placed on organic contaminants on iron oxide
              surfaces and their degradation by enzymatic or photochemical processes. 
              Examples of some problems that could be addressed more effectively by improved
              knowledge of subsurface transport are: behavior of pollutants on hydrated metal
              oxides and soils; mechanism and dynamics of chemical decomposition on surfaces;
              and migration of organic contaminants.  The Institute is expected to have a
              major impact on the development of new tools to predict and remediate
              contamination by organic chemicals. 

The 22-member team of investigators
              includes 16 faculty from five Columbia departments and the Lamont-Doherty Earth
              Observatory, plus one faculty member from Barnard College and five researchers
              from PNNL.  Additional collaborators are located at GE, IBM, DuPont, Exxon, and
              Inrad.  Approximately four postdoctoral associates, 20 graduate students, and
              20 undergraduates will participate each year.
