Title       : Development of Compensation Method for Loads With Non-Periodic Currents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9810167

Award Number: 9810167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leszek S. Czarnecki lsczar@communique.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9810167  Czarnecki    The project will employ the concept of a hybrid
              adaptive compensation for loads with nonsinusoidal currents developed, tested
              on prototypes and reported earlier.  According to this concept, a compensator
              is built of an adaptive passive compensator, which compensates the reactive
              power and balances the system, and an active compensator, which compensates
              fast varying components of the load current.  Such a hybrid structure is
              considered in the literature of the subject as the structure that could
              overcome power limitations while keeping compensation speed and reduce the cost
              of the compensator.  The compensator is controlled by a hybrid algorithm, i.e.,
              at the same time, in the frequency-,and in time-domain.       A new control
              algorithm that will enable compensation of loads with non-periodic currents
              will be developed in this research project.  Compensators for improving power
              factor and power quality are designed and specified in terms of active and
              reactive powers, rms values and harmonic rms values.  These values have to be
              measured or calculated to provide input data for the compensator control.
              However, these quantities are not defined in systems with non-periodic
              waveforms.  Therefore, the control will be based on a concept of time-varying
              quasi-powers measured over a time window of the duration of the supply voltage
              period.    The research is a continuation of the PI's studies on power
              phenomena, measurements and compensation in three-phase nonsinusoidal systems
              and will rely on theoretical studies, computer modeling of circuits with
              non-periodic currents and energy flow in such circuits, as well as on
              laboratory experiments with laboratory prototype of a compensator of
              time-variant loads.    Methods of compensation of loads with non-periodic
              currents developed in this project will contribute to more effective use of
              electric energy, to reduction of disturbances and increased reliability of
              equipment, and thus to reduction of extra cost involved with the supply  of
              variable speed drives, industrial robots, arc furnaces or welders.  Computer
              modeling of circuits with non-periodic currents, studies on properties of
              quasi-powers and their use in developing the control algorithm of a hybrid
              compensator will contribute to the knowledge base of electrical engineering.   
              The results of this project will be disseminated through published reports. 
              This project will provide the subjects for two M.Sc. and for one Ph.D. theses,
              thus three electrical engineers will acquire a deep knowledge and skill in
              compensating loads with non-periodic currents.  Since a new course on power
              quality and its improvement was initiated at the ECE Dept. at LSU, with a
              laboratory under development, the prototype developed in this research will be
              used for education purposes.  Also, Research Assistants in this project will be
              employed next in the development of the Power Quality Lab.  All of this will
              contribute to dissemination of the research results, as well to enhancement of
              education on power quality.  Moreover, the arrangement of a panel discussion at
              the PES IEEE Meeting on loads with nonperiodic currents and their compensation
              will be initiated to enhance a partnership between experts in this area.
