Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research; Family-Responsive Workplace Policies, Parenting,
               and Children's Well-Being
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9810953

Award Number: 9810953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Glass jennifer-Glass@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Dissertation Improvement research project examines the relationship between
              employment conditions and family functioning. Although dual-earner families are
              quickly replacing the traditional breadwinner-housewife family model,
              widespread changes in the conditions of employment have not accompanied
              families' increasing wage-earning responsibilities. However, some employers
              have adopted family-responsive workplace policies, such as flexible scheduling,
              reduced work hours, and family-supportive environments, which are designed to
              alleviate the work/family incompatibility that employed parents face. Although
              some evidence exists to support the assertion that these policies do serve to
              mitigate parental distress deriving from work/family incompatibility, little is
              known about how these policies affect family processes - in particular,
              parenting behaviors and children's outcomes. In this study, various concepts
              associated with role theory are used to relate family-responsive policies to
              parental outcomes, parenting behaviors, and children's outcomes. A random
              sample of approximately 80 Midwestern dual-earner couples with children will
              provide the data. Interviews utilizing established measures as well as new
              measures and open-ended questions will be conducted. Multiple regression will
              be the primary analysis technique; the open-ended questions will allow for
              qualitative data analysis as well.    In addition to the scientific gains to be
              achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a highly promising
              student in completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it contributes
              to the thorough training of the next generation of social scientists.
