Title       : Parametric and Semiparametric Bayesian Methods for Small Area Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9810968

Award Number: 9810968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malay Ghosh ghoshm@stat.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the development of parametric and semiparametric
              hierarchical Bayesian methods for small area estimation.  Direct survey
              estimates of local areas (such as a county, municipality, or census division)
              are usually accompanied by large standard errors and coefficients of variation
              due to smallness of samples sizes in these areas.  The prime reason for this is
              that the original survey was targeted to achieve accuracy at a much higher
              level of aggregation than that for local areas.  This makes it a necessity to
              `borrow strength` or use information from similar local areas.  Hierarchical
              and empirical Bayes methods are particularly well-suited to meet this need. 
              Much of the Bayesian literature, however, is restricted to normal theory
              hierarchical and empirical Bayes estimation of small area means and other
              characteristics of interest, and that too has almost exclusively been
              parametric, assuming normality of the local area effects.  One of the major
              components of this research is the development of semiparametric hierarchical
              Bayesian methods that avoid assuming normality of the local area effects. 
              These methods are applicable to both linear and generalized linear models. 
              Specific applications of these methods will involve estimation of median income
              of four-person families, estimation of income and poverty for small places like
              counties, subcounties, census tracts, etc.  The methodology is applicable to
              other problems and can be used for the analysis of both discrete and continuous
              data.  The second aspect of this research is small area estimation for more
              complex surveys, such as stratified two-stage sampling, where the local areas
              consist of primary units which cut across the stratum boundaries.  Both
              parametric and semiparametric hierarchical Bayesian methods will be pursued
              here and the results will be compared.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
