Title       : Seasonal Plasticity in the GnRH System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9810822

Award Number: 9810822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Lehman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred J. Karsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract  Lehman, Michael         A major challenge of biology is to
              understand how the  brain controls the secretion of hormones that regulate 
              fertility.  One such essential hormone is gonadotropin-  releasing hormone
              (GnRH).   GnRH is the master hormone  controlling reproduction in animals and
              man.  It is made by  brain cells, and carried by specialized blood vessels from
               the brain to the pituitary gland, where it controls the  secretion of other
              hormones. The PI's long-term goal is to  understand the signals and
              neurochemicals in the brain that  regulate the activity of GnRH cells.  The
              model animal used  to study GnRH cells is the sheep.  Like most other mammals, 
              sheep are seasonal breeders, their reproductive activity  being restricted to a
              single breeding season during year.  Seasonal breeding is sometimes called
              "nature's  contraceptive" because it represents a natural form of  fertility
              control.  Yearly cycles of breeding in sheep and  other animals are primarily
              due to changes in the activity  of GnRH cells. During the breeding season in
              sheep there is  a dramatic increase in the number of inputs (or "synapses") 
              that GnRH cells receive from other brain cells. One exciting  possibility is
              that this change in the number of synapses is  responsible for the start of the
              breeding season, but more  work is needed to confirm this.  In any case, this
              seasonal  change is a striking example of how the brain, even in adult  life,
              is not completely "hard-wired" and is capable of  significant structural
              reorganization.  The work proposed  here will explore the role that thyroid
              hormones play in  these seasonal changes in brain structure.  Recent work has 
              shown that thyroid hormones are required for seasonal  breeding, act in the
              brain to promote this seasonality, and  play a critical role in influencing the
              structure of the  developing and adult brain. Furthermore, GnRH cells contain 
              appropriate receptors to allow them to respond to  circulating thyroid
              hormones.  To test the role of thyro id  hormones, we will analyze and compare
              the inputs of GnRH  cells between the brains of thyroidectomized and thyroid- 
              intact ewes using the electron microscope.  This study is a  first step toward
              understanding the signals that regulate  seasonal changes in GnRH cells, and
              will help reveal  fundamental mechanisms responsible for seasonal biology in 
              animals.  As an example of "brain remodeling", this  knowledge will also
              provide clues as to the factors that  promote and regulate connections between
              nerve cells in the  adult brain.
