Title       : LTER: Interaction of Multiple Disturbances with Climate in Alaskan Boreal
               Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a9810217

Award Number: 9810217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1662275            (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stuart Chapin terry.chapin@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9810217
Chapin
The boreal forest plays a crucial role in determining the rate
              of global climate change because (1) changes in water and energy exchange could
              affect regional warming and (2) changes in carbon storage might affect the rate
              of climatic warming at the global scale. This LTER renewal proposal for the
              Bonanza Creek Long-term Ecological Research program seeks to understand the
              Alaskan boreal forest as an integrated regional system in which climate,
              disturbance regime and ecosystem processes are interactive components. The
              overall objective is to document the major controls over these interactions and
              their ecological and societal consequences. Disturbances are incorporated as an
              integral part of the regional system. Research will focus on how different
              disturbances affect population and ecosystem processes and the mechanisms by
              which these processes interact with climate to determine probability of insect
              outbreak and fire. Studies will focus on population processes that are best
              developed in boreal regions or which have the strongest ecosystem and societal
              consequences. These processes include plant succession following disturbance
              and the consequences of these successional changes for (1) species diversity,
              (2) population dynamics of mammals and insects, and (3) regional disturbance
              regimes. The ecosystem research focuses on the carbon cycle because changes in
              boreal carbon cycling have clear global consequences and because a predictive
              modeling of the carbon cycle requires an understanding of the underlying
              climatic, population, and ecosystem processes at stand and regional scales. The
              aquatic research will be integrally tied to the terrestrial program through an
              emphasis on hydrologic and disturbance impacts on aquatic community structure
              and function. These processes have immediate social relevance (e.g., regional
              and global climate, fire, insect outbreaks, timber, game populations, water
              quality, fish) because these integrate basic understanding and make results
              useful in influencing what will certainly be an increasing human impact on the
              boreal region.

