Title       : Adaptation Processes of Adult Children of Korean and Vietnamese Immigrants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9810725

Award Number: 9810725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen D. Pyke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a research planning grant to develop a study of adaptation among adult
              children of Korean and Vietnamese immigrants. Most of the research on the
              post-1965 wave of immigrants has focused on first generation adults and, to a
              lesser degree, second generation adolescents. This study will examine adult
              children of immigrants between the ages of 18 and 24, as they can better inform
              us about long-term adaptation processes and outcomes, emerging ethnicities, and
              prospects for the future. As relatively new immigrant groups, Koreans and
              Vietnamese are of particular interest in understanding the process of ethnic
              self-identity and ethnic formation.    The major aim of the full project is to
              develop theoretical models of the dynamic, multidimensional, and contradictory
              adaptation processes of the "new second generation," and to bring gender to the
              study of ethnicity and ethnic formation. The general research questions include
              (l) What are the dynamic adaptation process of adult children of Korean and
              Vietnamese immigrants? (2) What are their subjective experiences of managing
              different cultural worlds, including different gender expectations? (3) How
              must current theorizing be modified to capture the adaptation experiences of
              second generation Korean and Vietnamese Americans? (4) What kind of ethnic
              identities are emerging and how do they vary by gender? (5) How do adaptation
              processes affect family power dynamics, solidarity and conflicts in immigrant
              families?  This study will rely on data from surveys and individual and focus
              group interviews.    There are five goals of the research planning portion of
              this project. 1) Collect individual and focus group interview data to develop
              closed ended survey questions and interview guides. 2) Pretest the sampling
              techniques. 3) Pretest the survey. 4) Analyze pretest data and use findings to
              revise survey and interview guides. 5) Further develop the theoretical and
              conceptual framework.     This research will contribute to social scientific
              understanding of  immigration and cultural assimilation, a topic of great
              current interest for both scientists and policy makers. In addition to the
              scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award will materially
              assist a promising early-career researcher to prepare for a larger project,
              thereby contributing to the strengthening of the national resource of
              scientists and engineers.
