Title       : A Study of Exchange Anisotropy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9810185

Award Number: 9810185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. White white@ee.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810185  White  Exchange anisotropy is the name given to the vector exchange
              interaction between an antiferromagnet and a ferromagnet.  If the
              antiferromagnet is appropriately biased, this interaction produces a shift of
              the hysteresis loop away from the usual position of symmetry about H=O.  The
              magnitude of the shift is known as the exchange field, He. The interaction also
              produces a broadening of the hysteresis loop, an increase in the coercive
              field, Hc.  Exchange anisotropy was discovered some 40 years ago, but remained
              a scientific curiosity until it was realized in the 1980's that this effect
              could be useful for pinning the direction of magnetic thin films, important for
              the magnetoresistive sensors and spin valves important today in magnetic data
              storage systems.  Since then there has been an explosion in the number of
              scientists and engineers working on exchange anisotropy, but mostly from a very
              applied point of view.  The result is that there is a lot of empirical
              information on exchange anisotropy, but still very little fundamental
              understanding of die phenomenon.    For exchange anisotropy to exist there must
              be a magnetic polarization of the antiferromagnet at the
              antiferromagnet/ferromagnet interface, and magnetic anisotropy in the
              antiferromagnet.  There are two present hypotheses about the origins of the
              interfacial polarization of the antiferromagnet.  One invokes unbalanced spins
              at the interface, and the other a canting of the antiferromagnetic spin
              structure at the interface.  The unbalanced spin picture implies a dependence
              of the polarization upon the domain structure of the antiferromagnet. 
              Experimental evidence exists supporting both hypotheses.  It may in fact be the
              case that both occur but under different circumstances.    In order to
              understand the phenomenon of exchange anisotropy it is necessary to be able to
              observe (1) the interfacial polarization of the antiferromagnet, (2) the domain
              structure in the antiferromagnet, and (3) the magnetic anisotropy of the anti
              ferromagnet.  Unfortunately, until recently, only the third parameter has been
              directly measurable.  They have realized that X-ray magnetic dichroism can be
              used to measure directly the other "hidden" parameters.  X-ray magnetic
              circular dichroism, which is element-specific and has monolayer sensitivity,
              can be used to measure directly the interfacial polarization.  X-ray magnetic
              linear dichroism determines the axis of an ordered system but not the net
              magnetization.  It can therefore measure the spin system orientation in both
              antiferromagnets and ferromagnetism.  They propose to use the linear dichroism
              to observe both antiferromagnetic domain structure and the relative orientation
              of the ferro- and antiferro-magnetic films.    The antiferromagnet they propose
              to use initially in their studies is cubic NiO because it has a very simple
              crystal structure and a known simple spin structure.  They have developed a
              technique for MBE deposition of NiO and of the magnetic metals needed for their
              samples.  The MBE technique has both fine control on the film thickness and
              produces high quality epitaxial films.
