Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Voice and Honorifics in K'iche'-Spanish Language
               Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9810060

Award Number: 9810060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7842               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Silverstein m-silverstein@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Recent literature has argued that linguistic form and the sociolinguistic
              distribution of these forms are mediated by linguistic ideology, and that
              linguistic change is largely a result of a dynamic interaction between the
              social use of language and social structures.  The research here will enrich
              this view by systematically considering the sociocultural dimensions of use of
              interrelated grammatical, lexical and morphological features in K'iche' Maya,
              through its previously unexamined honorific register phenomena.  The social use
              of language is nowhere more apparent than in honorific registers --
              conventionalized cooccurrences of linguistic forms, pronouns, nouns or other
              linguistic devices which index deference or respect towards the person
              addressed.  Lexical, grammatical and morphological means are used to index
              respect or deference to referent, addressee or bystander.   Several varieties
              of K'iche' Maya have two full sets of second person pronouns that differ in
              formality, as well as two prefixes used before proper names of males and
              females, respectively.  In addition, honorification in some dialects of K'iche'
              appears to involve the voice system in interesting ways.   The research seeks
              to determine how and to what extent a replication at the local level of the
              sociolinguistic relationship between Mayan and Spanish, by means of gradual,
              pragmatically-driven replacement, may be occurring. Since Spanish is the
              national language of Guatemala, and K'iche' speaking communities are now
              variously bilingual, honorifics are a point of interlingual pragmatic
              (functional) overlap and serve as an important mediating register for K'iche' -
              Spanish language change.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
