Title       : Opioid-coding Genes: Evolution in Lungfish and Amphibians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9810516

Award Number: 9810516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Dores rdores@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip B. Danielson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY  Robert Dores    Gene duplication is a recurring theme in the
              evolution of  vertebrate polypeptide hormones and neuropeptides. These 
              duplication events lead to the formation of gene families in  which divergence
              of function is the usual outcome. In the  case of the opioid-coding genes,
              duplication events have  proceeded along two paths: a) an apparent duplication
              of  function (both Proenkephalin and Prodynorphin circuits  function as
              inhibitory networks in the central nervous  system); or b) divergence of
              function as seen in analgesic  activity of Proenkephalin and Prodynorphin
              products, as  compared to the heightened pain responsiveness (nociceptic) 
              activity of Pronociceptin products, or the melanocortin  (color change and
              chronic stress regulation) activity of  Proopiomelanocortin products. Are these
              duplication events  entirely random, or do they correspond to discrete points
              of  radiation of the vertebrates? This proposal develops the  hypothesis that
              the duplication-driven expansion of the  opioid-coding gene family
              (Proenkephalin, Prodynorphin,  Pronociceptin, and Proopiomelanocortin)
              corresponds to  periods when polyploidization (replication of the entire 
              genome) altered the course of vertebrate evolution. To  identify these "burst"
              periods, Dr Dores and colleagues have  combined a comparative approach with a
              molecular approach.  The species selected for this analysis (lungfish, urodele 
              amphibians, and a ancient lineage of anuran amphibians)  represent lineages
              that bracketed one of the predicted  genome duplication events (the rise of the
              lobed finned fish  and tetrapods in the Devonian). Thus, by taking a 
              comparative approach it is possible to select taxa that fit  into a logical
              phylogenetic hypothesis based on the fossil  record. By employing the molecular
              approach, it is possible  to test that hypothesis. In this study, the
              opioid-coding  gene family will be used as a model to analyze how natural 
              selection acts on duplicated genes to alter sequence, and  potenti ally alter
              function. The key to the molecular  approach is to focus on an ancestral
              character common to all  members of this gene family - the opioid core sequence
               YGGF(M/L). By taking this approach, we have already detected  genes in
              ray-finned fish and lobe finned fish (previous  period of support) which were
              previously unsuspected. In  addition, novel opioid peptides have been revealed
              whose  opiate agonist potential has not been evaluated. While it is 
              appreciated that none of the taxa used in this study are a  "living fossil," by
              taking a comparative/molecular approach  it is possible to reconstruct, through
              cladistic paradigms  (maximum parsimony), the most likely pathways which have 
              lead to the extant opioid-coding genes, and the potential  ramifications of
              these genes with respect to evolution of  neuronal circuits in the vertebrate
              central nervous system.
