Title       : Dissertation Research: Practicing the Biosciences in Vietnam: Local Culture,
               Market Forces, Global Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9810276

Award Number: 9810276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3072               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Gieryn gieryn@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project is focusing its empirical attention to a
              geographical and cultural area underresearched in science and technology
              studies.  In doing so, it seeks to contribute to a theoretical elaboration of
              globality/locality in science and speaks to theoretical issues outside science
              studies in the analyses of transition societies and the globilization of
              knowledge and culture.  More specifically, it is an interpretive study of the
              biosciences in Vietnam, examining local culture, organizational environment,
              and global context.  It addresses theoretical issues in the social studies of
              scientific practice and culture, incorporating analysis of market transition in
              socialist countries, and globilization and postcolonial theory.  The specific
              research questions are: 1) How do Vietnamese scientists interpret and judge the
              meaning of good science and the value of scientific knowledge? 2) How do
              funding requirements and mechanisms affect the organization of scientific
              research institutes and individual scientific careers? 3)  In what ways do
              Vietnamese scientists orient their practice to the idea of  `universal`
              science, and how do specific connections with foreign scientific communities
              affect their research?  The project design has three components: ethnographic
              observation at three bioscience research institutes; extensive, two-stage,
              tape-recorded oral histories with scientists; and collection and analysis of
              supplementary data form archives, organizations, policy documents, and
              interviews.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
