Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: An Integrated Model for Net-Shape Fabrication
               of High Strength Aluminum Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9810978

Award Number: 9810978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21250              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Sherif El-Gizawy elgizawya@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9810978
El-Gizawy

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Ahmed Sherif El-Gizawy, Director of the Industrial and
              Technological Development Center, College of Engineering at the University of
              Missouri in Columbia, and Dr. Amr Abdel-Hamid Professor and Dean of Science and
              Engineering at the American University of Cairo (AUC), in Cairo, Egypt.  The
              two plan to build an integrated model that can describe quantitatively the
              process behavior during net shape fabrication of advanced aluminum structures. 
               The proposed model consists of two modules: the physical and the numerical
              modeling modules.  In the physical module, which will be handled by the US
              team, material constitutive equations are established and the
              process-structure-property relationships are determined.  In the numerical
              module, to be developed by the AUC team, simulation of the entire net shape
              fabrication process will be conducted using the non-linear finite element code
              ABACUS.  The integrated model can then be used with the robust design
              methodology to explore the optimum process parameters and product configuration
              that would maximize quality and minimize cost, while reducing waste and impact
              on the environment.  The work will target the newly developed
              aluminum-copper-lithium alloy X2090 as a typical example of advanced material
              for use in various applications.

Scope:  This award will allow collaboration
              between Egyptian and US scientists who have complementary capabilities needed
              to carry out the proposed research efficiently.  The model to be designed will
              be used with two manufacturing methods, the superplastic forming (SPF) and
              diffusion bonding (DB) for net-shape fabrication of complex multi-sheet
              structural components.  Cost savings associated with this technique are based
              on high material utilization, reduced part count and the resulting assembly
              costs.  The resulting alloys can provide the transportation industry
              (automotive and aircraft) with the capability of a cost-effective manufacturing
              process for large complex structures.  The two collaborating teams are
              considered to be well qualified and experienced in the area of the research. 
              This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign collaboration in
              areas that benefit both sides.   This project is being supported under the
              US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
              in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities. 
***

