Title       : Continuation of Parkfield, CA Pipeline Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9810066

Award Number: 9810066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy Isenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weidlinger Associates Inc
	      375 Hudson Street
	      New York, NY  100143656    212/367-3000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The performance of buried pipelines when subjected to earthquake effects
              -including traveling waves, fault offsets and lateral spreading associated with
              soil liquefaction and slope failures - has received considerable
attention.
              Field and laboratory observations have led to the formulation of mathematical
              models of underground pipeline performance that can be used as a basis for
              design and retrofit of individual pipeline segments, and in damage modules for
              network simulations. Collection of physical data on pipeline performance from
              recent earthquakes has illuminated the roles of soil stability, surface rupture
              and pipeline material and condition.  Modeling efforts have similarly advanced.
              However, there is lacking specific data on how ground movement is translated
              into pipeline deformation. Laboratory scale testing has not been productive due
              to the
difficulties of simulating boundary conditions, realistic soil
              deformation and realistic pipeline surface conditions. The purpose of the
              Parkfield pipeline experiment is to obtain data at field scale under
              actual
earthquake conditions.

The reason for siting the experiment at
              Parkfield was to capitalize on the predicted recurrence of a M6 or larger
              earthquake. The USGS has extensively studied and instrumented the region,
              thereby enriching the data that will be collected.

The validity of the
              pipeline experiment was demonstrated in the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake. In the
              ensuing years, it became necessary to stabilize the instrumentation and data
              acquisition systems with equipment upgrades or replacements. Accordingly, this
              action is for upgrades to the instrumentation and data acquisition and
              recording equipment, including replacing the strain gages on the steel pipes,
              upgrading the seismographs
and performing other tasks needed to maintain the
              experiment in a state of readiness.

This project will provide critical data
              for calibrating design and analysis methods that will eliminate unnecessary
              conservatism or risk of failure for individual pipelines, and will also
              validate modules needed in
system-level and regional risk assessment and loss
              mitigation studies for pipeline networks.

