Title       : Initiative for an Enhanced Mathematics Education in Princeton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9810783

Award Number: 9810783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1956924            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Sarnak sarnak@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elias Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Fefferman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid Daubechies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Princeton VIGRE program - Abstract.    General Philosophy.  The VIGRE program at
              Princeton is a joint venture of the Mathematics Department and the Program in
              Applied and Computational Mathematics (PACM); it aims at exposing undergraduate
              students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows to a broader research and
              teaching experience.  On top of disciplinary depth, we want to foster
              educational exploration and breadth-qualities that are increasingly important
              in the current rapidly changing research world and job market.  It is more
              important than ever to prepare students and postdoctoral fellows for a variety
              of different teaching tasks and research opportunities.  Whether they proceed
              to academic or non-academic careers, all student and postdoctoral fellows will
              benefit from experience in teaching and exposition, and from contacts with the
              mathematical world at other institutions and outside academia.    The different
              components.  Our VIGRE program has components that pertain to graduate
              training, to undergraduate education, to postdoctoral fellowships, to
              curriculum innovation, and to outreach activities.  Several components are
              vertically integrated and have aspects that fit under several headings.  For
              most initiatives, we do not distinguish between Mathematics and PACM students,
              postdocs, or faculty: the VIGRE program will draw on and combine the strengths
              of the two programs.    2A Graduate training.  Mathematics, as perceived by
              graduate students through the filter of most graduate educations, has become
              increasingly fragmented.  This is the case for virtually all disciplines within
              mathematics, regardless of how "pure" or "applied" they are.  Integration of
              the different components encountered during graduate education into a more
              global view is typically left to postdoctoral studies.  In our program we want
              to coordinate initiatives that will help launch our graduate students into
              their research and teaching careers, exposing them to a broader view of
              mathematics and its application s.  All students, whether VIGRE supported or
              not, will be encouraged to participate in these activities.  Some of the
              activities will be required for VIGRE students.    We shall run research
              seminars aimed at graduate students, featuring expository presentations (by
              faculty members, visitors or graduate students) about open problems, often
              related to applications.  In a companion problem seminar, interested graduate
              students will work on open problems (typically more complex than a homework
              problem but not a thesis-size problem); they will be invited to present their
              results to the research seminar.  This initiative has started already with an
              Analysis and Application series, and can be extended to other fields.    Every
              Fall, we shall bring non-academic mathematicians (e.g. from industrial research
              labs, from government organizations, and from the financial world) to Princeton
              for a series of presentations, aimed at our graduate and advanced undergraduate
              students, about mathematics outside academia.    We shall encourage students to
              do at least one internship (probably but not necessarily during the summer) in
              another environment, during their graduate studies.  We shall put together a
              "portfolio" of such opportunities, and continue to work on updating it and
              adding new possibilities.  VIGRE students will spend at least one summer
              internship or another extended visit at another research institute, academic or
              not.    Where appropriate, we shall involve graduate students in "partnerships
              in research" with individual research labs.  Such collaborations will typically
              start with work on a mini-project, leading to a publication after completion,
              as well as a presentation at the research seminar series mentioned above.  In
              some cases, these projects could grow into Ph.D. theses.    A student
              colloquium committee, consisting of graduate students together with an
              undergraduate representation, will organize expository talks, aimed at
              students, in which speakers can be faculty or outsiders, or students ; the
              committee will be given the means to invite outside speakers known for their
              expository skills.  Every week during the term there will be at least one
              student speaker and at least one faculty or visiting speaker, invited by this
              committee.    Graduate students will be involved in the development of new
              courses and course material for undergraduates (see also below).  VIGRE 
              supported students will teach one precept of a course for at least one full
              semester during their training.    2B Undergraduate education.  Participation
              in the student-run expository talks series (see above).    Internships in
              non-academic mathematical environments, similar to the graduate internships
              (and in some cases, coupled to them) will be encouraged strongly, and a
              portfolio of opportunities will be put together.    We shall set up an
              undergraduate laboratory in mathematics for math majors, with involvement by
              graduate students and faculty.  We shall collect a database of problems and
              conjectures which are mathematically interesting and (with modest background
              and machines) amenable to numerical experimentation and scientific examination.
               The undergraduate project (which could be used for one of the two required
              junior papers, or, if more substantial, for the senior thesis) would be to
              examine experimentally (i.e., numerically) some phenomenon; students will be
              encouraged to probe further on their own, as well as to try their hand at
              proving special cases.  This will lead them to experience the thrill of
              discovery (as well as the agony of defeat, part of research as well!).   
              Experience in oral presentation: students enrolled in the PACM undergraduate
              certificate program will make a presentation about their independent work to
              the weekly PACM certificate seminar; these presentations are first rehearsed
              and edited with PACM graduate students.  Math majors will be encouraged to make
              a similar presentation (about their senior thesis, or possibly about a summer
              research experience or a project in the undergraduate  lab) to the student-run
              expository talks series.    2C Postdoctoral Fellowships.  VIGRE postdocs will
              be encouraged to visit another institute during one term of their fellowships,
              possibly with other funding (e.g. GOALI).    Postdoctoral fellows will be
              called upon to contribute substantially to course development (see below), and
              will be encouraged to participate in the teaching of innovative undergraduate
              courses.    VIGRE postdoctoral fellows will be given the opportunity to teach
              graduate courses: either advanced courses in their own specialty, or, if they
              are interested, introducing graduate courses.    2D Curriculum and development
              and review.  We want to develop and enhance new courses in mathematics that
              broaden and integrate.  The following are a few examples.  We expect to develop
              others as well:    New modules for Math Alive: This course was developed to
              explain the importance of mathematics in our society by pointing at concrete
              objects or issues and probing into the underlying mathematical ideas and
              concepts; it is aimed at students who will not major in mathematics, science,
              or engineering.    The course is organized in largely independent two-week
              modules; for presently existing modules see
              http://www.princeton.edu/~matalive/.  We want to develop new modules with other
              themes.    We will also develop a similar course tailored to the greater
              mathematical experience and skills of math majors; this course will be
              structured again in (fewer) modules, but it will explore each in greater depth.
                 We also want to develop an integrated analysis course that will cover
              several semesters.  It will integrate and closely interrelate several fields,
              such as partial differential equations, harmonic analysis, real and complex
              analysis, analytic number theory and probability theory.  This course will be
              primarily directed to third- and fourth-year undergraduate majors and b
