Title       : Impacts of Personnel Data Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9810137

Award Number: 9810137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48731              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Stanton stanton@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The widespread availability of the personal computer, local area networks, and
              the-Internet in work organizations has fostered extraordinary growth in the
              collection of-personal information about workers. Increasingly, organizations
              collect and maintain data-such as test results and performance records using
              networked computer systems.-Organizations make these data available to a
              widening circle of organizational members for-multiple purposes.-The use of
              technology for collecting, maintaining, and distributing information
              about-workers raises numerous value-laden questions. Organizational need to
              know may-conflict with worker need for privacy, autonomy, and job security.
              These opposing-needs virtually guarantee conflict about what information work
              organizations should collect,-maintain, and distribute concerning workers.-This
              award allows the investigator to begin to work on two related sets of questions
              about this-conflict. First, what facets or features of these technologies do
              workers evaluate as most-important to their status, well being, and privacy?
              Second, what decision processes do-organizational decision-makers use when
              adopting and deploying these technologies? Grant-funding supports a pilot phase
              of literature review and theoretical development and an initial
              qualitative-study to collect case histories concerning the introduction of
              personnel data-technologies into organizations. Material from the qualitative
              study will be utilized to generate-survey items for subsequent studies. Results
              will sharpen the theoretical focus and methodological soundness of- subsequent
              studies of the knowledge and attitudes of-employees and the decision processes
              of managers in regard to personnel data-technologies.  Further research would
              build upon these results by asking-employees to respond directly to management
              views, and asking managers to respond-directly to employee views. In this
              study, the potential for conflict between employee-and management perspectives
              would be explicitly assessed.-A final project would provide a longitudinal view
              of the introduction of a worker-information technology into an organization, to
              link changes in employee and manager attitudes to the introduction of a
              specific-instance of a personnel data technology.-                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
