Title       : The Cellular Mechanisms Responsible for AP-2-Dependent Mammalian Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9810504

Award Number: 9810504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor Williams twill@biomed.med.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factors are powerful regulators of
              genetic information and are responsible for integrating gene expression during
              embryogenesis. A comprehensive analysis of how these proteins control cell fate
              determination will yield critical insight into the mechanisms of vertebrate
              development. The AP-2 protein presents a particularly attractive system to
              study the various processes governing developmentally-regulated gene
              expression. During embryogenesis, AP-2 expression is concentrated in many
              tissues undergoing complex morphogenic changes - the developing neural crest,
              face, limb bud, kidney, mammary gland and epidermis. In addition, transcription
              of the AP-2 gene is influenced by retinoic acid, and AP-2 may act as an
              integral component of this signal transduction pathway.

Mice containing a
              homozygous disruption of the AP-2 gene die perinatally and exhibit multiple and
              severe developmental defects. Furthermore, preliminary analysis of chimeric
              embryos, composed of wild-type and AP-2-null cells, indicates that AP-2 is
              independently required for at least five fundamental morphogenic programs -
              formation of the neural tube, face, eye, body-wall and limbs. Clearly, a
              thorough understanding of the cell fate decisions regulated by AP-2 will yield
              a wealth of information concerning these normal development programs.

This
              proposal will utilize knowledge of the AP-2 knockout phenotype to probe the
              cellular mechanisms regulating mammalian morphogenesis. A new generation of
              AP-2-null embryonic stem cells will be established that are tagged with a lacZ
              transgene. These ES cells will then be used to generate chimeric embryos
              composed of wild-type and AP-2-null cells. Analysis of these chimeric animals
              will provide detailed information concerning the cellular basis of the numerous
              developmental programs with which AP-2 is involved.

