Title       : Effects of Predation Risk and Individual Condition on Multiple Behavioral
               Mechanisms Underlying Mating Patterns in Stream-Dwelling Isopods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9810321

Award Number: 9810321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Sparkes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Sih  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental goal of animals in nature is to produce healthy offspring. When
              choosing a partner an organism must decide whether the potential mate is the
              best individual available for meeting this goal. However, individual quality
              not absolute. It will be shaped by numerous external and internal factors. This
              research explores how the risk associated with searching for an alternative
              partner and the energy available to fuel assessment of a potential mates
              influences choice behavior. These factors often differ for males and females
              and differ across environments. As a consequence, the ideal partner will also
              vary. This research explores the role that risk in the environment (predation
              risk) and internal state (energy reserves) play in shaping pairing decisions in
              a stream-dwelling crustacean, allowing examination of the basic principles
              involved in partner choice. A combination of field surveys, laboratory-based
              experiments and biochemical assays of energy content will be used.

Little is
              currently known concerning the relationship between ecology, physiology and
              behavior in any choice system. This research will provide general insights into
              our understanding of the manner in which external and internal factors interact
              to explain expression of numerous different behaviors (mating, parental,
              competitive) both within and between animal populations in nature. This basic
              knowledge of choice behavior in nature is important for conservation efforts
              aimed at preservation of biological diversity.

