Title       : Protection of Unstable Pyrimidine Intermediates in Hyperthermophilic Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9810325

Award Number: 9810325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Evans   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hedeel I. Guy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9810325
Evans
This project focuses on de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis in the
              hyperthermophilic organisms. Pyrococcus abyssi, an archaebacterium recently
              isolated from a submarine hydrothermal vent, has an optimum growth temperature
              of 96oC.  Carbamoyl phosphate, one of the key metabolites in the pathway, is
              very unstable with a half life of 2 sec at this temperature and some of the
              intermediates involved in its synthesis are even less stable.  Moreover,
              carbamoyl phosphate decomposes to cyanate, an indiscriminate and highly toxic
              carbamoylating agent. When Pyrococcus abyssi carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
              (CPSase) was cloned and expressed in E. coli, it was found to have a distinctly
              different structure and sequence compared to all known mesophilic CPSase
              molecules. In contrast, the recombinant aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase),
              the enzyme that catalyzes the next step in the de novo pyrimidine pathway
              appears to be quite similar to its mesophilic counterparts.  This research is
              based on the hypothesis that carbamoyl phosphate is stabilized by channeling, a
              process that allows direct transfer of the intermediate from its site of
              synthesis on CPSase to ATCase where it is used to make carbamoyl aspartate. 
              Partial channeling was found to appreciably reduce the steady state
              concentration of the intermediate, and thus its hydrolysis.  However, the
              prerequisite physical association of CPSase and ATCase needed to sequester the
              intermediate could not be detected. Consequently, experiments are planned to
              quantitatively assess the factors that influence channeling and to look for
              physical and functional interactions between the enzymes.  Possible mechanisms
              which protect these intermediates from thermal degradation are of special
              interest, not only because they represent an important aspect of the biology of
              these fascinating organisms, but also because they could have important
              biotechnological implications in the design of enzymes which function at
              elevated temperatures.

Pyrococcus abyssi, an archebacterium isolated from a
              deep-sea hydrothermal vent, flourishes at temperatures close to 100oC.  Many
              metabolites are very unstable at these elevated temperatures and some breakdown
              to highly toxic compounds.  Thus, mechanisms must have evolved in these
              organisms that protect the metabolic intermediates from thermal degradation. 
              This research is based on the hypothesis that the intermediates are directly
              transferred or channeled between enzymes that catalyze sequential reactions in
              a metabolic pathway.  Experiments are planned to determine whether channeling
              occurs and to detect the enzyme complexes responsible for sequestering the
              intermediates.  These studies focus on an important aspect of the biology of
              these fascinating organisms, and moreover, have biotechnological implications
              for the design of enzymes which function at elevated temperatures.


