Title       : Doctoral Disssertation Research: Delinquency and Depression: Gendered Reactions
               to Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9810952

Award Number: 9810952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4769               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Heimer karen-heimer@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Dissertation Improvement research examines the process leading to both
              juvenile delinquency and adolescent depression among male and female
              adolescents.  Research on gender and delinquency consistently shows that males
              and females express deviance in different ways. While males are much more
              likely than females to engage in law-violating behaviors, females are more
              likely than males to suffer depression. This has led researchers to propose
              that: (1) delinquency and depression are the outcomes of a similar process, and
              (2) the process leading to these outcomes is acted upon by gender in ways that
              result in different forms of deviance - delinquency versus depression - for
              males and for females.     To develop an explanation of these differences, this
              research will draw on both criminological and mental health research to explore
              the possibility that macro-level social changes in the roles of men and women
              play an important part in defining persistent stress - including marital
              conflict, role overload, and the use of power-assertive discipline - within
              families. This persistent stress within families, in turn, may influence the
              ability of parents to raise well-adjusted, nondeviant adolescents. A central
              focus of this research will be on how gender ideologies influence this process
              to result in different forms of deviance for male and female youth who are
              exposed to persistent familial stress. After developing an explanation of the
              process leading to both delinquency and depression, the project will derive
              specific hypotheses and test them using data from a national sample of youth.
              The proposed models will be estimated separately for males and for females
              using the maximum likelihood procedures for covariance structure analysis in
              LISREL 8. These models will also be estimated simultaneously for males and
              females using the cross-groups option of LISREL. Cross-population models allow
              for the assessment of the relative magnitudes of causal paths across gender.
              Specifically, cross-population model s allow for tests of interactions between
              gender and the processes leading to delinquency and depression by constraining
              particular parameters to be invariant across groups.    In addition to the
              scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award will materially
              assist a highly promising student in completing research for the Ph.D.
              dissertation. Thus it contributes to the thorough training of the next
              generation of social scientists.
