Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Building a CNC Machining System with an Open
               Architecture Controller
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9810981

Award Number: 9810981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23811              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim N. Tansel tanseli@eng.fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9810981
Tansel

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Ibrahim Tansel of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at
              Florida International University in Miami, Florida and Dr. Essam Soliman of the
              Department of Production Engineering at the University of Alexandria in Egypt. 
              The project's objective is to investigate parameters and develop procedures for
              economic selection of mechanical and electronic components required for
              building computerized and numerically controlled machining (CNC) systems.  The
              economic selection of components is based on predefined performance
              specifications.  The selection will be based on a procedure to be developed by
              the two sides to provide information relevant to markets in the US and in
              Egypt.  This is to be followed by the development of software to control the
              performance of the machining system.  The software is to be tailored to meet
              the needs of the private sectors in the United States and in Egypt.  Dr.
              Soliman will provide the machine and assess the design modification needed to
              have it used as a base for the CNC system.  Drs. Soliman and Tansel will select
              the actuators and servo drives for the operation of the CNC system, and will
              equip the machine with the electronic displacement and speed sensors.  The two
              sides will develop the interface software to couple the data acquisition system
              to an attached computer.  They will test the system performance against the
              desired specifications.  

Scope:  This award is for collaboration between
              two scientists, one in the US and one in Egypt, to develop and test a CNC
              machining system from machines currently used in less advanced industries in
              Egypt, instead of replacing the entire machines with new CNC systems.  The
              study is particularly useful for the developing countries' industries where it
              is too expensive to acquire ready made CNC machining systems, and where some of
              these machines may be difficult to operate and maintain.  It is also beneficial
              for the United States industries that provide the mechanical components and the
              computer hardware and software for the retrofitting.  This proposal meets the
              INT objective of enhancing US-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both
              sides.   This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
              which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry
              out these cooperative activities. 

