Title       : Collabortive Research: A Field Test of Source-Sink Dynamics in Marine Systems:
               Linking Recruitment, Dispersal and Post-Settlement Processes in Space and Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9810624

Award Number: 9810624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145126             (Estimated)
Investigator: Romuald N. Lipcius rom@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger L. Mann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Luckenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Source sink dynamics may define the patterns in distribution and abundance of
              many marine and estuarine species. In source habitats there is a demographic
              surplus (births + emigration > deaths + immigration), whereas in sinks a
              demographic deficit (deaths + immigration > births + emigration) leads to local
              extinction, without immigration from sources. Moreover, total production in
              linked sources and sinks may be higher than in either alone, due to subsidies
              to sinks by emigrants from sources. Hypotheses based on source sink dynamics
              implicitly incorporate recruitment processes, physical transport mechanisms,
              dispersal behavior, post settlement demography and habitat heterogeneity across
              various scales of space and time. Many of the current paradigms of marine
              ecology can be subsumed or applied within the conceptual framework of source
              sink dynamics. Matrix population models that incorporate spatial heterogeneity,
              age or stage structure, and dispersal provide a theoretical construct for the
              generation of hypotheses to test source sink dynamics in the field. The
              investigators will perform a comprehensive experimental investigation of source
              sink dynamics in a model system for marine and estuarine species. They will
              extensive population data and a stage structured, spatially explicit matrix
              population model with dispersal to generate testable hypotheses concerning
              survival, growth, reproduction and dispersal between subpopulations in putative
              source and sink habitats. Mesocosm flume experiments will begin to examine the
              mechanisms underlying the dynamics, with particular regard to post settlement
              dispersal and reproductive success in relation to food and population density,
              respectively. Matrix models will be used to evaluate the importance of
              dispersal, and stage specific growth, survival and fecundity to population
              growth rate in linked and independent source and sink habitats. This research
              represents a comprehensive test of the existence and consequences of source
              sink dynamics in a marine system.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
