Title       : Seismic Design and Parametric Response Evaluation of 
Unbonded Post-Tensioned
               Hybrid Coupled Walls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9810067

Award Number: 9810067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83620              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yahya C. Kurama ykurama@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,1497,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The research conducted in this project is related to hybrid wall systems. 
              Additional research is need on hybrid wall systems in the following areas:  (1)
              development of new and innovative hybrid wall connections and systems; (2)
              parametric evaluation of the seismic behavior of hybrid wall systems.  This
              project addresses these needs.

The broad objective of this research is to
              analytically investigate the seismic behavior and design of a new type of
              hybrid coupled wall which  uses unbonded post-tensioning to couple the walls. 
              Compared with current industry practice and current research, the use of
              unbonded post tensioning, in a hybrid coupled wall system is significant
              innovation.  The proposed system consists of reinforced concrete walls and
              steel coupling beams.  It is expected t hat by using unbonded post-tensioning,
              the detailing of the coupling beams and the walls can be simplified. 
              Furthermore, it is anticipated that by using unbonded post tensioning the
              coupling beams can be designed to remain essentially "damage-free" during a
              "design" level  ground motion, with most of the damage occurring in certain
              selected components of the beam-to-wall connections which can be replaced after
              the ground motion.

The research task include (1) developing and analytical
              models for the hysteric behavior of unbonded post-tension hybrid coupled walls;
              (2) performing a parametric seismic response evaluation of these walls; (3)
              developing preliminary seismic design recommendations and practical application
              guidelines for these walls.  Analytical model of the coupled walls in the
              prototype structures will be developed and a series of parametric nonlinear
              static and nonlinear dynamic time history analyses of these walls will be
              conducted.  The analytical models will be verified using experimental results
              obtained at Lehigh University on unbonded post tensioned steel frame
              subassemblages with connections similar to the coupling beam-to-wall
              connections used in the proposed system.  Based on the results of the nonlinear
              dynamic time-history analyses, the research will assess the seismic behavior of
              unbonded post-tensioned hybrid coupled walls and develop practical analysis and
              design procedures and practical application guidelines.  

This project is
              supported under the 4th  year completion of initiative NSF 97-154.  Successful
              completion of the research will provide an analytical foundation on which
              future experimental research can be built and codified design specifications
              can be formulated.


