Title       : Making the Grade: Science and Values in Agricultural Grades and Standards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9810149

Award Number: 9810149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Busch lawrence.busch@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig K. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Reardon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. James Bingen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5913,9123,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the-relationships which connect science and technology,
              including the National Plant Genome Initiative,-to agricultural grades and
              standards (G&S).  It will identify and make explicit the ethical-and value
              issues raised by G&S in domestic and international agricultural production and
              marketing, and the sociopolitical dynamics surrounding developments in
              agricultural-G&S.  It will explore policy implications for making the process
              of standards setting and enforcement more accountable, transparent and
              democratic.  Standards are measures by which products, processes and producers
              are judged. Grades are-categories used to implement the standards. In a market
              economy, G&S reduce transaction costs,-establish agreed upon conventions that
              can be used to order production processes, ensure consistent-product quality,
              and make possible the location of production around the globe.  Increasing
              product-differentiation is leading to a proliferation of G&S while, with
              increasing-globalization of trade and competition, a-worldwide attempt at
              `harmonization` of G&S is underway.  In addition, G&S are limited by the
              availability and-cost of measurement technology, itself the result of
              scientific and engineering research.- At least three aspects of G&S are of
              social and ethical import. (1) Not everyone participates in the-negotiations
              leading to the creation, modification or maintenance of G&S. They may be
              set-democratically, or exclusively by industry groups, nonprofits or market
              leaders. (2) Although G&S make-the rules for entry into a given market
              transparent, they may also allow or deny access to particular-product or labor
              markets because certain assets necessary to make the grade are lacking. (3) G&S
              may-also have either positive or negative outcomes including distributive and
              environmental effects.- This research examines selected commodities at three
              sites: (1) US fruits and vegetables, (2) Brazilian-soybeans, and (3) Malian
              cotton. The cases reveal different combinations of ethical and value issues.
              The sites provide variation in the links between environment and product
              quality, degree of democratic control over G&S, skewing in the initial
              distribution of assets, and market `imperfections.` -The study uses four types
              of methods: review of historical studies and primary documents, interviews with
              persons involved in the creation, modification,-execution and enforcement of
              G&S, content analysis of the technical literature, and observation of the
              grading process itself, to understand-how decisions are made about grading and
              how ambiguous or disputed cases are handled.- The investigators will examine
              genome mapping results and mapping techniques-resulting from the National Plant
              Genome Initiative.  They will interview scientists mapping and developing
              mapping technologies for the specific crops-of interest here, to
              determine-potential impacts on G&S creation, monitoring and enforcement. A
              content analysis of the literature on-plant genomes will also be conducted, so
              as to determine probable future directions of development and-likely ethical
              import of the Genome Initiative for G&S.-The following ethical and value issues
              are likely to emerge: (1) Distributive justice. G&S (re)distribute wealth,
              income, prestige, power and status. (2) Rights and democracy: In-democratic
              societies citizens have a right to participate in decisions that affect their
              own lives; G&S increasingly affect daily life. (3) Risk. G&S may define-levels
              of acceptable risk, distribute risks and protection from risks differently
              across-populations and impose involuntary risks on certain persons or
              populations. (4) Virtues. As public measures, G&S-are means for demonstrating
              virtues including trust, truth and honesty. (5) Duty to future generations.
              Since-G&S modify human behavior, we may ask whether decisions we make about
              them today will affect-negatively the welfare of our progeny. (6) Environmental
              ethics. G&S raise important issues with respect to duties toward the
              environment,  and may distribute environmental problems in such a way-that only
              those without means to resist must face the deleterious environmental
              consequences.-                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
