Title       : Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Open-Shell Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9810106

Award Number: 9810106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Heaven heaven@euch4e.chem.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,1309,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program   of
              the Chemistry Division, Heaven will continue his studies of the   spectroscopy
              and dynamics of the pre-reactive van der Waals complexes   H2-CN and CN-HCl. 
              He will use fluorescence excitation and   optical-optical double resonance
              techniques to probe the ro-vibronic   structures of H2(D2)-CN(A) and -N(B).  In
              particular, he will examine the   predissociation dynamics of the A state
              complex.  In addition, Heaven   will investigate vibrationally excited levels
              of H2(D2)-CN(X) using   stimulated emission pumping (SEP) and stimulated Raman
              excitation (SRE)   techniques.  In collaboration with Morokuma and Bowman,
              Heaven proposes   to calculate ab initio potential energy surfaces for the
              ground and   excited states of CN-H2.  Finally, he proposes studies of the  
              predissociation dynamics of CN-Rg  and (N2+)-Rg (Rg= Ne or Ar).  The study of
              weakly bound van der Waals complexes is one of the frontier   areas of
              contemporary physical chemistry.  While numerous van der Waals   complexes
              formed by stable (called `closed shell`)  molecules have been   investigated,
              the study of such complexes in which one of the component   members is a
              radical (molecular fragment or `open shell` system) is still   in its early
              stages.  Theoretical models developed for the bonding   interactions in closed
              shell van der Waals complexes are not applicable   to open shell systems.  This
              research provides an important data base for   open shell van der Waals
              complexes that aids the development of   theoretical models of these systems. 
              The results of this research are of   direct relevance to work on collisional
              processes involving open shell   diatomics which is currently pursued in
              several laboratories and have   applications in atmospheric and industrial
              processes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
