Title       : Evaluation and Optimization of Scheduling Operations with Uncertain Task
               Durations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9810182

Award Number: 9810182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignacio E. Grossmann ig0c@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Grossmann - 9810182  Supply chain management, and consequently
              process scheduling, are receiving increased attention.  A major limitation of
              present scheduling models, however, is that they are deterministic in nature. 
              These models assume that data such as processing times, costs, availability of
              equipment, and product demands are known.  In practice, it is often the case
              that there will be considerable uncertainty in these items.  This means that
              solutions that are predicted from existing deterministic models may not be very
              useful.  The PI plans to build upon deterministic model and extend them in a
              meaningful way, so as to effectively handle the uncertainties.      This
              project is concerned with the evaluation of scheduling operations that arise in
              multiproduct batch and continuous process manufacturing, in new product
              development, and in any scheduling situation which exhibits uncertainties in
              the task duration.  These could correspond to inexact process times, lots whose
              processing must be repeated due to failures, and conditional tasks that may or
              may not be performed.  The PI plans to investigate a largely symbolic procedure
              that consists of translating a proposed schedule into a directed acyclic graph
              on which piecewise polynomial distributions are considered with Dirac delta
              functions.  To obtain the probability distribution function of the completion
              time of the schedule, a multiple integral is evaluated over all paths, which
              requires analytical integration over a polytope.  The dimensionality of this
              integral is reduced with graph decomposition methods.  The procedure should
              allow fast evaluation of uncertainties in a large variety of process scheduling
              problems.  The integration of this evaluation technique in optimization methods
              is also planned, for both direct search and mathematical programming methods.
