Title       : Minority Institutions Infrastructure: Dynamic and Irregular Parallelism: Its
               Management in Symbolic and Scientific Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9810732

Award Number: 9810732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1498343            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger T. Hartley rth@cs.nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur I. Karshmer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gopal Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Srinivas Aluru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Castillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mikhail Auguston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2886,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9810732 
Karshmer, Arthur I.
Aluru, Srinivas  
New Mexico State University 
              

Minority Institutions Infrastructure:  Dynamic and Irregular Parallelism:
              Its Management in Symbolic and Scientific Computing  

Through management of
              dynamic and irregular parallelism in symbolic and scientific computing, NMSU is
              establishing an infrastructure to support the development of a competitive
              integrated research and student training program in computer science that will
              service its large under-represented student population.  The equipment
              represents the fundamental backbone for the progress of projects which rely
              heavily on the availability of both a large shared memory architecture as well
              as a fast distributed system.  For a long-term impact, the research activities
              are being organized under thrusts involving automated debugging tools, natural
              language processing, symbolic computing projects, and parallel algorithms and
              applications.  The related synergistic research is being conducted via eleven
              projects encompassing those topics.  The plan includes direct cooperation with
              institutions in New Mexico serving a large Native American population as   well
              as cooperation from the American Indian Program (AIP) and the Alliance for
              Minority Participation (AMP).  Through this effort, New Mexico State University
              is expected to develop further its computing science research capabilities
              involving minority students in greater numbers, paving the way for eventual
              conferring of doctoral degrees, not only to Hispanic students, but also to
              Native American students.  It is hoped that through these efforts, the nation
              might find a successful model that will help in building a better racially and
              ethnically balanced technological enterprise for the benefit of its present and
              future generations.
