Title       : STTR Phase I: Microsensors for In-Situ, Real-Time Detection and Characterization
               of Toxic Oganic Substances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9810551

Award Number: 9810551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Carter James_Carter@eeg-inc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envir Eng Group, Inc
	      11020 Solway School Road
	      Knoxville, TN  379312052    423/927-3717

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9810551
Carter
      
     This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer
              project aims to develop a novel microsensor for the in-situ, real-time
              detection of toxic organic chemicals. The proposed microsensor will be capable
              of operating under field conditions, with sufficient sensitivity to permit high
              detection rates, and with sufficient selectivity to prevent high false alarm
              rates. The proposed sensor is based on a combination of gravimetric sensing and
              the determination of the unique photothermal spectrum of an analyte and
              utilizes a wavelength dispersive device and a thermal infrared detector array.
              This sensing technique is capable of detecting the presence of minute amounts
              of organic analytes with increased sensitivity and selectivity. During the
              detection process the sample is allowed to interact/adsorb onto the coated
              surface of femto-joule sensitive thermal detector. The surface of the detector
              will be coated with an appropriate chemical layer which preferentially
              adsorbs/reacts with a category of chemicals similar to the target analytes. As
              molecules adsorb on the thermal detector surface, various physical changes can
              take place such as changes in the electrical resistance when a microbolometer
              is used or changes in the bending due to adsorption induced stress when a
              microcantilever thermal detector is used. This step provides the chemical
              detection sensitivity comparable to recent chemical detection technologies in
              addition to providing the required selectivity. In order to determine the
              specific identity of the adsorbed molecule, a photothermal spectrum is obtained
              by scanning a broadband wavelength region of the detector array with the aid of
              a wavelength dispersive device. For the wavelengths at which the adsorbed
              analyte absorbs photons, the temperature of those particular detector pixels
              will rise proportional to the amount of analyte deposited and heat absorbed.
              Since different pixels will be exposed to different wavelengths, an extremely
              sensitive and unique photothermal signature response can be determined. The
              chemical detector surface can be regenerated by ohmic heating of the detector
              element.
      Miniature toxic organic sensors offer both extremely high
              sensitivity and are easily miniaturized, and could be readily mass produced
              using standard IC fabrication technology for use in high volume commercial
              applications, including industrial process monitoring, air and water pollution
              control, air quality monitoring, as well as vehicle emission monitoring.


