Title       : Our Environment, Ourselves: Multiple Knowledges and Contested Science in the
               Environmental Health Arena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9810406

Award Number: 9810406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59731              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica J. Casper mjcasper@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports research on knowledge production and claimsmaking-practices
              in the contested environmental health arena. Environmental health is widely
              viewed as one-of the most urgent problems of our time, and it is one in which
              the public and policymakers often look to science for answers. But because the
              impact of environmental pollution and degradation on-human health is very
              difficult to measure, there is controversy within the scientific and
              public-health communities about how to determine cause and effect. The
              perspectives and goals of-grassroots environmental and health activist groups
              often are very different from those of -scientists, and activist groups may
              diverge even from each other in the degree to which they-perceive ecosystem
              health and community health to be linked. The interests and goals
              of-policymakers and of the chemical, agricultural, and toxic waste industries
              further complicate the-picture.-This award allows the investigator to begin to
              explore the diverse, often contradictory meanings associated with-environmental
              health in the U.S.  The investigator will conduct field work at two sites in
              which these issues are under debate.  The cases have been selected to differ in
              important ways, so that she can compare their characteristics with those found
              in the literature on such controversies, formulate tentative hypotheses, think
              about how comparisons can best be made, and develop a meta-framework for
              thinking about the trajectories of these conflicts. The study is being
              conducted with the interrelated goals of advancing-knowledge about the social
              contexts and implications of environmental science and also informing-public
              debate about environmental health. The proposed project focuses on the kinds of
              knowledge created by different actors-in the environmental health arena, the
              contexts and ways in which that knowledge is produced and-used, and the
              relationship between and among multiple knowledges.-                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
