Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Evaluation of the Egyptian Calcium Carbonate as
               a Filler for Application in Plastics, Pigments and Paper Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9810982

Award Number: 9810982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hassan E. El-Shall helsh@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative project by a US team
              headed by Dr. Hassan El-Shall, Professor in the Department of Materials Science
              and Engineering and Associate Director of Research in the NSF Engineering
              Research Center (ERC) for Particle Science & Technology at the University of
              Florida, and an Egyptian team headed by Dr. Tawfik R. Boulos, Professor of
              Mineral Technology at the  Central Metallurgical Research and Development
              Institute (CMRDI) in Cairo, Egypt.  The ERC and CMRDI teams plan to study,
              develop, and test various methods for preparations of fine powders and
              slurries, for surface treatment techniques, and for dispersion of white fillers
              from Egyptian limestone and calcite deposits.  Planned also is bench scale
              development of methodologies for production of both powder and slurry of
              natural and surface coated limestone and calcite fillers for plastic,
              pharmaceuticals, pigments and paper production.  Scope:  This award will allow
              collaboration between Egyptian and US scientists who have complementary
              capabilities needed to carry out the proposed research.  The CMRDI will carry
              out specific tasks, including surveys of resources and needs in Egypt, sample
              collection and characterization, using XRF, XRD, DTA, size analysis using
              sieving, cyclosizer and laser techniques, and whiteness and liberation studies,
              and bench scale beneficiation studies.  The ERC will carry out studies and
              applications of new grinding and separation techniques, and fundamental studies
              of powder/slurry properties as a function of morphological properties and
              presence of modifiers.  The two collaborating teams are well qualified and
              experienced in the area of the research.  This proposal meets the INT objective
              of increasing US-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both sides.   This
              project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.
