Title       : Molecular Modeling as a Tool to Estimate Perturbations of Ideal Gas Reaction
               Kinetics in Supercritical Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9810053

Award Number: 9810053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Galen Suppes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Suppes - 9810053  In organic chemistry, solvents can have a large
              impact on reactions.  Free radical reactions are considered to be less
              dependent upon the solvent; however, even free-radical reaction rates can vary
              by greater than three orders of magnitude.  The ability to use solvents is a
              powerful design degree of freedom when designing processes, due to the
              solvent's ability to reduce required reactor sizes as well as the solvent's
              ability to change selectivities.  The electronic properties of the solvent tend
              to dominate trends in performance.    Much work has been done on methods to
              predict chemical phenomena such as phase equilibrium, reaction equilibrium, and
              reaction rates.  These efforts have resulted in the development of models which
              can, for example, rapidly predict vapor-liquid and liquid-liquid equilibrium
              data with a reasonable degree of certainty.  This work will be an effort to
              develop such models for predicting reaction rates in supercritical fluid
              solvents.    Ideal gas reaction rates will provide reference states that are
              perturbed to non-ideal reaction conditions in supercritical fluids.  Molecular
              modeling will be used to model and then predict changes in ideal gas reaction
              rates which have been used successfully in software called CHEMKIN to model
              hydrocarbon oxidation in water near the critical point.  The reaction rates
              will be perturbed into and through the supercritical region --- as close to
              liquid phase reactions as is practical.  The research approach includes:     o
              gathering sufficient reaction rate data on two model reactions in near- and
              supercritical water and supercritical carbon dioxide,     o using available
              CHEMKIN software to evaluate detailed chemical kinetic mechanisms used to model
              the systems which are experimentally investigated, and     o using molecular
              modeling techniques to model and predict the impact of the solvent on the
              potential energy surface, thereby improving the rate constants of key reactions
              in the kinetic mechanisms.
