Title       : The Role of Impurities in Superplastic Deformation and Cavitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9810422

Award Number: 9810422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farghalli A. Mohamed famohame@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Earthman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9810422  Mohamed    This research focuses on the substructural details of 
              superplastic flow in metal alloys with special focus on the  superplastic
              region (region II).  This includes a systematic  examination of the effects of
              selected types of impurity  atoms on superplastic flow and cavitation.  Such an
               examination addresses synergistic interactions among various  impurities on
              cavitation and ductility.  An in-depth study  of the effects of impurity type
              and level on the cavitation  process is carried out, looking at cavity
              nucleation and the  relationship between deformation and cavity growth. 
              Impurity distribution at boundaries is characterized.  Microstructural details
              associated with superplastic  deformation (boundary sliding and migration,
              grain shape,  grain rotation, and ligaments) are determined as a function  of
              impurity level and type, large strains (>30%), and  deformation mode (tension
              and double shear).  Three  different model materials, Zn-22% Al, Pb-62% Sn, and
              Al-33%  Cu, are examined.  For these alloys, high-purity grades and  grades
              doped with impurities are tested.  In addition,  selected commercial
              superplastic alloys are included to  examine the orientation of cavity
              stringers as a function of  strain rate in light of a new mechanistic model
              proposed for  the stringers.  Also examined are the effects of major 
              impurities, such as Cu and Mg, on cavitation and ductility  behavior in two
              near-nano scale A1 alloys, which exhibit  high strain rate superplasticity.  An
              innovative technique  employs flat double-shear specimens to simplify the test 
              procedure and avoid problems associated with torsional and  tensile loading. 
              %%%  The results of this program should have significant impact  in the science
              and technology of metal alloy  superplasticity.  It will advance understanding
              of the  processing of commercial superplastic alloys and could lead  to
              improvements in the performance of these materials.  ***
