Title       : Molecular and Functional Characterization of Neuronal FMRFamide-Activated
               Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9810804

Award Number: 9810804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Price dprice@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-10804  PRICE   Many of the cells that compose an animal communicate with
              each  other by means of chemical signals.  One cell releases a chemical  which
              is detected by another cell through the interaction of the  chemical with a
              "receptor" protein on the cell's surface.  The  receptor must pass the external
              signal into the interior of the  cell and often does so by opening a selective
              pore in the cell's  surface which lets particular charged ions into and out of
              the  cell.  The selective pore is called an "ion channel" and the  receptor is
              said to "gate" the channel.  Such signaling is  especially elaborate in the
              nervous system, but ion channels are  also involved in salt and water balance
              and are particularly  abundant in the kidney.  One of the kidney channels is
              called the  epithelial sodium channel because it allows the sodium ion to 
              pass.  It was thought that the epithelial sodium channels were  completely
              distinct from sodium channels mediating chemical signal  transmission in the
              nervous system, but it has recently been shown  that one type of channel in the
              nervous system is related to the  epithelial sodium channels.  In the snail
              Helix, one such  epithelial sodium-channel relative from the nervous system is 
              gated by a particular chemical named FMRFamide. FMRFamide is a  peptide
              released by certain nerve cells and is thus one example of  a group of
              signaling molecules known as neuropeptides.  FMRFamide  is the only
              neuropeptide known to directly gate an ion channel and  the channel it gates is
              the only epithelial sodium channel  relative known to be gated by a substance
              released by nerve cells  (i.e. by a "neurotransmitter"). Dr. Price has cloned
              portions of  two epithelial sodium channels from the sea slug Aplysia (an 
              animal related to the land-snail, Helix, but with a much more  extensively
              studied nervous system than Helix).  He will now try  to  isolate full length
              clones (cultured cells containing the gene  from Aplysia) containing these two
              channels so that their physica l  properties can be determined and also so that
              their localization  in the nervous system can be compared to the known
              localization of  FMRFamide.  The end result of these studies will be a better 
              understanding of how neuropeptides are involved in the  communication of
              individual nerve cells of an animal and how such  communication mediates the
              complex behaviors that even the most  simple animals exhibit.
