Title       : Synthesis and Luminescence of Macrocyclic Vinyl Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9810283

Award Number: 9810283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thieo E. Hogen-Esch hogenesc@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9810283  Hogen-Esch    At low degrees af polymerization (DP< 30) the pendent
              phenyl  groups of macrocyclic polystyrene are known to organize in  parallel
              fashion leading to increased absorptivity  (hyperchromicity) and strongly (six
              times) enhanced excimer  fluorescence.  The synthesis is proposed (by anionic 
              polymerization followed by high dilution coupling) of analogous  macrocyclic
              vinyl polymers such as macrocyclic  polyvinylnaphthalene containing single
              photochemical acceptors  such anthracene or pyrene.  Such polymers are expected
              to be  capable of strongly enhanced absorptivity and efficient Foster  transfer
              to the photochemical acceptor.  The enhanced  absorptivity and luminescence of
              the above macrocycles will be  applied to the synthesis of macrocyclic photon
              harvesting  antenna type polymers containing a peripherally positioned 
              acceptor chromophore the orientation of which with respect to  the parallel set
              of pendent donors, is systematically optimized  to allow highly efficient
              donor- donor and donor- acceptor  coupling.  Thus the key issue that will
              receive attention will  be the optimization of donor-donor and donor-acceptor 
              orientation with respect to the quantum yield of conversion of  incident light.
                    The donors and acceptor combinations will be those that  have been well
              studied in other types of antenna polymers  such as linear- random or block
              copolymers of donor and  acceptors, or photozymes, dendrimers incorporating
              donor -  acceptor combinations etc., so that comparisons with a  variety of
              alternative structures are possible.  The acceptors to be included into the PS
              macrocycles through  incorporation into the coupling agent will include
              naphthalenes  incorporated through the 1,2- 2,3- or 2,6- positions.  Acceptors 
              in the proposed polyvinylnaphthalenes will include anthracenes,  pyrenes and
              similar chromophores the incorporation of which also  will be subject to a
              systematic change in orientation with regard  to the donor chromophores.      
              The extent of donor-do nor energy migration and donor-  acceptor singlet
              transfer in the macrocycles and in the  macrocyclic antenna polymers will be
              studied by steady state  and time resolved luminescence measurements at ambient
               temperatures and in low temperature glasses using both  circularly- and
              plane-polarized light.  %%%  These polymers are of potential interest in
              efficient light  emitting- and in optical power limiting devices and in 
              upconversion lasing of photovoltaics.  The possible similarity  to chrorophyll
              assemblies is striking and will be explored.  ***
