Title       : Distribution Kinetics of Radical Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1999   
File        : a9810194

Award Number: 9810194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin J. McCoy bjmccoy@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - McCoy - 9810194    Free-radical reactions are common in industrial
              applications such as polymerization, depolymerization, petrochemical cracking
              and oligomerization, etc.  The PI plans to investigate fundamental and general
              models that quantify the mechanisms and kinetics of these macromolecular
              reactions in complex mixtures.  Most of the applications involve distributions
              of many components that can be mathematically described by distribution
              kinetics.  The PI hypothesizes that these radical processes can be modeled as
              combinations of elementary reactions among semi-continuous molecular weight
              distributions.  This hypothesis will be tested by theoretical and experimental
              investigations with the common feature that macromolecular distributions will
              be monitored, for example, by gel permeation chromatography, and compared with
              mathematical models.    Elementary reactions, such as initiation, hydrogen
              abstraction, chain scission, propagation by coupling, and termination, will
              constitute the mechanisms.  Recent results indicate that these reaction steps
              lead to experimentally verified rate expressions for random chain and chain-end
              cleavage processes for polymers when the well-known long-chain and
              quasi-stationary-state approximations are applied to radicals.  Extending the
              analysis to include hydrogen donors and mixtures of macromolecular radicals is
              planned.  Most published results in continuous distribution kinetics are based
              on the assumption that rate coefficient, k, are independent of molecular
              weight, x.  This is a valid approximation for polymer decomposition experiments
              that last only a few hours.  Longer experiments yield a larger shift in average
              molecular weight and need to be interpreted by a model with k(x).  Polynomial
              or power-law expressions for k(x) will be tested to describe such experiments. 
              The radical processes planned for experimental study are hydrogen-donor
              assisted cracking, polymer mixture reactions, and cellulose degradation. 
              Theoretical investigations to de velop mathematical solutions to the
              fundamental balance equations for the radical mechanisms will be conducted in
              parallel with experiments.  The PI will extend current models to include
              multivariable distributions, such as branching and molecular weight.  Exact
              mathematical solutions that are related to similarity solutions will be
              developed to show the evolution of molecular weight distributions over a longer
              time range.
