Title       : Diatoms and Cold Water: A Novel Hypothesis Regarding Nitrate Uptake and
               Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9810563

Award Number: 9810563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184581             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Glibert glibert@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Diatoms and Cold Water: A novel hypothesis regarding nitrate uptake and 
              reduction  Blooms of diatoms are common in temperate, upwelling, and polar
              regions,  and most often occur in cool waters when the environmental conditions
              such  as upwelling, mixing, or runoff increase the flux of nitrate to the
              system.  It has often been shown that diatoms do not exhibit the preference for
               ammonium typically observed for other phytoplankton, but the physiological 
              basis for why nitrate is taken up disproportionately is not well  understood.
              Based on published data and preliminary experiments, a  hypothesize is proposed
              that diatoms thrive in cold, nitrate-rich water as  a result of interactions
              between their carbon and nitrogen metabolisms.  Specifically, this study will
              try to establish that nitrate, which can be  accumulated at high concentrations
              by diatoms, may serve as a sink for  excess electron flux that results
              episodically from an imbalance between  production of electrons in the light
              reactions of photosynthesis (which is  temperature insensitive) and the
              consumption of electrons in the dark  reactions (i.e. carbon fixation, which is
              temperature sensitive). Different  temperature optima for the enzymes involved
              in nitrate reduction, nitrate  reductase and carbon fixation,
              ribulose-biphosphate-carboxylase, also come  into play. It appears that nitrate
              reductase has a much lower temperature  optimum, making it a more favorable
              electron acceptor in cold water.  Consequently, the rate of nitrate uptake is
              negatively correlated with  temperature, at least over the temperature range of
              -8-20'C.  The significance of this work lies in the development of a
              physiological  explanation for why diatoms bloom when nitrate levels are high
              and waters  are cool. The negative relationship between nitrate uptake and
              temperature  argues strongly for the incorporation of temperature functions in
              models of  new production. Lastly, should nitrate serve as a mechanism for
              energy  dissipation, then release of nitrogen from these cells in the form of 
              nitrite or organic nitrogen would be expected. This study will seek to 
              determine the fraction of nitrate that is reduced for maintenance of  cellular
              nitrogen requirements, and how much is reduced via other  regulatory mechanisms
              in the cells. If a significant fraction of nitrate is  reduced simply as an
              energy dissipatory mechanism then estimates of new  production based solely on
              nitrate uptake could be seriously biased.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
