Title       : Physiological Regulation of proTRH Biosynthesis and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9810349

Award Number: 9810349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo A. Nillni Eduardo_Nillni@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James I. Koenig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rhode Island Hospital
	      593 Eddy Street
	      Providence, RI  029034923    401/277-5121

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9810349  Nillni         Rat thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) produced in
              the  paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN) was  first  shown  to 
              stimulate the biosynthesis and secretion  of  the  thyrotropin-stimulating 
              hormone  (TSH)  from  the  anterior  pituitary,  which in turn regulates
              thyroid function.   This  effect  showed  to  play a central role  in 
              regulating  the  pituitary-thyroid axis.  This hormone derives from a  larger 
              protein  precursor  (proTRH).  ProTRH  also  encodes   seven  intervening
              peptides with potential biological activity.  An  understanding of the
              biosynthesis and biochemical processing  of  proTRH  is critical to
              appreciating how, when and  where  regulation of the
              hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT)  axis  takes  place  during
              physiologically appropriate enhancement  of  thyroid function.  ProTRH is
              widely expressed throughout  the  brain  and  spinal  cord, in  particular  the
               PVN  and  ventrolateral medulla. In the last few years, our laboratory  has 
              made substantial contributions to understanding how TRH  is   synthesized,  by 
              demonstrating  the  way   proTRH   is  processed,  and by finding the
              proteolytic enzymes  involved  in this process.          In  spite of our
              knowledge of proTRH biosynthesis  and  processing,   little  is  known  about  
              the   physiological  regulation  of proTRH biosynthesis and processing,  and 
              the  neuronal  factors  involved  in  this  regulation.  TRH   is  integral  
              to   the  survival  of  most  animals   in   cold  environments  and  TRH 
              secretion  by  the  hypothalamus  is  increased  during  cold.  Moreover  the 
              noradrenergic  (NE)  system plays a crucial role in cold-induced augmentation 
              of  TRH  secretion.  TRH neurons in the PVN receive a  dense  NE  innervation. 
              However, the mechanisms whereby  cold  and  NE  enhance mature TRH production
              are unknown, but could be  due  to  enhancement of proTRH biosynthesis or
              processing.   Data  are  scant regarding the regulation of the enzymes 
              involved  in   this  activity  in  the  brain during  physiological  or 
              pharmacological situations where TRH and HPT  axis  activity  is  stimulated. 
              Therefore, in  these  studies  it  will  be  investigated  the role that the
              processing enzymes  play  in  the  processing  of proTRH.  It will be also 
              determine  the  generation of TRH during physiological activation of the HPT 
              axis. Cold represents a strong stimulus to the activation of  the  HPT  axis
              and represents a more chronic response  where  adaptive  changes in the
              processing of proTRH are necessary.  In  addition, the genesis of TRH will be
              examined  in  cold-  exposed  enzyme  deficient knockout mice.  Cold-induced 
              TRH  release  is  mediated  by activation of  brain  NE  systems.  Therefore, 
              it  will be examine in normal  and  cold-exposed  mice  and rats whether the
              activation of NE systems  mediate  these effects. There are virtually no data
              available on  the  regulation  of  prohormone processing in the  brain.   These
               studies  will provide novel information on the physiological  and 
              environmental  regulation of proTRH processing  in  PVN  neurons regulating the
              HPT axis.
