Title       : A Vertically Integrated Program for Training in the Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9810759

Award Number: 9810759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2286472            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Mullen mullen@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nigel D. Higson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anatole Katok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas N. Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9177,9178,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT         Penn State's Mathematics Department aims to become a leading
              training   center for the next generation of mathematical scientists.  The  
              Department's rise to research prominence in recent years has placed it   in a
              position from which a comparatively modest investment will lead to  
              exceptional returns in training effectiveness. The Department has   planned an
              integrated program of training initiatives at all levels,   from K-12 through
              postdoctoral.  It builds upon the Department's current   strengths: its
              research excellence in several areas; its MASS program,   which was founded in
              1996 to provide an intensive learning environment   for talented undergraduates
              from around the country; and its unique   fluid mechanics laboratory.        
              The Department will expand its recently instituted Chowla postdoctoral  
              program from one to three three-year appointments per year.  These   positions
              will include a limited, carefully designed, supervised   teaching component. 
              Many postdoctoral fellows will be associated  with departmental centers of
              excellence; some will be selected for   interdisciplinary research; and some
              will be closely involved with our   fluids laboratory.         The Department
              will increase the attractiveness of its doctoral program   to the country's
              best students by creating three annual fellowships,   called VIGRE
              Traineeships, with special terms of appointment. Features   will include
              periods of concentration on learning and thesis research,   along with a
              program of closely supervised teaching at various levels.   The target
              time-to-degree for VIGRE Trainees will be five years.  Formal   graduate
              training will be extended to the summer months by programs of   intensive
              summer courses and industrial internships.         The Department will solidify
              its innovative MASS program, expanding its   visibility and securing its
              funding.  It will also institute a program   of six-week summer research
              experiences for undergraduates (REU's). MASS   students and instructo rs are
              expected to be involved prominently in  the REU program. In addition a vigorous
              program is planned to develop   mathematical thinking and enthusiasm for
              mathematics among area high   school students.         The Department is
              responsible for the mathematical education of future   scientists and engineers
              within the largest undergraduate student body   in Pennsylvania, and must at
              the same time promote mathematical literacy   across the full breadth of Penn
              State's student population.  To make   certain it meets these challenges as
              effectively as possible, the   Department will undertake a thorough review of
              its entire undergraduate   curriculum.  A task force will lead a broad effort
              to generate, discuss,   select, and implement the most effective curricular
              reforms, emphasizing   the relation of mathematics to other scientific
              disciplines and   industrial applications.         The Department will
              strengthen the educational and research missions   of its Pritchard Fluids
              Mechanics Laboratory by according it a  high priority in the selection of some
              graduate and postdoctoral   fellowships, and by building experimental apparatus
              which can be used   for undergraduate research projects, faculty
              demonstrations, and K-12   outreach activities.         The vertical
              integration of students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty,   both in research
              and training, is already central to the Department's   activities: intensive
              and extensive interactions among all three groups   are day to day realities. 
              Future initiatives will further strengthen   vertical integration in a number
              of very definite ways.  For instance,   graduate students funded through VIGRE
              fellowships and participating  in the MASS program as assistants will benefit
              from a double mentoring   relationship: they will work closely with an
              accomplished researcher   and teacher while themselves being mentors for
              talented and committed   undergraduates.  Postdoctoral fellows affiliated with
              the fluids   laboratory will assist faculty and, in  turn, assist graduate and 
               undergraduate students in carrying out the research and training   activities
              of the laboratory.  The teaching program planned for all   postdoctoral fellows
              will bring them into contact with other faculty   as mentors and with both
              graduate and undergraduate students in the  classroom.  It presents
              opportunities to develop innovative teaching and   learning strategies, while
              still providing a structured environment with   defined goals.         This
              project is being supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities within the Directorate of Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences, and the Division of Elementary, Secondary, and Informal
              Education within the Director of Education and Human Resources.
