Title       : Workshop on Values in Scientific Research, Pittsburgh, PA, October 9-11, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9810231

Award Number: 9810231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12271              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Machamer pkmach+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel Ankeny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heather Douglas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Merrilee Salmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This three-day workshop will examine how various types of values enter into
              judgments and decision-making in the practices of scientific research.  While
              values and science have many connections, values as they actually play a role
              in substantive issues in research practices, as they enter into the daily
              activities of scientific research, have been insufficiently studied.  This
              workshop will explore, in some detail, how values enter into experimental
              paradigm choice and set-up, how they function in data-gathering in experimental
              situations, and how they affect the way data are treated statistically, and
              then interpreted.  It will bring together scientists (in fields ranging from
              physics to medicine), social scientists (who work on policy, public health, and
              value issues) and philosophers (who have studied values and science).  The
              invited group consists of senior and junior scholars, graduate students, and
              many individuals underrepresented in the sciences.  Through informal
              presentations and intense discussion, the group will elaborate and identify the
              various types of values, and where and how they affect scientific
              decision-making in the context of research.  The workshop will be broadly
              advertised.  Post-workshop activity will involve codifying and disseminating
              the insights and results in various forums at the University of Pittsburgh,
              nationally, and internationally, at meetings, in academic journals, books,
              popular science magazines, newspapers, educational materials, and the home page
              of the Center for Philosophy of Science at the University.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
