Title       : Interdisciplinary Research and Training Program in Ethics for Business Science
               and Engineering in the Puerto Rican Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9810253

Award Number: 9810253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Frey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elena Lugo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hector J. Huyke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge I. Velez-Arocho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supports a retreat and-post-retreat activities designed to (1)
              integrate ethics into the business, science and engineering curriculum at the
              University of Puerto Rico at-Mayaguez (2) integrate business, science, and
              engineering content into ethics and values studies courses there, and (3) place
              this teaching firmly in the Puerto Rican cultural, economic, and political
              context.--The heart of the effort is a retreat scheduled to take place December
              13-18, 1998.  This-retreat has workshop sessions designed to help university
              faculty select and prepare case-studies that can be used effectively in
              science, engineering, business, and humanities courses.  It also has sessions
              designed to acquaint business, science, and engineering faculty with the
              ethical approaches and issues-that are involved in the practice of business,
              science, and engineering in Puerto Rico.  To provide a foundation for a
              successful retreat, a-series of pre-retreat activities has been conducted,
              including a planning and scoping workshop that selected cases to be discussed
              in the retreat, and developed the retreat structure and expected outcomes. 
              Other preparatory activities included a forum that investigated ethical
              problems in science and engineering and an experimental class of business
              ethics designed specifically-for engineering students offered in the-spring
              semester of 1998.  The cases and other materials developed at the retreat will
              be introduced into university classes, and several post-retreat evaluation
              measures will be carried out.  Results will also be more broadly disseminated
              in Latin America and the U.S.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
