Title       : Study of Hard and Soft Surfaces Using Exact and Asymptotic Boundary Conditions
               and their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2001   
File        : a9810448

Award Number: 9810448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed A. Kishk ahmed@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810448
Kishk
It is proposed to study artificially soft and hard surfaces for
              practical applications.  Artificially soft and hard surfaces can be realized by
              a reactive and anisotropic loading of a conducting material, This loading can,
              for example, be done by using the well-known corrugations or using a cheaper
              method of etching conducting strips on a grounded dielectric slab.  To perform
              this study, it is necessary to modify some existing numerical codes to adopt
              modeling these surfaces and develop analytical solutions of some canonical
              problems for verification purposes.  The numerical tools will be general witch
              can be employed to easily model any detailed structure of antennas and
              scatterers. Two numerical techniques will be adopted, the finite difference
              time domain technique (FDTD) the method of moments techniques.  The two methods
              will be used to complement each other and model many complicated structures. 
              The graduate student will be trained to learn these techniques and to be able
              to do the modifications to the codes.  Then,  the process of designing new
              antennas and scatterers will begin.  Some of the interesting problems are
              reducing the coupling between microstrip array elements to eliminate the blind
              effect with lower scanning elevation angles, reducing leakage of
              electromagnetic waves from microwave ovens, reducing the heat consumption in
              high power applications to increase device efficiency and reducing the cost of
              the cooling system.  Smart antennas used in base stations require a decrease of
              the support structure effect on the radiation patterns and many other
              applications.  Base stations requires the study of the radiation from antennas
              such as dipoles, slots, and microstrip antennas in the presence of infinite
              cylinders with arbitrary cross-section of composite materials.  Many of these
              applications will be constructed and tested and verified with the numerical
              results.
To analyze strips loaded surfaces and corrugated surfaces in an
              efficient way, new asymptotic boundary conditions are developed and will be
              implemented in the numerical codes.  These asymptotic boundary conditions are
              referred to as asymptotic strip boundary conditions (ASBC) for strips loaded
              surfaces and asymptotic corrugation boundary conditions (ACBC) for corrugated
              surfaces.  These boundary conditions will facilitate the study of arbitrary and
              finite surfaces that have periodic strip loading or corrugations.  The new
              boundary condition will simplify the numerical modeling of these surfaces and
              Facilitate using them in practical applications.  Therefore, these new
              asymptotic boundary conditions will be implemented in the method of moment
              codes and FDTD code.
In some applications, the impedance boundary condition
              (EBC) can also be used efficiently whenever it is possible to accurately obtain
              the equivalent surface impedance.  Therefore, the EBC will be also considered. 
              We have presented a few examples to show that these boundary conditions can be
              successfully implemented and used with practical applications.
This study also
              may develop novel ideas to obtain the desired radiation characteristics of
              antennas by simple implementation of the soft and hard surfaces.  This may be
              used to improve the performance of the wireless communication devices, and
              microwave ovens, and simultaneously reduce the danger of the electromagnetic
              waves and their biomedical effects on human bodies.  The findings of this work
              will be published in the literature, and introduced to the class room, and a
              comprehensive study may be published in a book.


