Title       : LTER: The Arctic LTER Project: The Future Characteristics of Arctic Communities,
               Ecosystems, and Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a9810222

Award Number: 9810222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4199882            (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hobbie jhobbie@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gaius R. Shaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce B. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9810222
Hobbie

The Arctic LTER site is located in the northern foothills of
              the Brooks Range, Alaska, in tundra vegetation of sedges and grasses mixed with
              dwarf birch and low willows. The tundra, streams and lakes at the site have
              been undisturbed and unchanged for more than 5,000 years. This allows the
              analysis of relationships among plants and animals in this ecosystem which is
              unaffected by an ecological legacy of human use. In contrast to this ecological
              stability, the climate of northern Alaska has changed remarkablyover the past
              30 years. The temperature of the region has increased by more than 0.5oC per
              decade. No one knows if this warming is a part of the 3-5 degree change
              predicted by GCM models but it is known that other areas of the Arctic have
              either not changed or have become colder. Based on several types of
              observations, there appears to be a biotic response to this regional warming.
              The goal of this LTER project is to predict the future ecological
              characteristics of the site. This prediction is based on knowledge of the
              controls of ecosystem structure and function as exerted by physical setting and
              geologic factors, climatic factors, biotic factors, and the changes in fluxes
              of water and materials from land to water. 
	The long-term research is based
              on the following approaches: (1) Long-term monitoring and surveys of natural
              variation of ecosystem characteristics in space and time. This will include
              routine monitoring of variables, such as climate, tundra plant communities and
              productivity, thaw depth, stream flow, stream chemistry, lake temperatures,
              lake chemistry, lake productivity and the abundance of zooplankton and fish.
              (2) A north-south regional transect in cooperation with the Bonanza Creek LTER
              program. (3) Experimental manipulations of ecosystems which are maintained and
              measured for decades. These experiments include tundra warming, shading and
              fertilizing, the exclusion of large herbivores, fertilization of lakes and
              streams, and the addition and removal of predators. (4) Synthesis and modeling
              efforts. 
	Overall, this research will add to our basic understanding of the
              response of ecosystems to human induced global environmental change. In
              addition, these analyses will contribute to theoretical questions in ecology,
              including issues related to disturbances, resource availability, top-down vs.
              bottom-up controls on communities, and ecosystem structure and function.

