Title       : LTER: Long-Term Ecological Research in Field Crop Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a9810220

Award Number: 9810220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Philip Robertson robertson@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart H. Gage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine L. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen K. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. Vanderpool  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Richard R. Harwood  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9810220
Robertson

Agricultural activities worldwide are carried out through
              a combination of biological and chemical management practices.  The Kellogg
              Biological Station (KBS) Long-Term Ecological Research program has been
              conducting research since 1987 focusing on testing the hypothesis that
              agronomic management practices based on knowledge of ecological interactions
              can effectively replace management based on chemical subsidies.  Work to test
              this general hypothesis is focused on field-crop ecosystems that are used
              extensively throughout the US Midwest.  KBS research employs a series of sites
              where 11 different cropping systems and successional communities have been
              established to represent different levels and types of ecological disturbance. 
              Within this series of sites, working hypotheses are being tested in general
              areas of soil microbial communities, the dynamics of insect consumers, nutrient
              availability, and plant community dynamics.
	Recent work has led to
              development of biologically based agricultural  systems that produce acceptable
              crop yields.  The KBS site has documented changes in abundance of various taxa
              that appear to be important in row-crop function and in ecosystem-level
              attributes of agricultural systems.  General ecological understanding has been
              advanced in key relationships in field-crop ecosystems.  In addition to
              continuing these efforts, proposed work will evaluate the effects of
              agricultural practices at scales larger than individual fields on the dynamics
              of biogeochemical processes in entire watersheds.  Efforts will also be
              developed to incorporate a social component to evaluate the degree to which
              human decision making plays critical roles in the ecological processes
              occurring in agricultural ecosystems.  Finally, the results of efforts at the
              KBS site will be regionalized to develop a general understanding of the
              interactions between climate and productivity across the entire North Central
              Region.

