Title       : Contingency Constrained Optimal Power Flow For Deregulated Electricity Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9810288

Award Number: 9810288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin A. Clements clements@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9810288  Clements    Deregulation of the electric power industry will
              require dynamic optimal power flow (OPF) algorithms, new tools that can
              efficiently schedule power system operation over a time horizon while including
              transmission and distribution costs, transmission line limits, generation ramp
              rate limits, energy constraints, price-responsive loads, and a long list of
              operational contingencies.  In the deregulated environment, transmission and
              distribution costs and line limits will be significant because of wheeling
              through third-party transmission systems operating at or near capacity.  Ramp
              limits and energy constraints will control load following and peak support
              during periods of large changes in load.  The active electricity spot market
              will cause load fluctuations as large industrial customers, for example, shift
              productions schedules to capture lower energy prices.  All must be accommodated
              within a secure operating environment that can efficiently reschedule to
              correct for a range of contingencies.      The proposed research will extend
              the classic static OPF tool to incorporate all of these issues.  Drawing on
              prior experience with unit commitment, economic dispatch, and a variety of
              nonlinear optimization techniques, the proposers will develop an
              interior-point-based, nonlinear programming approach to dynamic OPF that
              incorporates rescheduling and price-responsive loads.  Key ideas in the
              development of these tools are constraint relaxation and problem reduction to
              control problem size, the use of Lagrangian relaxation to decouple ramp rate
              constraints (vis-a-vis direct solution of the full time-coupled problem), and
              techniques such as artificial variables to accommodate unfeasibility.
