Title       : Dissertation Research: Exploring the Oceanic Frontier: American Naturalists as
               Amateur Conservationists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9810028

Award Number: 9810028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7801               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregg A. Mitman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project is a contribution to both the history of
              science and environmental history in that it seeks to analyze the dialectic
              between ocean exploration and conservation. It will examine the history of a
              number of popular oceanic naturalists in the twentieth-century by focusing on
              their in situ exploration of the oceanic frontier and the consequent narratives
              of exploration that circulated in popular culture.  Exploration was a
              legitimate scientific practice in nineteenth-century America; it was bound up
              with the work of natural history whose primary goal was to map and catalogue
              the American landscape.  But in twentieth-century universities, exploration was
              largely displaced by laboratory-based science, often under the aegis of
              philanthropic patronage.  For the most part, the history of twentieth-century
              American science is about the dominance of the lab, the staggering explosion of
              technology, and the increasing bigness of science.  This dissertation research
              project focuses on a handful of naturalists who directed their attention to a
              barely explored region- the ocean.  Roy Chapman Andrews, Robert Cushman Murphy,
              William Beebe, Rachel Carson, Eugenie Clark, Thor Heyerdahl, and Jacques
              Cousteau were all naturalists, but also constructed popular representations of
              the ocean.  One of the spin-offs of their exploratory efforts was their support
              for conservation measures.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
