Title       : Cell-Cell Adhesion and Regulation of Pituitary Prolactin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9810327

Award Number: 9810327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly C. Delidow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marshall Univ Res Corp
	      401 11th Street
	      Huntington, WV  25701    304/696-4837

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN(MCB)-981027  Beverly C. Delidow, P.I.      The goal of this proposal is to
              examine the regulation of a  pituitary hormone gene,  prolactin, by cell-cell
              contacts. Preliminary data show that  prolactin (PRL) gene  expression
              increases when rat 235-1 pituitary tumor cells  experience  greater levels  of
              cell-cell adhesion. In contrast, PRL levels decrease when  the cells are
              exposed  to glucocorticoids, which decrease both the levels of cell-  cell
              adhesion molecules  and cell reaggregation. The cell adhesion molecules
              involved  are the cadherin-catenin system of calcium-dependent cell  adhesion
              proteins.  These proteins participate in both  forming stable cell-cell
              contacts and in intracellular  signaling. Prolactin levels decrease profoundly
              in cells in  which the DF-catenin levels have been decreased by exposure  to
              antisense oligo-nucleotides. These observations led to  the hypothesis that
              cell-cell contacts mediated by cadherins  serve a regulatory function in PRL
              gene expression. In  completion of  the proposed work, the hypothesis will be 
              tested in the following ways: 1. The data strongly imply  that 235-1 cells
              contain cadherin-like proteins, but their  identity is not  known. The
              identification of these molecules is essential  because the cell surface 
              cadherin interacts with a like molecule on a neighboring  cell to initiate
              stable cell-cell adhesions. It is also  necessary characterize the cadherin(s )
              expressed so that  their function may be perturbed specifically. Both RNA and 
              protein analyses will be carried out using existing cadherin  probes or
              antibodies to determine which cadherin-related  genes are expressed in 235-1
              cells. 2. To determine the role  of cadherin proteins in PRL gene regulation,
              the Tet-on  system, a new means of stably introducing inducible genes  into
              mammalian cells, will be used to generate sublines of  235-1 cells that contain
              an inducible gene for the  inhibitory fragment of cadherin. When the cadherin
              fragment  gene is induced, the cells shoul d lose  cell-cell adhesion, 
              allowing a detailed investigation of effect of that loss on  PRL gene
              expression. 3. Finally, glucocorticoid treatment of  235-1 cells leads to a 
              decrease in the expression of catenins; the mechanism of  this decrease will be
              examined. Catenins are regulated at  multiple levels in other cells. The
              potential targets for  regulation are RNA levels, protein levels and protein 
              modification. All of these possibilities will be examined.  The information
              gained from these studies will add to the  growing evidence for a regulatory
              role of cell-cell adhesion  molecules in differentiated cell types. In
              addition, novel  data will be generated on the regulation of lactotrophs, 
              versatile endocrine cells with roles in reproduction,  osmoregulation and
              behavior across many vertebrate species.
