Title       : Bioavailability and Toxicity of Ionic Organic Compounds in Estaurine Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9810112

Award Number: 9810112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452287             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Burgos wdb3@email.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Unz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon D. Chorover  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9810112 Burgos This is an award to support research, the goal of which is to
              develop a means to predict the sorption, bioavailability and toxicity of ionic
              organic compounds in estuarine sediments based on scientifically credible
              mathematical models that relate chemical properties of chemical compounds of
              pollutional significance to their effect on biological activity such as their
              rate of degradation and toxicity.  The approach being taken in this research
              involves use of fine-grained, organic-coated minerals as environmentally
              relevant model sorbents.  The minerals to be used in this work are kaolinite
              and hematite.  The ionic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons compounds selected
              for study are structurally similar and consequently exhibit a similar mode of
              toxic action, a prerequisite for analyzing results using quantitative
              structure-activity relationships.  Enrichment cultures of test
              compound-degrading cultures will be prepared using sediment samples from the
              Sinclair Inlet in Puget Sound obtained in cooperation with the personnel from
              the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard.  

This research addresses issues that may be
              applied in use of storm water, estuary and toxicity models in assessing
              ecological risk of activities posing a pollutional threat to coastal waters and
              in engineering design of systems for management of environmentally significant
              aquatic sediments.  Results of this work are expected to improve prediction of
              the fate of organic contaminants in estuarine sediments and to estimate the
              environmental risk posed by leaving these materials in place and as a
              consequence of moving them to an alternative location.  Results may also
              provide insights into the role pollutants from diffuse and non-point sources
              play in affecting sediment quality and approaches that can be used to reduce or
              eliminate their adverse impact on water quality.  
***  

