Title       : Seismic Behavior of Column Base Connections in Braced Steel Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9810595

Award Number: 9810595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash C. Goel subhash@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The principal objectives of this research project are: (1) to determine the
              causes of damage, (2) to formulate rational and practical analysis and design
              model, (3) and to develop upgrading schemes, for column base connections in
              steel structures similar to those observed in Northridge earthquake.

Column
              bases are an essential element of steel moment-resisting or braced frame
              structures.  The designers face two critical issues: (1) How to design a column
              base for combined axial, moment and shear forces, and (2) What degree of fixity
              can be counted upon for a given column base design and detailing? Neither of
              these two issues is addressed in the current AISC LRFD Manual for Steel
              Construction.

Numerous column base failures were observed in
              earthquakes.

This problem is not addressed as the currently in progress SAC
              Program is primarily focusing on the problem of beam-to-column moment
              connections.  The importance of the problem of column base connections is
              recognized but no study is either planned or under way.

A comprehensive
              research effort is needed to understand the behavior of column base connections
              and formulate realistic design and analysis procedures.  This can be best
              accomplished by focusing on the "load path" through the column base
              connections.

1. The principal tasks of this research include: formulation
              and verification of a FEM-based analytical model of the column base under
              combined moment, shear and axial force, (2.) to pin-point the causes of poor
              column base performance, identify the failure modes, and characterize them in
              terms of the potential for brittle failure, (3) to generalize the model for
              commonly used column base connections and establish the dominant flow path of
              forces, to formulate a simplified base connection design/analysis model that
              captures the principal characteristics of the force flow, to formulate
              practical details and design procedures for seismic evaluation and upgrading of
              potentially deficient column bases in existing structures.

