Title       : Communicating Across Cultures: Workshop on the Ethics of Representation, June
               1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9810538

Award Number: 9810538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie Alia alia@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 0000,9260,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This four day planning workshop brings together social scientists, scholars in
              the humanities, artists, and leaders from minority communities for constructive
              dialogue on contentious cross-cultural issues involving research practice.  The
              workshop participants will examine existing codes of conduct and consider what
              guidelines and methods further ethical practice in the social sciences and
              humanities, particularly with respect to research with vulnerable populations. 
              They will look for ways to further what has become a difficult and challenging
              dialogue in the social sciences and humanities, which in many cases has led to
              stalemate or conflict between researchers and human populations, in order to
              create an atmosphere of collaborative inquiry which transcends the
              particularities of regions, cultures or disciplines.  The planning workshop
              will focus on identifying key issues, questions, concerns and goals and on
              setting priorities and planning future activities to carry out the identified
              goals.  Topics to be considered include the nature of ethical communication;
              multiple identities, representation and cultural appropriation; the role of
              mass media in communicating or miscommunicating across cultures; the nature and
              effectiveness of codes of conduct governing relations between scholars and
              first peoples.  The workshop is sponsored by the Western Washington University
              (WWU) Center for Canadian-American Studies and co-sponsored by the
              International Arctic Social Science Association  (IASSA).  It will include a
              two-hour public videoconference using distance learning facilities at WWU and
              Northwest Indian College (NWIC), to help participants reach, and collaborate
              with, the target audience.  The workshop will lead to the development of a
              panel to examine codes of conduct and draft a research agenda on issues in
              research practice for the International Congress of Arctic Social Sciences (May
              2001).  Participants will also be invited to submit essays on workshop topics
              for publication in a collection of essays accessible to general readers, edited
              by the principal investigator.  The project will further                       
                      IASSA's development of guidelines for scientific practice which
              acknowledge rapid cultural and social change in the circumpolar north, and
              intercultural work by WWU and NWIC.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
