Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Extensional Tectonics in West Anatolia,
               Turkey, and its Comparison to the Death Valley Extended Terrain in the United
               States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9810811

Award Number: 9810811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33114              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim Cemen icemen@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1307,5940,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9810811
Cemen
Description: This award supports a collaborative research
              project between Professor Ibrahim Cemen of the School of Geology at Oklahoma
              State University in Stillwater, Oklahoma and a Turkish team headed by Dr. Gurol
              Seyitoglu, Associate Professor of Geological Engineering at Ankara University
              in Turkey.  These scientists plan to conduct research to compare the
              continental extensional features of West Anatolia to the extensional features
              in the southern US Basin Ranges, especially the Death Valley region, in terms
              of geometry and evolution of extensional structures and geochemistry of the
              extension related igneous and metamorphic rocks.  The research will include a
              field geological study in West Anatolia, to be followed by geochemical analysis
              and radiometric age determinations on the extension related igneous and
              metamorphic rocks.  The three models on the origin of extensional tectonics:
              the tectonic escape model, back-arc extension model, and orogenic collapse
              model, will be tested based on the data collected during this research.
              

Scope:  This project will support collaboration between two scientific
              teams with complementary expertise and institutional facilities.  The US team
              includes Dr. Cemen, who is a field geologist with expertise in the geology of
              the western United States, and a graduate student from Oklahoma State
              University, who will participate in the field research.  The Turkish team
              includes two scientists with special knowledge of the geological sites in the
              Western Anatolia, as well as a graduate student.  The Turkish graduate student
              will carry out geochemical analysis under the supervision of Dr. Inci Erten at
              Rice University, and will carry out radiometric age determinations under the
              supervision of Dr. Kip Hodges at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
              The project fits well within the objectives of the Division of International
              Programs. 


