Title       : Ion-Beam Scattering and Modification of Thin Film Growth: From Atomistics to
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9810058

Award Number: 9810058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366356             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Barnett s-barnett@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9810058  Barnett  This project seeks to use 1-3 kev He and Ar ion beams to
              monitor  and modify semiconductor surfaces using the specular scattered  beam
              intensity to quantitatively determine surface defect  densities, surface
              compositions, and to influence the orientation  of grains of polycrystalline
              thin films. Experiments to measure  alloy composition, segregation,
              interdiffusion, desorption, and  surfactant effects will be carried out. The
              combination of  ion-beam orientation with annealing will also be investigated
              as  a method for preparing highly-oriented semiconductor films.  Potential
              applications for decreasing electromigration by  eliminating high-angle grain
              boundaries in metal films will also  be explored.  %%%  The project addresses
              basic research issues in a topical area of  materials science having high
              technological relevance. The  research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a  fundamental level to important aspects of electronic/photonic 
              devices.  Experimental tools such as those being investigated on  this project
              allow atomic level observation of basic surface  processes which when better
              understood provide the basis for  advances in both fundamental and
              technological arenas. The basic  knowledge and understanding gained from the
              research is expected  to contribute to improving the performance and stability
              of  advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental  understanding and
              a basis for designing and producing improved  materials, and materials
              combinations.  An important feature of  the program is the integration of
              research and education through  the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically  significant area.  ***
