Title       : Methodological Issues in the Study of the Democratic Peace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9810092

Award Number: 9810092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Gates   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                One of the most powerful set of  findings in international relations is that
              democracies are less likely to engage in conflict with one another, less likely
              to escalate disputes to war, and never or very rarely fight wars with each
              other.  Most studies of this proposition of a democratic peace posit that two
              democracies are more prone to peaceful behavior than other pairings of regime
              types.  Even if one controls for other factors that affect conflict propensity,
              the effect of democracy still persists.  This result is now widely accepted by
              most scholars of international politics as well as by policy-makers.  Yet, some
              of these empirical findings are based on debatable statistical assumptions. 
              The current investigation focuses on several fundamental methodological issues
              relevant to the democratic peace:  issues relevant to different levels of
              analysis, problems caused by the dyad-year construction, case dependence,
              endogeneity, substantive significance, and measurement problems.  The
              investigators address these issues through a variety of statistical models on a
              set of cases from 1816-1992 involving both the Polity database  and an
              expansion of the Vanhanen database.  Specifically, the investigators compare
              several maximum likelihood modes:  a Cox proportional hazard model, the Gompit
              model, generalized additive models, and a Heckman simultaneous equations model.
               At the systems level the investigators compare structural equations approaches
              with a Kalman filter technique.  The models control for a set of factors know
              to affect the likelihood of war:  contiguity, power status, alliances, war
              diffusion, recurrent conflicts, etc.  The investigators compare the statistical
              and substantive significance of parameters across the models for a variety of
              indicators.  These models assist in addressing the methodological difficulties
              affecting the democratic peace results.  It is expected that many of the
              findings from this investigation will be transferable to other fields in the
              study of war and peace.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
