Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Reseach Center for Microcontamination Control:
               Detection and Control of Microcontamination in Ultrapure Water Processes-TIE
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9810181

Award Number: 9810181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. O'Hanlon ohanlon@.ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon C. Sjogren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly L. Ogden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Sierka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Farhang Shadman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  EEC-9810181  OHANLON    This three-year project unites 4
              Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers (I/UCRC) and Engineering
              Research Center (ERC) to study the detection and control of microbiological
              contamination in ultra-pure water used in the production of semi-conductor
              chips.  The study will focus on the chemical/mechanical (CMP) processes of chip
              wafers since this is a high consumer of water and associated with the
              generation of waste water.  The project aims at developing the control of
              micro-biocontamination in order to recycle this expensive water.    The
              University of Arizona I/UCRC for Microcontamination Control will build and
              maintain a copper CMP pilot system to study off-line metrology for monitoring
              biofilm growth and contamination in the system.  The system will also provide a
              test base to test the research results of the other centers.    The University
              of Arizona Engineering Research Center for Environmentally Benign
              Semiconductors will study the use of advanced oxidation processes to remove any
              biological contaminants and reduce total organic carbons.    The State
              University of New York at Buffalo Industry/University Cooperative Research
              Center for Biosurfaces will study mechanisms to measure and monitor the
              biocontamination.      The New Jersey Institute of Technology I/UCRC for
              Hazardous Waste Management will study how to prevent biofueling of membranes
              used to degassify the ultra-pure water to be recycled.    The Queen's
              University at Belfast (I/UCRC) QUESTOR will study the microbiology of organisms
              in the system and how they interact and obtain food.  (This activity will be
              funded by the Northern Ireland Research and Technology Unit.)    The I/UCRC for
              Microcontamination will test how the research results can be utilized for a
              possible recycling system in its ultra-pure water system in its clean room.
