Title       : Foreign Direct Investment and Antidumping Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9810706

Award Number: 9810706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60690              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Blonigen bruce@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810706  Blonigen    With the latest GATT Uruguay Round reductions and
              eliminations of most major tariffs and quotas across World Trade Organization
              countries, antidumping and countervailing duty (AD/CVD) laws are poised to
              become the most significant trade policy remaining in the world economy. While
              a significant body of literature has examined the trade and price effects of
              AD/CVD investigations and duties, little attention has been given to the role
              of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the occurrence, administration and
              effects of AD investigations.  This project will generate a database matching
              FDI occurrences by foreign firms investigated in U.S. AD investigations to the
              firm-specific duties received by these firms. This new firm-level database will
              allow analysis of the following previously-unexplored issues which have obvious
              policy implications for the structure of AD protection.  1) To what extent do
              foreign firms locate production in the United States to avoid AD duties and are
              there features of U.S. AD law that encourage or discourage this tariff-
              jumping? The possibility of tariff-jumping AD protection has largely been
              ignored, but has obvious impacts on the actual "protection" the domestic firms
              receive, FDI levels in the U.S., prices, employment, and welfare costs of AD
              protection. This project will analyze at the firm level the extent of
              tariff-jumping FDI in U.S. AD cases and the effect of annual AD duty reviews on
              the incentives for foreign firms to tariff-jump. A foreign firm can achieve
              lower duties in future annual reviews by discontinuing its "dumping." The
              theory and empirical work will determine to what extent this feature of U.S. AD
              law discourages tariff-jumping FDI.  2) Do firms locating (or located) in the
              United States receive different outcomes when named in AD investigations than
              foreign rivals that are not invested in the United States? Quid pro quo FDI
              theory suggests that foreign firms may locate in the U.S. to appease
              protectionist sentiments and receive lowe r expected probabilities of future
              protection. On the other hand, a theoretical result by Blonigen and Ohno
              (forthcoming) suggests that firms investing in a market may aggressively export
              to trigger an AD investigation to generate duties on rivals that are not likely
              to be able to tariff-jump protection. These two hypotheses have opposite
              predictions for differences in duties received by foreign firms already
              invested in the U.S. market and those that are not. This project will estimate
              the extent and nature of strategic reaction by invested foreign firms to U.S.
              AD law.  3) To what extent does the domestic industry consider the possibility
              of tariff-jumping by foreign rivals when deciding whether to petition for
              relief through AD protection ? Casual empiricism shows that the majority of AD
              cases are named against firms from countries that rarely invest in the United
              States. When countries that often engage in FDI in the U.S. are named, the
              investigated product is often in an industry, such as steel, where the fixed
              costs of investment are relatively high. This project will theoretically and
              empirically investigate a domestic industry's likelihood of petitioning for
              costly relief given that industries and countries vary in their ability to
              tariff-jump AD protection.        ??
