Title       : Skills, Optimism and Growth: A Bayesian Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9810723

Award Number: 9810723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88237              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaw Nyarko yaw.nyarko@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Most economic activity involves risk and is subject to many unknowns. This is
              especially the case with economic activities that have the potential for major
              technological breakthroughs.  Because such activities are new and never before
              tried, there is no past history one can use to assign risks associated with
              those activities, and therefore no objective measure of those risks. 
              Entrepreneurs must make an assessment of such risks before deciding whether or
              not to experiment with a particular activity.  Two different entrepreneurs may
              be justified in having different beliefs about the probability of success of a
              given activity.  Some may be very optimistic about the prospects of a given
              project while others may be very pessimistic. The more optimistic such
              entrepreneurs are about the prospects of that activity, the more likely they
              are to try it or experiment with it. Such experimentation in turn is what
              results in the creation of new ideas and hence in economic growth.  On the
              other hand, skills are also required for entrepreneurship.  The more skilled
              will be more likely to succeed in their experimentation and entrepreneurship.  
              In this work presents a model in which economic growth occurs via the process
              of experimenting with new goods.  The experimentation process depends on the
              optimism and on the skills of entrepreneurs. The model shows that optimism and
              skills are often hard to separate because they work in similar ways to produce
              growth.  The model also indicates the possibility of pessimism traps:
              situations of zero growth, which come about because pessimistic entrepreneurs
              caught in them fail to try new activities and therefore fail to discover
              potentially useful projects. Some specific questions addressed are the
              following: (a) What are the implicit costs of experimentation in terms of
              foregone current output?  In particular, what is the optimal level of
              experimentation in the economy? (b) Do differences in beliefs/optimism of
              entrepreneurs act as mutations in evolutionary economics, resulting in a role
              for differences in beliefs as an engine of economic growth?  In particular, can
              changes (mutations) in beliefs of entrepreneurs be the reason why we
              consistently escape out of pessimism traps? (c) What may determine the level
              optimism or pessimism of entrepreneurs?   For an idea or new activity to be
              implemented or experimented with, more is required than just the optimism of
              the entrepreneur.  The entrepreneur typically requires the cooperation of a
              bank, or the owners of resources, to finance the project.  Banks, however, may
              also be affected by optimism/pessimism.  Further, banks may or may not have the
              required skills to screen projects and finance the truly good ones.  I
              construct an information structure model to quantify bank screening skills,
              thereby providing a definition of `financial sophistication`  and enabling a
              computation of its effect on growth.   I also study the two-sided adverse
              selection problem which results when both banks and entrepreneurs have biased
              beliefs (optimism/pessimism) about projects they are evaluating.    A natural
              final question is whether competitive market forces can weed out entrepreneurs
              and/or banks who hold biased beliefs.  I construct a model to determine when
              the market can indeed weed out such beliefs. Although the market by itself may
              not weed out such incorrect beliefs, I indicate some types of institutional
              arrangements that may help.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
