Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Study of Micropatterning of Ferroelectric Thin
               Films and Size Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2002   
File        : a9810336

Award Number: 9810336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25560              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilhan A. Aksay iaksay@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5940,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for the support of a collaborative research project
              between Dr. Ilhan Aksay, Professor of Chemical Engineering at Princeton
              University, and Dr. Macit Ozenbas, Professor of Metallurgical Engineering at
              Middle East Technical University in Ankara, Turkey.  These scientists plan to
              study the processing and characterization of ferroelectric thin films for
              integration into Microelectronic Mechanical Systems (MEMS).  The two scientists
              have shown that a novel micromolding method pioneered by Whitesides and his
              colleagues is a quick and inexpensive approach to fabricate ferroelectric thin
              films with micron scale patterns.  The proposed project would enable them to
              develop this method for the manufacture of MEMS devices using ferroelectric
              films.  Such devices have many potential applications in biomedicine,
              industrial processing, automotive systems, avionics, and environmental
              monitoring.  The project seeks to accomplish two goals: to develop synthesis
              and processing methodologies for the fabrication of ferroelectric/piezoelectric
              thin films with mesoscale integration through micromolding methods, and to
              characterize the structure-property relations of these films.  Scope:  This
              project will support collaboration between two scientists with complementary
              qualifications and institutional facilities.  The Turkish team is well versed
              in the fundamentals of materials science but is otherwise hindered in their
              work by the lack of some needed facilities.  The US team will provide access to
              the state-of-the-art facilities needed for this collaborative work.  This
              collaboration will involve a sciencetist at Princeton with a scientist at one
              of the top technical universities in Turkey.  The project fits well within the
              objectives of the Division of International Programs.
