Title       : Vertical Integration of Research with Education and its Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9810774

Award Number: 9810774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1418695            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Harris harris@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yum-Tong Siu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Benedict Gross  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daniel L. Goroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford H. Taubes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9810774
Yum-Tong Siu

With support received from the VIGRE Program, the
              Harvard Mathematics Department seeks to sustain and enhance the vertical
              integration of research and education throughout its programs in light of
              current trends, pressures, and opportunities.  The Department already provides
              a large array of activities that quite effectively promote interactions among
              different groups -- undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
              junior and senior faculty, visitors, researchers, teachers, experts in applied
              areas  -- both in the realm of mathematical research and in the graduate and
              undergraduate curricula.  Examples include an active mathematics club, small
              group tutorial classes, intensive undergraduate advising about courses, theses
              and careers, expository and research seminar series, workshops, conferences,
              special lectures, and pedagogical training for graduate students conducted in
              cooperation with the Derek Bok Center for Teaching and
              Learning.

Participation in the aforementioned activities is common,
              enthusiastic, and well-distributed among all the existing groups within the
              Department.  VIGRE funds will not only maintain the quantity and variety of
              these successful ongoing endeavors but also introduce new options and
              opportunities.  The key features of the Harvard VIGRE program reflect the
              Department's desire to extend and enrich the experiences of all its
              constituents across boundaries of academic age and departmental standing. 
              Graduate students are particularly essential to vertical integration, and new
              traineeships will prevent the number of doctoral students the Department is
              able to accommodate from dropping below critical mass.  Undergraduate research
              experiences will be expanded to include support for students, instructors, and
              practitioners to work together not just during the academic year but during a
              VIGRE summer REU program as well.  A new postdoctoral associate program will
              explicitly help young mathematicians prepare for the full range of professional
              responsibilities they face both on campus and off.  A thorough review conducted
              by our curriculum committee will address the coherence, relevance, dovetailing,
              and boundary conditions of our course offerings.  VIGRE funds will also support
              the gathering and analysis of data concerning retention, placement, time to
              degree, minority representation, and other measures of success in the vertical
              integration of research and education at Harvard and other
              institutions.

Funding for this award is provided by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities.


