Title       : Political Constraints on Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9810402

Award Number: 9810402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine D. Wolfram cwolfram@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award provides support for preliminary research into two examples of the
              effects political factors have on firms' economic decisions. The project
              addresses the hypothesis that firms' decisions are affected not only by their
              customers and their competitors, but also by pressure from the general public
              and policy makers. While previous studies have found evidence that political
              pressure affects firms that are subject to direct economic regulation, this
              work extends the analysis of political constraints to unregulated firms. It is
              particularly important to understand the channels through which political
              interests influence firm behavior in the absence of direct price and entry
              regulation, given the recent moves to deregulate a number of industries,
              including electricity, telecommunications and airlines. This research provides
              an important benchmark for policy decisions, and offers new evidence on the
              nature and determinants of firms' political power.  The first project considers
              the effects of the one million dollar tax deductibility cap on executive
              compensation. The tax cap reflected rising public discontent with `excessive`
              levels of executive compensation, and discussions of the legislation served to
              focus public attention on executive pay levels. This project considers the
              extent to which compensation has been affected by the added small, though real,
              tax and administrative costs, and by incentives to make pay more sensitive to
              firm performance. The second project considers the extent to which
              pharmaceutical companies preemptively lowered their prices during 1993 as the
              Clinton administration discussed regulating drug prices as part of health care
              reform legislation.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
