Title       : Collaborative Research: An Experimental Investigation Into the Economic Behavior
               of Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9810835

Award Number: 9810835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine S. Krause kkrause@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Scholes Hall, Room 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Economic behavior starts in childhood. Children live in complex economic
              environments.  They make choices about what to consume and they earn money.
              Children save, exchange goods, make decisions under uncertainty, and they share
              and bargain among themselves and with their parents and other adults.  While
              this behavior is interesting enough for its own sake, what makes it important
              is the simple fact that children grow up to be adults. In every science one of
              the first steps towards understanding something is understanding its
              development, and we believe economics is no different. This research is
              motivated by the belief that many of the economic behaviors seen in adults are
              rooted in preferences, norms, and habits acquired in childhood.   We have three
              general goals.  The first is to study the development of rational economic
              behavior.  We investigate the age at which age children begin to behave in a
              way that is consistent with standard economic models.  In addition, since there
              are many examples of behavior where adults do not act rationally, we examine
              whether these anomalies are also present in children, in an attempt to help
              explain why they are present in adults.  Our second objective is to study the
              development of preferences with age.  We investigate what sorts of preferences
              change with time, and what sorts become fixed at young ages.  Our third
              objective concerns the development of bargaining behavior.  We study what sorts
              of bargaining strategies children learn first, when they learn these
              strategies, and under what circumstances they use them.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
