Title       : Ultraviolet Radiation on Tropical Reefs: Effects on Fish Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9810387

Award Number: 9810387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Losey losey@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Ultraviolet radiation is recognized only recently as an important 
              environmental parameter for marine animals. The strong scattering  properties
              of UV light in the sea create unique opportunities for signal  detection. It is
              now known that UV-A radiation (320-400 nni wavelength) is  present in a
              biologically useful intensity up to 400 m deep in clear  oceanic water. UV
              radiation on shallow tropical reefs can be a destructive  agent and many reef
              organisms produce special, UV-absorbing compounds to  protect their tissues
              against radiation damage. Many animals have  UV-blocking compounds in their
              eyes to reduce chromatic aberration and  radiation damage and are blind to UV
              radiation. Recently it was realized  that many reef animals lack UV-blocking
              compounds in their eyes and are  sacrificing focusing precision and risking
              potential damage to their eyes  in exchange for the advantages of UV vision.
              Unique UV-sensitive visual  pigments have evolved for the purpose of UV
              perception. Science knows  little about the distribution of this perceptual
              ability or the form of the  UV-perceptual world that may be very different from
              our own.       This study will explore the UV visual world of reef fishes - a
              world  that is denied to human visual senses. It will examine the hypothesis
              that  the phylogenetic origins of UV vision in fishes centered on detection of 
              pelagic objects such as zooplankton. UV vision while present for food 
              detection, would likely be evolutionarily co-opted for other functions such  as
              communication. Work will proceed on three fronts. Spectrophotometry will 
              indicate species that lack UV-blocking compounds in their eyes and thus  likely
              have UV vision.  UV vision will be confirmed by  microspectrophotometry. Using
              the comparative method, work will study  families that include zooplanktivores
              and other feeding guilds. Species  that use UV vision for food detection will
              likely have other functions such  as social communication. Field work with a
              UV-sensitive underwater video  system will describe the fixed and changing UV
              colorations of fish and  their background. Pilot studies have indicated various
              types of coloration  that are not evident in the human-visible spectrum. Some
              include a complete  reversal of the bright/dark reflecting areas that humans
              perceive. Imaging  will concentrate on reef sites such as cleaning stations
              that are visited  by many species that undergo coloration changes during
              cleaning. Both  visible and UV contrast of the colorations that are found will
              be  quantified to explore hypotheses as to the use of UV for close range social
               communication and longer range broadcast signals. Thirdly, when species are 
              found with interesting UV coloration, field and aquarium studies will 
              establish the likely communication functions of the UV colors.      
              Understanding both the uses, and phylogenetic distribution, of UV  vision and
              coloration will help us understand the evolution of UV vision  and better
              predict the responses of organisms to changes in UV radiation  incident on our
              oceans. This understanding will also result in better  appreciation of the
              signal detection/transmission value of UV radiation in  aquatic media.
              Knowledge of the existence of unsuspected UV color patterns  in the fishes will
              greatly improve the validity of future studies of the  ecology and behavior of
              these species. At this time, we may literally be  `calling black, white!` For
              species important to commercial and sport  fisheries, knowledge of their visual
              world will impact the design of visual  lures as well as visual barriers
              intended to exclude unwanted `bycatch`. It  is hoped that the total benefits
              will rival those that resulted from  appreciation of the UV-visual world of
              terrestrial insects. As an  additional benefit, the survey of fish coloration
              will also result in  knowledge of the UV-absorbing characteristics of corals
              and algae in the  environment on a scale that was heretofore impossible. This
              knowledge may  lead to improvement of our understanding, management and
              conservation of  our sustainable shallow reef environments in a world of
              increasing UV  radiation.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
