Title       : SGER: A Study of State Political Party Endorsement Systems in Gubernatorial
               Nominations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9810472

Award Number: 9810472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm E. Jewell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah M. Morehouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This is a study of nine preprimary endorsing conventions to be held by
              political parties in six states in 1998, designed to replicate a similar study
              carried out in 1994 by the researchers in the same states.  Although the
              nomination of candidates is theoretically one of the most important
              responsibilities of parties, the use of the direct primary, required for
              nominations by the laws of almost all states has, undermined this function of
              American State parties.  But one or both parties in about one-third of the
              states uses some institutional mechanisms in an effort to influence the
              nomination of candidates for some offices.  This study is focused on political
              party endorsing conventions, including ones established by law in some states
              and those provided by party rules in other states.  The research is designed to
              answer several questions about operations of endorsing conventions:  What is
              the decision-making process used by conventions and what are the criteria for
              endorsing candidates?  Under what conditions is the candidate endorsed by the
              convention most likely to be nominated?  How do convention delegates evaluate
              the impact of the endorsement process?  The cross-state research design makes
              it possible to compare endorsements made by different types of parties; the
              replication of previous research makes it possible to enlarge the number of
              cases studied and to examine trends over time, including the declining success
              of endorsees in the nominating process.  The investigators will visit as many
              of the state endorsing conventions as possible, to get first-hand analysis of
              the process.  The researchers then send questionnaires to a sample of 350
              delegates from each convention, shortly after the convention meets, in order to
              get factual information and impressions about the endorsing process.  The data
              set to be gathered will be of value to numerous other scholars.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
