Title       : Tree-Ring Formation, Isotopes, and El Nino in Ponderosa Pine of the Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9810474

Award Number: 9810474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Leavitt sleavitt@ltrr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Austin Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold C. Fritts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9810474  Leavitt, Steven W.  University of Arizona  Title:
              Tree-Ring Formation, Isotopes, and El Nino in Ponderosa Pine  of the Southwest 
                Climate conditions and variability over several centuries in the  American
              Southwest have been investigated via standard  dendroclimatological research
              during the past few decades.   Analysis of reconstructed data and modern
              instrumental data  indicates this region's climate appears particularly
              impacted by El  Nino teleconnections and the vagaries of the annual
              southwestern  summer monsoon.  New tools in the form of stable isotopes have 
              recently become a viable option for probing present and past  climate by means
              of analysis of tree rings and precipitation.  This  award supports a study
              designed to establish the linkage between  tree-ring isotopic composition and
              environment (including climate).  The primary focus of the proposed research
              will be to advance the  numerical tree-ring growth process model through the
              addition of  isotopic subroutines.  The fundamental goal of the process model 
              development is to take inputs of climate and isotopic composition  of
              atmosphere and soil (water), and accurately generate the  detailed patterns of
              isotopic variation (and cell size) for  individual wood cells within rings. 
              The isotopic experimentation  and model development will go hand-in-hand to
              better understand  relationships of isotopic composition and climate.  With
              escalating  use of tree-ring isotopes in climate research, especially at the 
              subannual level, this model should provide important guidance to  understanding
              the isotopic results.
