Title       : Optical Fiber Sensor-Based Techniques for On-Line Detection and Location of
               Partial Discharges in Transformers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9810688

Award Number: 9810688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anbo Wang awang@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yilu Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9810688
Wang

Catastrophic failure of power transformers, one of the most
              expensive component in power transmission, often occurs without warning,
              resulting in serious oil spills, fires, extensive damage to adjacent equipment,
              and major disruption of service.  The cost of a single transformer failure
              could run into tens of millions of dollars.  Especially EHV power transformers
              have an unacceptable annual failure rate of more than 3% mainly due to
              dielectric breakdown often initiated by partial discharges.  It is therefore
              imperative that the partial discharge of important transformers be detected and
              located in a timely fashion to provide a warning before catastrophic failures,
              and to prevent extensive damage cost.  Unfortunately, due to the tremendous
              technical difficulties encountered by on-line partial discharge detection and
              location, no accurate and reliable techniques are available to meet the power
              industry's need.

In this three-year program, the principal investigators in
              the Department of Electrical Engineering at Virginia Tech propose to develop
              fiber optic techniques for real-time, on-line detection and location of partial
              discharges in power transformers.  The program will involve two stages,
              including the development of highly-sensitive, miniaturized fiber acoustic
              sensors, and laboratory and field investigation of partial discharge detection
              and location using the developed sensor instrumentation.  The basic principle
              is to utilize several of the newly developed miniaturized fiber sensors placed
              at different locations inside a transformers to detect partial
              discharge-generated acoustic emissions.  Based on the differential acoustic
              arrival times and geometrical triangulation, the location of the partial
              discharge could be determined.  In addition to location, the acoustic signal
              amplitudes, frequencies and time-domain patterns together may also yield
              additional information concerning the partial discharge, such as discharge
              intensity type and stage.  Seven tasks will be performed to achieve the
              technical goal.  These tasks include 1) specify technical requirements, 2)
              sensor design and fabrication, 3) system testing and optimization, 4) study of
              partial discharge detection in transformer oils, 5) acoustic signal processing
              and interpretation, 6) study of partial discharge location in transformers, and
              7) develop a plan for technology transition into industrial uses.  The
              successful completion of the proposed program will lead to the development of
              accurate and reliable fiber optic techniques for detection and location of
              partial discharges to fulfill the power industry's needs for real-time on-line
              transformer health monitoring,

In this program, Virginia Tech researchers
              will work closely with American Electric Power (AEP) and Virginia Transformer
              Inc. (VTI).  The strong industrial involvement in the program would also
              accelerate the transition of the developed fiber optic technologies into
              practical uses.



