Title       : Vertical Integration of Research and Education in Mathematics at Columbia
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9810750

Award Number: 9810750
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2288800            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Friedman rf@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry C. Pinkham  (Principal Investigator former)
              Hyman Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Duong H. Phong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian R. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ioannis Karatzas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9178,9179,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9810750
Pinkham

The main goal of the Columbia University VIGRE award is to
              offer mathematical training that is better aligned with contemporary scientific
              needs and job opportunities for mathematicians.  These require a more cohesive
              teaching of traditional branches of mathematics, with an exposure at an early
              stage to other scientific disciplines and to non-academic environments.  Thus a
              central feature of this proposal is a restructured "core curriculum", for the
              first year of the Ph.D., which will provide all new math graduate students with
              a  broad, yet tightly interwoven introduction to the basic themes and
              techniques of modern mathematics.  The material ranges from classical topics to
              state-of-the-art developments, and cuts across the traditional subdivisions of
              mathematics into algebra, analysis and topology.  It is covered in a series of
              one-year courses, with large overlaps,  where the same ideas occur repeatedly
              in different guises.  Besides lectures,  the courses all incorporate round
              table discussions led by advanced graduate  students and postdoctoral fellows
              supported by the proposal.

The project focuses on three areas in the
              mathematical sciences, in which Columbia has particular strength:  1) core
              mathematics, with an emphasis on geometry; 2) the mathematics of theoretical
              physics; 3) probability, with an emphasis on the mathematics of finance.  In
              each area, we offer (a) a restructured curriculum and research activities
              reflecting cutting edge developments in the subject.  (b) joint
              postdoctoral-Ritt Assistant Professor positions structured to provide better
              support for young mathematicians beginning their careers as teachers and
              researchers.  These positions will have half the teaching load of the ordinary
              Ritt Assistant Profressor positions in the Department.  (c) internship
              positions in allied institutions such as other departments or financial or
              industrial firms.  (d) increased emphasis at all levels on pedagogical issues
              in mathematics, much of this through collaboration with the mathematics
              department of Teacher's College.  (e) improved funding for graduate students in
              order to shorten time to degree.  (f) improved research activities and funding
              for mathematics undergraduates.  This will be done through Columbia
              University's I.I. Rabi scholarship program, which already has an established
              track record of promoting undergraduate reseach in science and mathematics, in
              particular through a summer internship program allowing Rabi scholars to join
              active research groups and participate in the actual process of mathematical
              and scientific investigation and discovery.  (g) seminars and other activities
              designed to increase the amount of interaction between students at different
              levels and faculty  at different stages of their careers.

Mathematics in the
              urban environment of New York will be an important aspect of our efforts. It
              will include outreach to both mathematics high school teachers and high school
              students in  New York City, with an emphasis on disadvantaged students and
              teachers working in schools with a high percentage of disadvantaged students.
              Here we will work in collaboration with two well-established and nationally
              recognized Columbia University programs:  a) the Double Discovery Center (DDC),
              founded in 1965 at Columbia University, a youth service agency serving over
              1,000 at-risk high school students in New York City.  The undergraduate and
              graduate students supported by this proposal will collaborate with the DDC on
              math courses and tutorials for these youths.  b) the Columbia Saturday Science
              Honors Program (SHP), a long-standing, highly selective program for high school
              students who have exceptional talent in mathematics and the sciences.  This
              proposal will allow the SHP to hire high school math teachers as "teaching
              partners" in the mathematics courses offered by SHP, with the goal of enabling
              them to offer similar courses in their own schools.  It will also allow
              students and postdocs supported by the proposal to participate in the design
              and teaching of innovative new mathematics courses.

This project is being
              funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of Elementary, Secondary, and
              Informal Education.

