Title       : The Role of Courts in Contemporary China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9810542

Award Number: 9810542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Y.K. Woo MWOO@slaw.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1093,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project focuses on the extent to which and the manner in which Chinese
              courts are being used today.  The thesis of the project is that Chinese courts
              have emerged in ways apart from the intent of the power elite's who set them up
              and that divergence is significant for what it says about the  value of
              judicial reforms not only in China, but for authoritarian regimes everywhere. 
              The research evaluates the manner in which the Chinese state has shaped its
              courts with in the last twenty years (1978-1998), how civil cases are being
              adjudicated, and the possible radiating effects from tan evolving court system.
               The research relies on documentary and ethnographic data collected from the
              municipal courts in Shanghai (N = 20) and Beijing (N = 20).  Results form the
              study will advance our understanding of the interrelationship between culture
              and law, and test the disputed proposition that china culturally eschews the
              use of formal law, the varied purpose that courts can serve in a transitional
              economy like China's, and whether and how an institution that is establish for
              one purpose can take on a life of its own, apart from the purpose of he power
              elite that set it up.   %%%  This project focuses on the extent to which and
              the manner in which Chinese courts are being used today.  The thesis of the
              project is that Chinese courts have emerged in ways apart from the intent of
              the power elite's who set them up and that divergence is significant for what
              it says about the  value of judicial reforms not only in China, but for
              authoritarian regimes everywhere.  The research evaluates the manner in which
              the Chinese state has shaped its courts with in the last twenty years
              (1978-1998), how civil cases are being adjudicated, and the possible radiating
              effects from tan evolving court system.  The research relies on documentary and
              ethnographic data collected from the municipal courts in Shanghai (N = 20) and
              Beijing (N = 20).  Results form the study will advance our understanding of the
              interrelationship between culture and law, and test the disputed proposition
              that china culturally eschews the use of formal law, the varied purpose that
              courts can serve in a transitional economy like China's, and whether and how an
              institution that is establish for one purpose can take on a life of its own,
              apart from the purpose of he power elite that set it up.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
