Title       : Dissertation Reseach: The Global Apparel Industry and Transnational Production
               Networks: North American Economic Integration and the Southern
               California-Mexico Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1999   
File        : a9810965

Award Number: 9810965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7448               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Sutton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Appelbaum  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the 1990s, the geographical location of apparel production has witnessed a
              dramatic shift away from East Asia and toward the western hemisphere. This
              change has significant implications for economic development at the level of
              the nation-states that figure prominently in this industry, but even more
              important consequences at the transnational/regional level. This doctoral
              dissertation project examines a critical transnational network of global
              apparel production that has received little empirical attention since the
              passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The southern
              California/Mexico apparel production network is a cluster of greater L.A.
              manufacturers, designers, and retailers, and Mexico-based contractors and
              entrepreneurs. This study addresses five overarching questions: 1) What types
              of production activities have shifted to Mexico over the past five years, and
              to what degree? 2) Was relocation accelerated by the passage of NAFTA and/or
              the December 1994 Mexico monetary collapse? 3) Are East Asian apparel
              entrepreneurs penetrating the North American market through NAFTA's "back
              door," and if so, how? 4) How have geographical changes in production
              activities affected both the southern California garment industry and related
              production regions in Mexico? 5) To what extent will Mexico's changing position
              in the apparel "commodity chain" enable it to follow the East Asian path of
              enhanced export competitiveness by moving up to the more higher-value added
              "nodes" on the chain. To answer these questions, the study will utilize survey
              data, secondary data, and data from selected case studies of firms,
              contractors, and consultants on both sides of the border. Aside from economic
              policy implications, the results should contribute to the development of
              commodity chain analysis as an approach to understanding the local consequences
              of shifting patterns of global production.
