Title       : Nuclear Technology and the Ethics of Worker Radiation Risk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9810611

Award Number: 9810611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224052             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin Shrader-Frechette Kristin.Shrader-Frechette.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 1094,5937,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This grant will support a research team, composed of a Swedish physicist (who
              measures effects of ionizing radiation) and a US philosopher (who investigates
              ethical issues in technological risk) to examine ethical assumptions and policy
              consequences of current radiation-protection standards for nuclear workers. The
              project has 7 objectives: to investigate the International Atomic Energy Agency
              (IAEA) radiation-protection standards, including their ethical underpinnings
              and policy consequences; to assess the degree to which these IAEA norms
              presuppose more egalitarian or utilitarian ethics; to clarify the double
              standard for worker, versus public, exposure to ionizing radiation (worker
              standards are more lenient); to determine whether nuclear workers are likely to
              have given free informed consent to higher radiation risks they bear; to
              investigate workplace standards for free informed consent, as compared to those
              used in medical ethics; to trace the ethical consequences following from the
              norms governing worker exposures to ionizing radiation; and to determine the
              degree to which alternative principles would result in public-policy changes
              affecting the safety of nuclear workers. Ethical evaluation of
              radiation-protection standards for nuclear workers will involve seven
              questions: What are the main IAEA radiation-protection standards, and how do
              they differ from those for public exposure? Do IAEA radiation norms (based on
              the Justification, Optimization, and Dose-Limitation Principles) follow mainly
              utilitarian or egalitarian ethical principles? Which, if either, is more
              desirable for current society? For nuclear workers? For future generations?
              What are the ethical and evaluative presuppositions, strengths, and weaknesses
              of the traditional justification -- the compensating wage differential -- for
              the double standard for worker, versus public, exposures to ionizing radiation?
              What ethical conditions for free informed consent ought nuclear employers
              attempt to implement in the workplace? What are the ethical and evaluative
              presuppositions, strengths, and weaknesses of current nuclear regulations for
              worker consent? In addressing these questions, the project team will employ
              four methods that it has used previously, with successful results: (1)
              bibliographic research, (ii) assessment of ethical assumptions, (iii) two-stage
              ethical analysis, and (iv) case studies. After each year of research, a
              multidisciplinary group of nuclear-energy experts will evaluate project
              articles. The strengths of the physics-philosophy project team include 4 years
              of prior collaborative work and different opinions as to the pros and cons of
              using nuclear technology.  Both are widely published scholars. They have had
              policy-related experience and hold offices in international risk-assessment
              societies. The potential impacts of the project include increased knowledge in
              physics, ethics, and economics; greater protection of worker health and safety;
              fostering excellence in multidisciplinary and international research;
              transnational cooperation in radiation protection; and improving international
              education and ethics related to worker safety and nuclear technology.
