Title       : Institutional Learning and Technological Knowledge in Renewable Energy Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9810408

Award Number: 9810408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98102              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank N. Laird   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop an analysis of renewable energy technology policy
              focusing on the-role of ideas and institutional learning as the analytical
              framework for understanding policy changes.-As scholars have given ideas
              increasing analytical priority in understanding public policy, they have
              not-excluded the more traditional explanations for policy such as interests and
              institutions.  Instead,-they have looked at the interaction of ideas,
              interests, and institutions.  In earlier work, the PI has-analyzed the ways in
              which ideas become institutionalized over time and how policy advocates-compete
              to institutionalize their ideas.  If ideas are important, the ways in which
              institutions change their ideas must-also be important.  The analytical lens of
              institutional learning is one means for examining those changes.- This study
              will use institutional learning to link the ideas and technological knowledge
              debated within the-policy community to the changes in policies and the
              explanations that senior officials give for those-changes.  To analyze the
              extent of institutional learning and its possible sources, the study will
              utilize two-important theoretical strategies.  First, it will examine the ways
              that institutions can manifest learning-beyond individual learning by key
              officials; for example, changes in rules, procedures, or-institutional
              structures can constitute institutional learning.  Second, the study will
              incorporate insights from-the social studies of technology by using a complex
              notion of technological knowledge, seeing it not only-as an instrumentality but
              as a complex mixture of empirical and normative claims.- A longitudinal case
              study of renewable energy policy is apt for theoretical and pragmatic-reasons.
              Changes in energy policy are themselves important and will become more so in
              the coming-years. In addition, renewable energy policy is part of a class of
              technology policies that are concerned with encouraging the creation of future
              technological systems.  These policies are of theoretical importance because of
              the profound uncertainties that such efforts entail.  The more pervasive
              the-uncertainty, the stronger the role for ideas, especially normative ones, in
              influencing policy actors and-outcomes.  Pragmatically, these future-oriented
              policies are important because, through them,-governments try to achieve broad
              social goals and influence the direction of industry.- This study will examine
              renewable energy policy from 1977 to the present through an analysis
              of-government documents and archives, as well as the relevant policy
              literature. The analysis will proceed by-extracting the ideas that have guided
              policy by looking at the narratives, symbols, metaphors, and other-ways in
              which officials have explained their policies and framed the policy issues. The
              analysis will also-link these ideas up with those that are found in the
              professional literature of the time and examine the-linkages between external
              policy analysts and policy makers.- The results of this work will be
              three-fold.  It will develop a better understanding of-renewable energy policy
              and recommendations for where that policy should go in the future, and a
              framework that will facilitate the analysis of the broad class of future
              oriented technology-policies.  Third, it will enable scholars and policy makers
              to understand better the barriers to institutional-learning in technological
              areas and, therefore, to develop more effective policies.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
