Title       : Vertical Integration of Research and Education in Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a9810751

Award Number: 9810751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2329245            (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Meiss jdm@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Curry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey Segur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bengt Fornberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Ablowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9810751  Meiss    The Department of Applied Mathematics of the University of
              Colorado at Boulder's VIGRE program is focussed in the areas of computational
              and nonlinear mathematics.  The program creates tetrahedral research groups
              consisting of a faculty mentor, a postdoctoral fellow, several graduate
              students, and undergraduate majors.  Tetrahedra will focus on particular
              interdisciplinary research problems, hold seminars, write research proposals,
              and participate in the curriculum reform program.  The curriculum will be
              integrated with computation using multi-layered case study modules.  Affiliated
              faculty serve as co-advisors for Ph.D. theses of our students; the affiliated
              faculty program will be extended to government laboratories and technology
              companies.    The program will create four tetrahedral groups in the areas of
              Dynamical Systems, Nonlinear Waves, Multilevel Computation, and Fast Algorithms
              and Modeling.  The four facets of interaction within the groups include:
              teaching--as a seminar, and in the development of case study projects;
              learning--to develop mathematical, computational, and communication skills;
              discovering--to develop the techniques for formulation of useful and solvable
              research problems; and communicating--to collaborate in the joint production of
              research papers, grant proposals, and interim research reports.   Computational
              mathematics provides the unifying theme for vertical integration of our
              training program.  Computation will be integrated into lower division courses
              through Case Study Modules.  Vertical integration will be implemented through
              the development of a multi-layered modeling course that has both lower and
              upper division undergraduate components as well as a graduate component.   The
              VIGRE grant will support four Postdoctoral Fellows.  They will receive
              mentoring from a faculty advisor and teach one course each semester for the
              Department.  Twelve Graduate Trainees will be funded by the proposal.  They
              will participate in the tetrahedra, research pro posal development, and the
              development and implementation of case study modules and receive teacher
              training through the Teaching and Learning Seminar and the Graduate Teacher
              Program.  Four Undergraduate Research Experiences will be funded each year. 
              Students will participate in one of the tetrahedra part-time during the
              academic year and for two months during the summer.   These initiatives will be
              sustainable and lead to a number of permanent structural changes: successful
              tetrahedral research groups will endure and be emulated, case study modules
              will form an essential part of our curriculum, and the extended affiliated
              faculty will result in a continuing option for training of our students in
              application areas.   Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division
              of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.
