Title       : Neuronal Translational Control - Ribosome Function and the Role of Ribosome
               Protein L4
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9810803

Award Number: 9810803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81251              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery Lewis Twiss jtwiss@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-10803 TWISS.  Gene expression, in which a cells genes are turned on and
              become active,  is a tightly regulated process whereby the genetic codes of DNA
              in the nucleus is "transcribed" into an intermediate messenger compound, RNA,
              which is then "translated" to produce a given protein.  Gene transcription is a
              complex and highly controlled mechanism.  Cellular type is determined by the
              specific combination of proteins which a cell expresses.  Therefore, once a
              messenger RNA molecule is produced it still must be translated into protein to
              have any effect. It has become increasingly clear that this translation of
              messenger RNA into protein can also be regulated.  Translational control of
              preexisting messenger RNAs is indeed an efficient and rapid mechanism to alter
              cellular protein levels.  Initial studies have shown that cells of the nervous
              system can control the translation of messenger RNAs to rapidly respond to
              extracellular stimuli (stimuli outside the cell) and injury.  Although,
              translationally-regulated messenger RNAs are known in other cell types, until
              recently, no specific messenger RNAs that are regulated in this fashion have
              been identified in neurons.  Dr. Twiss has isolated a messenger RNA whose
              translation is regulated by a chemical known as "nerve growth factor" during
              neuronal differentiation (transition from a precursor cell into a maturee nerve
              cell) and regeneration (repair following injury).  This messenger RNA encodes
              for a particular component of translational machinery, a protein associated
              with the translation centers, "ribosomes."  Preliminary studies have shown that
              differentiated neurons distinctly regulate translation of this ribosomal
              protein messenger RNA in different growth states. Translation of this ribosomal
              protein mRNA is required for some forms of neuronal regeneration.  Using an in
              vitro model of neuronal differentiation and regeneration, Dr. Twiss will
              investigate the role of this ribosomal protein in mature and injured neurons
              and how it affects the function of the translational machinery.  The goal of
              these experiments is to elucidate the fundamental biological mechanisms and
              consequences of translational regulation in neurons.  The experiments proposed
              will advance the understanding of this increasingly important basic neuronal
              response and will be the first to specifically address the mechanisms and
              impact of translational control in neurons.


