Title       : STTR Phase I: Quantum Tunneling Biosensor Identifies Endocrine Disrupters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9810587

Award Number: 9810587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard P. Groger www.arcova.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Rsrch Corp of VA
	      PO Box 3406
	      Radford, VA  241433406    540/731-0655

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9810587  Groger       This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
              project aims to develop electrodes modified with ligand-stabilized metal
              clusters (LSMC) for immunological and nucleic acid-dependent assays in order to
              improve the selectivity of capacitance-based methods of analysis. The
              observation of quantum tunneling in LSMC at room temperature and the
              feasibility of monitoring biologically produced sub-nanometer displacements
              with LSMC arrays suggests the very high sensitivity of this approach. The
              innovation of the proposed sensor system is the combination of LSMC with a
              frequency-dependent chip-based read-out to provide a silicon-based sensor
              having unparalleled sensitivity to endocrine disrupter molecules. The Phase I
              research objectives include the development of gold and silver
              ligand-stabilized metal clusters, deposition of LSMC membranes on electrode
              surfaces, acquisition of families of test data and optimization of a
              proof-of-concept prototype system. Recent evidence that xenobiotic materials
              can disrupt the endocrine systems of developing organisms has underscored the
              need to understand the mechanisms of interaction of these substances with
              biological systems. Capacitive biosensors have shown sufficient sensitivity for
              trace analysis of these endocrine disrupters in solution, in vitro and in vivo,
              but these biosensors can also respond to changes in the electrochemical
              characteristics of the sample, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the
              technique. In Phase II, test procedures will be automated and the sensor will
              be miniaturized for use in environmental analysis.        The Phase I program
              will result in a prototype biosensor based on ligand-stabilized metal clusters
              for monitoring environmental change. The sensor will find use in industrial and
              environmental process monitoring and in defense and biomedical applications.
