Title       : US-Lebanon Planning Visit: Initiation of Collaborative Research on Active
               Tectonics, Seismology and Earthquake Hazard Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9810510

Award Number: 9810510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Muawia Barazangi barazangi@geology.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1307,5988,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Description:  This award is to support a planning visit by three US scientists
              to Lebanon and Syria to conduct preliminary geological field work and to
              organize a program for a collaborative research on active tectonics,
              seismology, and earthquake hazard assessment.  The US principal investigator is
              Dr. Muawai Barazangi, of the Institute of the Study of the Continents at
              Cornell University.  The collaborators include Dr. Kamal Khair, Geology
              Department of the American University of Beirut (AUB), and Dr. Charles Tabet,
              Director of the National Center for Geophysics of the Lebanese National Council
              for Scientific Research (NCSR).  The US scientists also plan to use this
              occasion to attend the 4th International Conference on the Geology of the
              Middle East, to be held in Beirut in November 1998.  Lebanon occupies a
              critical area along the Dead Sea fault system in which regional strain is
              transferred between two long fault segments by a large bend in the fault
              system.  The proposed study will help scientists to understand the processes of
              an active, continental transform fault, which is similar in many ways to the
              San Andreas fault system in southern California.     Scope:   This planning
              visit will help the US and Lebanese scientists prepare proposals for
              collaborative research in an area that is scientifically important.  The P.I.
              has excellent credentials in the area of seismological investigations in the
              Middle East and North Africa.  The AUB, which follows the American academic and
              research models, has a good reputation, and thus the collaboration with its
              scientists would likely be quite productive.  One of the two persons travelling
              with the P.I. is a junior scientist who recently received the Ph.D. degree, and
              the other is a graduate student working on his Ph.D.  These two will have an
              opportunity for a productive international scientific experience.
