Title       : The Fluorescence of Indole, Tryptophan and Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9810812

Award Number: 9810812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ludwig Brand Ludwig.Brand@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to understand the influence of the local
              environment on the fluorescence decay of tryptophan residues in proteins. The
              fluorescence of indole, 3-methyl indole and tryptophan will be studied with the
              aid of pulse nanosecond fluorescence methods. Fluorescence decay data with
              excitation at various wavelengths will be obtained as a function of viscosity
              and solvent polarity. Experiments will be done to photoselect subpopulations of
              differentially solvated fluorophores. The data will be represented as
              fluorescence decay associated spectra (DAS) and time-resolved emission spectra
              (TRES).  Theoretical studies will be done in order to predict the influence of
              excitation wavelength and environmental conditions such as viscosity,
              temperature and polarity on excited-state solvation processes. Similar studies
              will be done with several single tryptophan containing proteins including
              mutant forms of Enzyme I of the PTS, the galactose repressor, myelin basic
              protein and the ultrathioborax homeodomain (UBX).  These experiments are
              designed to provide information about the mutual interaction between tryptophan
              residues in proteins and the polar solvent environment to provide more detailed
              information about the relation between protein structure and fluorescence and
              to explain the changes observed  when proteins exhibit conformational changes
              or interact with other molecules.

The functions of proteins include
              catalytic activity and regulation. These events involve conformational changes
              observable by tryptophan fluorescence. A clear understanding of the origin of
              the sensitivity of tryptophan fluorescence to conformational changes of
              proteins remains elusive. The aim of these studies is to utilize nanosecond
              time-resolved fluorescence methods to understand the influence of excited-state
              solvation and charges on the fluorescence of tryptophan in proteins. This work
              will enhance the application of fluorescence spectroscopy to studies of 
              function and structure of proteins.



