Title       : Development of Adaptive Learning Algorithms for High-Performance Control of
               Robotic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9810398

Award Number: 9810398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Degang Chen djchen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810398
Chen
The past few decades have witnessed tremendous growth in the
              deployment of robotic systems to improve production rate and product quality. 
              The vast majority of these industrial robots are used for simple, repetitive
              tasks.  Traditional robot controllers do not take advantage of the repetitive
              nature and the same performance error will persist in all repetitive
              executions.  Consequently, over eighty percent of today's robots are restricted
              to tasks requiring relatively low precision.  It is predicted, however, that
              future growth will be in high performance robotic systems for tasks such as
              electronic assembly.  Learning Control, being able to learn from past
              experience to eliminate errors in future trials, has great potential to emerge
              as the controller of choice for future robotic systems.  The bottleneck
              hindering this technology is its inability to handle non-minimum phase dynamics
              that arise in high-speed operation and in robotic systems with flexible
              components.
The main objective of this project is to develop a new control
              methodology for the precise and high-speed execution of repetitive tasks for
              robotic systems with light-weight flexible components.  The technical approach
              is inversion-based adaptive learning control that learns both the optimal
              control input and the system model from past execution data.  This approach
              will resolve the above mentioned bottleneck by incorporating into the learning
              algorithms techniques from stable inversion, a theory recently developed for
              handling non-minimum phase systems.  The project will also speed up the
              application of the new technology to industrial robotic systems by validating
              its effectiveness through simulation and experimental testing and by resolving
              technical issues arising in its practical implementation.
Utilizing the PI's
              eight years of experience in robotic control and his expertise in stable
              inversion, the three year project will deliver the following: 1) a family of
              adaptive learning control algorithms designed to work for both minimum and
              non-minimum phase systems; 2) a set of nonlinear tools that enable the design
              and implementation of adaptive learning controllers for nonlinear systems that
              arise in light-weight robotic systems; 3) an experimental testbed with
              light-weight flexible components (a 3D crane reconfigurable for various testing
              purposes); 4) extensive simulation and experimental testing, validating the new
              control technology and demonstrating its high-performance in practical
              implementation.
In addition to expanding the knowledge base in systems and
              control, the successful delivery of this control technology will have a
              significant impact on industries involved with robotic systems.  The deployment
              of the new technology will bring about improved product quality since it
              empowers the robot to learn and eliminate repetitive errors.  Production rate
              will be higher since the new controller can overcome difficulties caused by
              structural flexibility in high speed operation.  Various cranes, currently in
              widespread use and manually controlled by skilled operators, can be automated
              using the new controller to achieve high performance at high speed, effectively
              converting them into programmable robots.  The technology also promotes design
              and deployment of lighter-weight robotics systems, which in turn leads to
              faster speed, less energy consumption, less material waste, and other
              environmental and societal benefits.  
***  

