Title       : U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Seismotectonics and Seismic Hazard and Risk
               Assessment Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9810994

Award Number: 9810994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Farouk El-Baz paula@crsa.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 5944,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9810994
El-Baz

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Farouk El-Baz, Director of the Center for Remote Sensing at
              Boston University and Dr. Samir Riad, Professor of Geophysics at the National
              Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences (NARSS) in Cairo, Egypt.  The
              two plan to formulate and start a program to assess the earthquake risks in
              various parts of Egypt.  The tasks planned include: 1) compilation of a uniform
              data base and catalogue of historical seismicity data, 2) production of a
              master seismic source model combining the data on the special-temporal
              distribution of seismicity from the earthquake catalogue and relevant
              geological input from seismotectonics, paleo-seismology, geomorphology, mapping
              of active faults, geodetic estimates of crustal deformation, and geodynamic
              modeling, 3) evaluation of the probability of occurrence of ground shaking in a
              given time period using several probabilistic seismotectonic approaches.  This
              project will be a part of an IGCP Project entitled "Seismotectonics and Seismic
              Hazard Assessment of the Mediterranean Basin," which Dr. Riad and others have
              submitted and which was adopted by the Scientific Committee of the
              IGCP.

Scope:  This award will allow collaboration between Egyptian and US
              scientists who have significant technical background and expertise to carry out
              the proposed research.  The US scientist has extensive experience in Egypt's
              geology, remote sensing data gathering and interpretation, and he also has
              access to international sources of data that will be used in this study.  The
              Egyptian scientist has long experience in geologic studies in Egypt and in
              monitoring seismic activities in the Mediterranean region.  He is working with
              others to correlate data from Egypt with those from other countries in the
              northern Mediterranean area.  This research project will provide more complete
              and uniform data base information, catalogues and maps, will provide
              comparative evaluations of the different geological and geophysical data sets,
              and of the different methodologies in the assessment of seismic hazard, and
              will result in the production of software for data handling and analysis.  It
              will also make possible transfer of technology and risk assessment
              methodologies between the collaborating teams.  This proposal meets the INT
              objective of increasing US-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both
              sides.   This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
              which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry
              out these cooperative activities. 

