Title       : Antarctic Oral and Written History Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a9810431

Award Number: 9810431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Guthridge                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147290             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Bergstrom jbergstrom@cox.rr.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dian O. Belanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Bowers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Stroup  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Antarctic Deep Freeze Asso
	      100 Pampas Drive
	      Long Beach, MS  395602706    /   -

NSF Program : 5130      ANTARCTIC COORDINATION & INFOR
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9810431    Project summary    The Antarctic Deep Freeze Association, Inc.,
              with independent historian Dian O. Belanger will produce a two-part study that
              will document and preserve the history of one of the most important and
              fruitful periods of human activity in the Antarctic.  The historian will
              conduct oral history interviews with veterans of Operations Deep Freeze I and
              Deep Freeze II, the military and civilian pioneers who helped plan and
              implement the most comprehensive construction program ever attempted on the
              polar continent.  The 35 to 40 interviews with selected individuals will be
              professionally researched, prepared, and conducted on audio tape.  The tapes
              will be transcribed, soft-bound, indexed, and deposited in up to four
              repositories for preservation and use.    Complementing the oral histories, and
              relying significantly on them as resources for a primary theme-that of
              developing a workable infrastructure for polar scientific investigation-the
              historian will write a history of the U.S. presence in Antarctica from the
              post-World War II period through the formulation of the Antarctic Treaty of
              1959.  During this crucial time the United States asserted itself on the
              continent by mapping vast areas, constructing seven widely scattered facilities
              to support or conduct scientific research, participating in the huge antarctic
              research program of the International Geophysical Year, and leading efforts to
              formalize continuing peaceful, cooperative activity through the Antarctic
              Treaty, which went into force in 1961.     This publishable manuscript of 200
              to 250 pages will build from works such as Bertrand's Americans in Antarctica,
              1775-1948 and provide a basis for further historical investigation of this
              singular environment.  Written in a lively, engaging style, using the
              participants' own words as possible, the book will adhere to established
              standards of professional historical scholarship.  These histories will be a
              resource for historians, scientists, civilian and military poli cy makers, and
              the public.  ***
