Title       : U.S.-Zanzibar Dissertation Enhancement: Trading on 'Arabness': Merchants and the
               State in Pemba
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9810686

Award Number: 9810686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: 
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5928,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9810686
Worby & McKim

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
              graduate student, Mr. Bruce McKim, working under the guidance of Dr. Eric
              Worby, with the Department of Anthropology at Yale University, to do a
              multi-site field study in Zanzibar and Oman.  Colonial-era accounts often
              described the social order of Zanzibar as a racially-layered pyramid.  At the
              top was a privileged rural aristocracy of Arab plantation owners, in the middle
              was a large Indian merchant class, and at the base lay a mass of African
              laborers.  After the 1964 Zanzibar Revolution, however, the state consolidated
              its control over most economic and social activities and this social order was
              changed.  As a result, the entire Indian community on the island of Pemba
              emigrated and many of the Arab families migrated to Oman.  Zanzibar's recent
              implementation of market liberalization has resulted in the emergence of a new
              urban-based commercial class, whose members are mostly Arabs with connections
              to the Middle East.  Mr. McKim will study the social, economic, and political
              transformations of this commercial class to determine how the Arabs overcame
              their officially disadvantaged social identity and became successful in
              commerce, and how they refashioned their identity as an urban elite status
              group.  Information will be collected from ethnographic and archival research
              in Zanzibar, and interviews with the families of Pemban businessmen who reside
              in Oman.  Research techniques will include participant observation, surveys,
              interviews, audiotaped oral histories, network sampling, and archival research.
               Members of the Department of Archives, Museum and Antiquities, Zanzibar
              Revolutionary Government, will collaborate with Mr. McKim on this project.
              

The results of this study will increase the knowledge about ethnicity and
              identity, and how an ethnic group operates in a larger multi-dimensional
              domain. This project will also support an international research experience
              very early in the career of an outstanding graduate student.
***

