Title       : IDPU/WG: Women in Science: A Community of Learners
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9810207

Award Number: 9810207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra K. Madison smadison@uwsp.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Gifford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Stevens Pt
	      2100 Main Street
	      Stevens Point, WI  54481    715/346-2632

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point (UWSP) recently  implemented a
              Freshman Interest Group (FIG) initiative on its  campus.  The program has
              generally been successful; however, the  success has not been universal.  The
              single science, mathematics,  engineering and technology (SME&T)-related FIG
              attracted only 12  students in its inaugural year and seven in its second
              year--all  male.  The experience highlights the difficulties regional 
              universities may experience implementing national educational  reform models as
              well as the need for a SME&T-related initiative  that targets women.  This
              project's goal is to develop the  resource referred to as the "second tier,"
              those who can do  science, but opt not to.  The knowledge gained by identifying
               those components that appear most effective could reform the way  science is
              taught.  The specific objectives are to:  create a  Women in Science learning
              community; enhance classroom  instruction with study groups; provide technology
              training,  career information, role models, and related work experience; 
              acquaint faculty members with gender issues; and identify the  facets of the
              intervention that are most effective.  The program  includes an
              interdisciplinary course that participants will take  as a cohort.  The
              curriculum will be enhanced with field trips,  guest speakers, and career
              information.  Mentor-led study groups,  a technology workshop, a family open
              house, and SME&T-related  student employment will provide additional
              scaffolding.
