Title       : RUI: ph Regulation in Medullary Glia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9810809

Award Number: 9810809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel K. Hartline                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146202             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Erlichman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 98-10809  ERLICHMAN      The brain is composed of two types of cells termed
              neurons and  glia. Most of what we know about the processing of information in 
              the brain involves the generation, propagation and transfer of  electrical
              signals between neurons within the brain. Although it  is clear that neurons
              play a pivotal role in all brain-related  activities such as learning and
              memory, recent research suggests  that glial cells may play a crucial role in
              normal neuronal  function. The importance of glia in normal brain function may
              be  related to their ability to regulate a variety of chemicals  accessible to
              the neurons. The regulation of these chemicals is  important to study because
              these substances that can have profound  effects on the production of
              electrical signals in neurons and  thus the type and content of information
              processed by the brain.  Dr. Erlichman will examine role of glia in a region of
              the brain  involved in the regulation of breathing. Using live brain tissue 
              and a special microscope, he will investigate how glia regulate  the level of
              acidity in a region of the brain known as the  medulla. Controlling the level
              of acidity in the body is one of  the most tightly regulated systems known.
              This tight regulation is  thought to occur because slight variations in acidity
              (either too  much or too little) can greatly disrupt cell function throughout 
              the body. The medulla is a particularly important region of the  brain since
              neurons at these sites 'sense' changes in acidity by  altering their production
              of electrical signals. These changes in  electrical signals ultimately result
              in a change in breathing,  which is one method the body uses to regulate
              acidity.  Investigating the role of glia in this response is exciting  because
              it will provide important new information on how glia help  regulate acidity in
              the medulla and more generally, how the  interaction of these two cell types
              help shape information  processing in the brain.
