Title       : Hemisphere-Wide Collaboration on Development Research in the Americas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a9810889

Award Number: 9810889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sebastian Edwards   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810889  Edwards             The objective of this project is to form new
              research ties between Latin American and US-based researchers in the area of
              economic development studies, with the ultimate goals of strengthening Latin
              American research capacity and filling gaps in our empirical understanding of
              development issues affecting the region.   To achieve these aims, this proposal
              would launch two related US-Latin American collaborative efforts.   First, it
              would establish the Hemisphere Fellowship program, which would use travel
              grants to finance the participation of US-based researchers in the
              Interamerican Development Bank's Regional Research Network (RRN).   The RRN is
              a well-established intraregional group of Latin American researchers and
              institutes that work on key development issues affecting the region. Second,
              each year NSF will finance two Hemisphere Workshops - working meetings each
              year that would promote collaboration by bringing together RRN and US-based
              experts to explore pressing development issues.            The procedure for
              identifying research topics and researchers helps ensure that their topics fill
              important gaps in knowledge, and that the institutes chosen to carry out RRN
              research are the appropriate ones.   The IDB Office of the Chief Economist
              chooses research topics for their relevance to major economic and social
              problems facing the Latin American/Caribbean (LAC) region, basing their
              selections on consultations with both an internal IDB committee and an external
              Blue Ribbon Committee. The external committee is made up of leading outside
              researchers and representatives of the public and private sectors.  Each year,
              these consultations help the IDB to identify at least 7-8 topic areas in which
              research is needed.   The following are a few examples:    Determinants of
              domestic savings    Regulation, organization, and incentives: The political
              economy of potable water supply    Labor market regulation and employment   
              Violence: Dimensions and control policies    Ass ets and resources of the poor 
              The RRN finances relatively long-term studies, typically lasting 1 1/2 to 2
              years each, that are aimed at filling important gaps in our basic knowledge of
              development issues facing the region.  After the topics have been selected, the
              IDB chooses one or two leading external researchers to coordinate each project
              in collaboration with one or two IDB researchers. Third, the IDB sends out a
              request for proposals, including a description of expected research
              methodology, to all 240 institutes in its research network. Institutes from
              small, low-income countries are especially encouraged to compete. Finally, the
              project coordinators and the Chief Economist together review the proposals and
              select 4-8 institutes to receive grants. The process of research on these
              topics is strongly collaborative.   Within a few weeks after receiving notice
              of the grants, researchers from the selected institutes attend an initial
              meeting in which they comment on each others' research proposals, a process
              that allows intraregional learning to begin immediately.           This project
              would build on the strengths of the IDB's Regional Research Network, extending
              its reach and scope. Combined with funds provided by the World Bank, the
              proposed NSF grant would fund two new avenues for research interaction, the
              Hemisphere Fellowship program and Hemisphere Workshops. Each of these would
              extend the work of the RRN and begin to lay the groundwork for a Western
              Hemisphere research network. Together, they would serve to stimulate sustained
              one-on-one research between US and Latin American researchers -- with
              consequent benefits for knowledge dissemination and capacitybuilding -- but
              would do so within the context of an established network (RRN) that can ensure
              some continuity and stability of these US-Latin American links.
