Title       : Why Do Countries Trade? Analytical and Empirical Inquiries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9810180

Award Number: 9810180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386845             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Weinstein dew35@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9810180  Weinstein    The most fundamental question in international economics
              is why countries trade.  The principal theories have been elaborated in great
              detail, but empirics and the most basic questions are unanswered.  This project
              makes important contributions to some of these questions: What are the relative
              contributions?  Of scale economies, technical differences, and endowment
              differences in explaining actual trade patterns?  Why does the theoretically
              robust Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek theory suffer the dramatic failure that has been
              termed the "mystery of the missing trade"?  Can the new theory of trade
              identified by the rubric "economic geography" help to account for the
              international pattern of production and trade?    More specifically, the
              project addresses the relative contribution of scale economies, technical and
              endowment differences to understanding the causes of trade by exploring a rich
              panel of Japanese firm-level data to address the issue of the determinants of
              trade.  The project investigates the contribution to our understanding of
              international specialization due to recent research in the area dubbed
              "economic geography," by extending theoretical work by Krugman and Venables
              which allows for the monopolistically competitive goods to serve not only as
              final outputs, but also as intermediate inputs in the production of all of the
              other varieties and by broadening the concept of market access.  Finally, the
              project addresses the problem known as "the mystery of the missing trade",
              i.e.,  the surprising finding that measured net factor trade is an order
              smaller than that predicted by Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek from national endowments. 
               This project pursues cross-country technological differences using databases
              for OECD countries.  Further insights will come from a comparison between
              import coefficients taken from Japan's national input matrix and direct
              measures from a panel of Japanese exporters.  The project considers a variety
              ways of extending these insights to a broader samp le of countries.  ??
