Title       : Studies of Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9810178

Award Number: 9810178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona M. Scott Morton fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project consists of several distinct, but related studies.  The first
              study aims to model and predict entry decisions in the generic pharmaceutical
              industry, and in particular to determine how firms make entry decisions when
              costs are sunk and competitors act simultaneously. A model of a plausible
              equilibrium for the simultaneous game is presented and tested using a dataset
              of all generic entry from 1984 to 1994. Initial entry regressions using a
              probit model indicate that firms enter markets where they have therapeutic or
              marketing experience due to products that already are in their portfolios. The
              years after generic regulators were found to have taken bribes was a period of
              upheaval in the industry. New priorities at the FDA affected firm
              decision-making, which resulted in new entry patterns. Initial results indicate
              that entry decisions of individual firms become harder to predict; achieving
              the equilibrium number of entrants for any particular market will become less
              likely, and social surplus may be lost as firms fail to coordinate on an
              equilibrium strategy. Empirical analysis of the game being played in the
              generic pharmaceutical market can give researchers a better understanding of
              what decisions firms make in practice in complex entry games of this type.  The
              central premise of the second study is that owners of private firms maximize
              utility, and that some of these owners get utility from features of the firm
              other than profits, such as product quality or the number of consumers of the
              product. The existence of firms with non-profit objectives affects industry
              outcomes, such as scale of production and equilibrium prices. In addition,
              competition between the two types of firms will be different than it would be
              if their objectives were the same. In particular, a simple model and initial
              results show that owners pursuing non-profit objectives charge more for their
              wine on a quality-adjusted basis and locate their product at the higher-quality
              end of the market.  Existing data on the California wine industry is
              supplemented with winery-level production data and information on acreage
              available in the different appellations.  Scale of production, price,
              specialization, and entry are related to the preferences of the owners for
              profits versus other non-monetary returns to see if utility-maximizers differ
              from profit-maximizers. Additionally, survey information on how preferences are
              affected by the number of generations and years the winery has been in the
              family are used to explain the effect of hobbyists on the industry.
              Privately-owned firms form a large part of the US economy; it is important to
              improve our understanding of owner motivations since these motivations affect
              firm behavior and impact other firms in the industry.  The final study's
              hypothesis is that an increase in social and institutional ties between
              executives reduces the intensity of price competition in duopoly airline
              markets. Theory would predict fewer price wars when executives set prices and
              process the same information in the same way because fewer mistakes are made in
              interpreting a rival's action. This may allow firms to avoid inadvertent price
              wars, which would cause prices to be higher on average. Sociologists would
              expect higher prices if the executives feel they are friends. The specification
              uses standard determinants of airline prices as well as measures of social and
              institutional ties. These variables test and distinguish between the two
              theories mentioned above using a data set of duopoly airline routes in the US. 
              The results of this project can broaden our understanding of the price-setting
              process and may have interesting antitrust policy implications. Empirical
              researchers who find that concentration positively affects prices will be able
              to refer to two mechanisms of action: the externality caused by deviation from
              cooperation falls as concentration rises (e.g. Cournot), and the number of
              inter-firm social ties increases as concentration increases. If prices were
              higher due to the existence of social and institutional ties, such ties may
              negatively affect social welfare. However, an antitrust agency trying to
              increase welfare cannot instruct managers as to whom they may be friends with
              nor direct the career paths of managers so as to avoid social ties.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
