Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Anthropological and Palaeontological Research at
               the Fossil Primate Sites of the Fayum, Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9810821

Award Number: 9810821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25497              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elwyn L. Simons esimons@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1305,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for partial support of a collaborative research
              project between Dr. Elwyn Simons, Department of Biological Anthropology &
              Anatomy at Duke University, and an Egyptian team headed by Dr. Gaber M. Naim,
              Chairman of the Egyptian Geological Survey and Mining Authority in Cairo,
              Egypt.  The objective of the project is to learn more about the earliest
              forerunners of monkeys, apes, and humans, by study of fossils from the Fayum
              basin of Egypt.  The project will yield skulls, jaws and post-cranial skeletal
              elements from a broad range of early primates of both Eocene and Oligocene age
              represented in the Fayum.  These date to between 36 and 26 million years ago. 
              Africa appears to be the continent where higher primates arose, and the Fayum
              holds the only continuous sequence of deposits in Africa during the time period
              of interest.          Scope:  This project will support collaboration between
              two teams with complementary capabilities and institutional facilities.  The US
              team is well qualified in the theoretical studies, the excavation,
              identification, and mounting of the fossils. The US team also will provide
              access to the state-of-the-art facilities needed for this work.  The Egyptian
              scientists are familiar with the excavation sites and the recent historical
              events that may effect the data interpretation.  They are also capable of
              maintaining the samples and preserving them during the assembling and mounting
              process. The primary research funding for the US team is provided under a large
              3-year award from the Division of Social, Behavioral and Economic Research. 
              The project fits well within the objectives of the Division of International
              Programs.
