Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Molecular Characterization and Biological
               Control of Agrobacterium Vitis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1998    
File        : a9810332

Award Number: 9810332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19318              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Burr tjbl@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esengul A. Momol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 5940,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Burr  Description: This award is for the support of a collaborative research
              project between Professor Thomas Burr and Dr. Esengul Momol, Research
              Associate, in the Department of Plant Pathology at Cornell University, and Dr.
              Salih Maden, Professor of Plant Pathology at Ankara University in Turkey. 
              These scientists plan to collect isolates of Agrobacterium vitis from different
              regions of Turkey.  They plan to identify these isolates using standard
              physiological and biochemical methods, and specific DNA primer sets with the
              Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR).  The isolates will be tested for the presence
              of Ti plasmids using a T-DNA specific probe.  The genetic diversity of the
              strain collection will be analyzed by fingerprinting the chromosomal region
              between the 16S and the 23S genes (intergenic spacer).  Non-tumorigenic strains
              that are collected from wild and cultivated grapes in Turkey will be tested as
              potential biocontrols of grape crown gall in the United States and Turkey.  A
              PCR-based indexing method will be developed to screen commercially grown
              grapevines for the presence of A. vitis.  Scope:  This project will support
              collaboration between two teams of scientists with complementary qualifications
              and institutional facilities.  The Turkish team is quite familiar with and have
              access to the varieties of cultivated and wild grapes that may be host to the
              A. vitis in Turkey.  The US team is experienced and well equipped to conduct
              the identification, isolation, and PCR detection and IGS fingerprinting of the
              virus strains.  The two sides will jointly identify non-tumorigenic strains
              that will be tested for their ability to inhibit gall formation by tumorigenic
              strains.  The problem to be solved has significant economic importance to the
              US, to Turkey, and to many other countries in the Middle East.  The project
              fits well within the objectives of the Division of International Programs.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
