Title       : Anatomical Substrates Subserving Electrotonic Coupling in Locus Coerulus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9810524

Award Number: 9810524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth J. Van Bockstaele Elisabeth.vanbockstaele@mail.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9810524  Van BOCKSTAELE  The brain nucleus locus coeruleus (LC)  has been
              intensely investigated because it provides the  neurotransmitter norepinephrine
              to all major levels of the brain  and spinal cord.  Neurons in the LC are the
              first norepinephrine-  containing cell group to develop in the central nervous
              system.  Numerous lines of research have shown that norepinephrine from the  LC
              may be involved in regulating neuronal outgrowth in regions of  the brain which
              receive norepinephrine innervation, such as  cortical and limbic brain regions.
               Interestingly, the intrinsic  physiological activity of LC neurons varies
              during development and  may account for their involvement in these functions. 
              Electrophysiological recordings from neonatal LC neurons in brain  slices
              display oscillations in their membrane potentials which are  synchronous
              throughout the entire nucleus.  The frequency of  oscillations increases from
              0.3 Hz to 3 Hz until about three weeks  of age when they disappear.  The
              synchronous activity observed in  neonatal LC neurons is thought to be the
              result of electrical  coupling between LC cells.  However, gap junction
              proteins, the  anatomical substrate for electrical coupling, have not been 
              demonstrated by electron microscopy nor has their existence been  established
              at different periods of development in the LC.  In  addition, there have been
              no electrophysiological experiments that  have examined the modulation of
              electrical coupling by compounds  known to inhibit or stabilize gap junctions. 
                   The primary objective of our research is to unequivocally  establish the
              existence of gap junction proteins that can couple  LC neurons to each other or
              to glial cells at different stages of  development.  The methods include dual
              labeling  immunocytochemistry at the electron microscopic level in young and 
              adult rat brain using antibodies specific for the gap junction  protein family,
              known as connexins, and for the norepinephrine  synthesizing enzyme, tyrosine
              hydroxylase.  Addition ally,  electrophysiological recordings from individual
              LC neurons will be  conducted in vitro and to test their responses to agents
              known to  modulate gap junctions.  Finally, individual LC neurons will be 
              intracellularly filled and examined for dye coupling at both light  and
              electron microscopic levels.  Taken together, the anatomical  and
              electrophysiological results obtained from this research will  shed light on
              the functional architecture of LC in development and  will thus lay the
              groundwork for future studies aimed at  elucidating the role of the
              LC/norepinephrine system in regulating  control of its postsynaptic targets.
