Title       : A Comparative Study of Manakins at Leks: Consequences for Variance in Mating
               Success and Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0235141

Award Number: 0235141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bette A. Loiselle loiselle@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia G. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5926,5977,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A Comparative Study of Manakins at Leks: 
Consequences for Variance in Mating
              Success and Population Genetics

Bette A. Loiselle, John G. Blake, and
              Patricia G. Parker

Abstract

	This project investigates the relationship
              between spatial structure, genetic relatedness and reproductive skew in a set
              of closely related species of manakins (Aves: Pipridae) that exhibit lekking
              behavior in Neotropical wet forests.  Lekking behavior, which occurs in many
              animal taxa, is characterized by a aggregation of males displaying for females
              in traditional locations and a lack of association between males and females
              after copulation.  Females visit leks only to breed and rear their young
              elsewhere without assistance from the male.  Lekking behavior often results in
              large reproductive variance (skew) among males because usually only one or a
              few males at the lek sites successfully copulate with females.  Manakins
              represent a model system to investigate reproductive skew because (1) birds are
              common inhabitants of understory of tropical wet forests, (2) six closely
              related species occur in the same geographic location and thus experience
              similar environments, and (3) species differ in lek organization (e.g., number
              of males and distance among males at leks) and lekking behavior, characters key
              for predicting reproductive skew and analyzing population genetic consequences
              of lek mating systems.  Considerable theory regarding reproductive skew has
              emerged, but there yet exist few empirical tests.  Understanding the factors
              that influence reproductive skew is essential to understand the evolution of
              lekking behavior, a mating system that has evolved in a number of taxa and that
              has received a great deal of attention in theoretical and empirical literature.
               Measures of reproductive skew in lekking species are often based on
              observations of copulations at the lek.  Yet, paternity analyses using
              molecular genetic data have revealed that for a number of bird species
              observations may provide misleading results about paternity.  In the proposed
              study, observational data at leks are combined with direct measures of
              individual male success and reproductive skew through paternity analyses of
              offspring found at nests.  This research will be the first to compare lekking
              behavior and its genetic consequences among a set of closely related species
              that occur in the same forest but that vary in lek organization and spatial
              structure.  Such an approach should contribute substantially to our
              understanding of the evolution of lek mating system.  The proposed research
              also effectively combines the ecological, behavioral, and molecular genetic
              expertise of the principal investigators and provides an avenue for new
              collaborative research that will enhance research programs of each senior
              investigator.  Field and laboratory components of the research program will
              provide key opportunities for students from both the home institution and from
              Ecuadorean universities to gain research experience.   Several Ecuadorean and
              UM-St. Louis students are expected to expand on aspects of the proposed project
              as part of their thesis or dissertation research.  Travel expenses in Ecuador
              incurred by UM-St. Louis students and faculty  will be supported by the NSF
              OFfice of International Science and Engineering.

