Title       : Gene Regulation by Oxidative Stress in Bacillus Subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0235255

Award Number: 0235255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Helmann jdh9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              All organisms must obtain a specific set of trace metals from their environment
              yet these same metals, if present in excess, can lead to toxicity often by
              catalyzing the formation of toxic free radicals. Iron and copper, in
              particular, can aggravate oxidative stress by contributing to the generation of
              highly reactive hydroxyl radicals. In contrast, manganese and zinc can actually
              protect cells against oxidative stress. Bacillus subtilis contains two regulons
              that are selectively induced by peroxide stress (PerR and OhrR) and at least
              two regulons induced by nitric oxide (PerR and Fur). This project focuses on
              two regulators that respond to reactive oxygen species: PerR and OhrR. The
              peroxide regulon (PerR) repressor is structurally related to Fur but PerR
              functions physiologically as a sensor of peroxidative stress, rather than metal
              ion starvation. It is proposed that PerR, together with a metal bound cofactor,
              reacts with hydrogen peroxide to generate an inactive repressor. The nature of
              the change(s) in PerR that lead to derepression will be defined. The OhrR
              protein contains a highly reactive cysteine residue that reacts with organic
              peroxides to generate a cysteine-sulfenic acid derivative. This protein
              modification inactivates the repressor leading to expression of an organic
              hydroperoxide resistance gene. The effects of cysteine oxidation on OhrR
              function will be investigated. The proposed studies will provide insights into
              how proteins function as sensors of reactive oxygen/nitrogen species. The
              presence of related regulators in diverse bacteria argues that the paradigms
              established by a detailed characterization of these proteins will have
              far-reaching implications.
