Title       : Collaborative Research: Biodiversity, Phylogeny and Biogeography of Hornworts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0235919

Award Number: 0235919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Duff rjduff@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0235919
Duff
As one of the oldest living assemblages of terrestrial organisms,
              the hornworts are crucial to understanding the survival and diversification of
              early plants on land.  With a worldwide distribution of approximately 150
              species, the hornworts are tiny, inconspicuous plants that are poorly known,
              even by botanists.  These plants exhibit unique and innovative means of coping
              with their existence on land, including positioning all vulnerable organs in
              mucilage-filled cavities that are nested within vegetative tissue.  Intriguing
              features of the cell include a solitary chloroplast (photosynthetic organelle)
              that has an architecture reminiscent of algal cells.  Detailed examination of
              such features will clarify more fully the changes that occurred when algae made
              the transition from water to land and ultimately gave rise to land plants. 
              Despite their evolutionary importance and peculiar features, hornworts are
              among the few major groups of plants for which a comprehensive scientific study
              has yet to be conducted.  This first examination of hornworts will provide a
              portrait of the phylogeny and biodiversity of the group from a global
              perspective.  Information on genetic and structural diversity will be
              accumulated for hornworts collected from multiple geographic regions by an
              international assemblage of experts on these plants, headed by Dr. Robert Duff
              at University of Akron and Dr. Karen Renzaglia at Southern Illinois University.
               The goals are to: 1) establish a robust phylogeny of hornworts by generating
              and analyzing multiple data sets; 2) produce a revised classification based on
              the relationships established by the phylogenetic analyses; and 3) reconstruct
              global patterns of hornwort diversification and especially among the
              Australasian landmasses.  The program will greatly expand knowledge of this
              widespread but relatively obscure group of evolutionarily significant plants,
              and will also explore more global issues relating to biological diversification
              and biocomplexity.  

This project will have an impact on the infrastructure
              of education within the principal investigators' institutions, communities and
              beyond.  Both PIs have demonstrated a strong commitment to providing enriching
              and supportive educational experiences for elementary, high school,
              undergraduate and graduate students.  Students involved in the project will
              experience a wide range of professional activities and will be involved in all
              aspects of the research enterprise. Emphasis will be placed on attracting and
              mentoring students from underrepresented groups.  The international component
              of this proposed program will provide the resources and opportunities for
              students to explore collaboration with students and scientists from a diversity
              of cultures and backgrounds.  By the dissemination of data through
              presentations, publications and a Web site dedicated to the program, awareness
              of hornwort biology will be extended to the international scientific community
              as well as the general public.  The results of this study will be valuable for
              informing decisions on conservation and environmental management as the
              habitats of these tiny ancient plants become increasingly threatened.

