Title       : Characterization of the maize sesquiterpene cyclase genes involved in the
               defense response to insect damage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0235021

Award Number: 0235021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo K. Dooner dooner@waksman.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seiichi P. Matsuda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plants possess a variety of mechanisms to protect themselves from attack by
              herbivores. One system that is induced upon attack by herbivorous insects is
              the production of terpenoids that can serve in either direct or indirect
              defense against the herbivore. It has previously been shown that the maize
              sesquiterpene cyclase gene stc1, located in 9S, is induced in corn seedlings
              being foraged by beet armyworm (BAW) larvae. The product of this gene is a
              volatile terpenoid that most likely serves to attract wasps that parasitize the
              BAW larvae. Preliminary work leading to this proposal has now shown that stc2,
              the ortholog of stc1 in 6L, is induced by a different insect pest, the
              southwestern corn borer (SWCB). The P.I.s propose a genetic, molecular, and
              biochemical dissection of the two orthologous maize genes involved in this
              novel type of inducible plant defense system, as follows:

1.
              Characterization of the induction of the stc2 gene by the SWCB and other
              related corn borers. These experiments will establish the pattern of stc2
              induction in response to regurgitant from the SWCB and whether the plant
              response is specific to that insect species or not.

2. Determination of the
              complete structure of the stc2 gene by isolating a full-length stc2 cDNA from
              seedling sheaths that have been foraged by SWCB. This will enable
              identification of the N-terminus of the protein, confirmation of the predicted
              intron-exon structure of the transcript, and expression of the STC2 enzyme in a
              heterologous system for biochemical characterization of its activity.

3.
              Assessment of the possible role of stc2 as an insect resistance gene by
              isolating and sequencing the stc2 gene from the non-inducible, SWCB-susceptible
              Ki3 inbred line. This would identify the basis of the noninducibility of stc2
              in Ki3 and provide further evidence that stc2 corresponds to a quantitative
              trait locus (QTL) for SWCB resistance that maps very close to the location of
              stc2 in 6L.

4. Determination of the nature of the terpenoid product
              catalyzed by the heterologously expressed STC1 and STC2 enzymes. These
              experiments will identify the nature of the terpenoids made by these enzymes
              and confirm whether the product of STC1 is a sesquiterpenoid, as suggested by
              the earlier biochemical genetics data.

5. Identification of the most likely
              subcellular localization of the STC proteins with constructs that fuse their
              putative chloroplast transit peptides to GFP. This will confirm whether the
              predicted N-terminal targeting sequence in each of the three sequenced stc1
              alleles behaves as a chloroplast transit peptide in vivo.

The proposed
              activity will have clear broader impacts. The work combines genetics, molecular
              biology, and biochemistry to analyze the response of maize plants to insect
              pests. It will serve as excellent training ground for student and postgraduate
              researchers interested in applying biochemistry and molecular genetics to
              address practical problems in plant biology. Both the P.I and co-P.I. are
              members of minorities and their labs are heavily populated by under-represented
              groups. The project is relevant to long-term improvement in U.S. agriculture in
              that it addresses mechanisms by which maize defends itself from insect attack.
              The identification of genes involved in insect resistance will aid breeders in
              developing naturally resistant crop species. Understanding natural defense
              mechanisms in major crops will allow alternative insect control strategies and
              reduce our dependence on potentially toxic pesticides. Thus, the problem to be
              investigated is of scientific, economic and environmental significance.

