Title       : Regulation of intestinal fructose transport in neonatal rats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0235011

Award Number: 0235011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465066             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronaldo P. Ferraris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine how intestinal nutrient transport systems adapt to
              marked changes in nutrient types and concentrations occurring at birth and at
              weaning.  At birth, the small intestine abruptly acquires a new function: to
              absorb nutrients from milk.  During weaning, the intestine has to manufacture
              different types or different numbers of transporters.  How do intestinal cells
              make, and 'know' when to make, these transporters?  The long-term objective of
              this project is to determine the mechanisms regulating intestinal nutrient
              transport during development. The intestinal fructose transporter GLUT5 is
              normally not made until after completion of weaning.  However, precocious
              introduction of its substrate, dietary fructose, dramatically induces the early
              appearance of this transporter.  This project will determine the genes that
              change their expression when fructose stimulates GLUT5 during weaning.  It will
              then identify which of these factors mediate the effect of dietary fructose by
              using cell-permeable, pharmacological agents that stimulate or inhibit their
              action.  If these agents alter the effect of fructose on GLUT5, then their
              target proteins likely play important roles in transducing the dietary signal
              to the GLUT5 gene.  The location of these factors in the intestine will be
              determined by dye-containing probes that specifically recognize them.  Thus,
              the results of this study will provide important new information to understand
              the regulation of nutrient transporters during development. In addition, by
              examining nutrient-responsive regulatory mechanisms controlling gut
              development, this project can determine the potential of reprogramming normal
              developmental patterns of absorption in order to allow the intestine to process
              nutrients at an earlier stage of development.  This knowledge would increase
              our understanding of mechanisms that control intestinal growth and maturation
              in premature infants.  Fructose is a very common ingredient in American diets,
              and these studies have major nutritional significance.  Further, this project
              will also support the training and education of postdoctoral fellows and
              students.
