Title       : Poly(A) Removal and Translational Silencing of Maternal mRNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0235488

Award Number: 0235488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W.Michael Wormington ww2t@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Oocytes synthesize and accumulate a large pool of maternal mRNAs.  Many of these
              transcripts are actively utilized for protein synthesis throughout oogenesis,
              but are subsequently silenced when the oocyte completes meiosis and matures
              into an unfertilized egg, or when the egg is fertilized.  As the oocyte has
              limited translational capacity, this silencing is necessary in order to permit
              the activation of other mRNAs encoding proteins essential for the completion of
              meiosis and early embryogenesis.  The developmentally regulated removal of 3'
              poly(A) tails, a process termed deadenylation,  is an evolutionarily conserved
              mechanism by which maternal mRNA are silenced in diverse organisms.  This
              project addresses the molecular basis for the deadenylation-dependent
              translational inactivation of maternal mRNAs during the meiotic maturation of
              Xenopus oocytes.  Deadenylation in mature oocytes is catalyzed by the
              poly(A)-specific ribonuclease, PARN.  PARN activity is stimulated by the
              presence of the m7GpppG cap structure present at the 5' end of mRNAs, and cap
              recognition is an intrinsic property of this nuclease.  By interacting directly
              with the 5' cap, PARN may also function in repressing translation initiation
              independently of its poly(A)-degrading activity.  Competing interactions among
              PARN, the cap-binding translation initiation factor, eIF4E, and the poly(A)
              binding protein, PABP, provide a mechanism which integrates translational
              efficiency with poly(A) stability.  This research utilizes complementary
              molecular biological and biochemical in vivo and in vitro approaches to address
              the following aspects of PARN-dependent deadenylation and translational
              silencing.  First, to delineate functional domains required for PARN's poly(A)
              and cap-binding activities, and to address these aspects of PARN function in
              deadenylation.  Second, this project will analyze functional and physical
              interactions between PARN and cap-dependent translation initiation factors. 
              PARN deadenylation activity is intimately linked with translation efficiency as
              the 5' cap and 3' poly(A) tail are major determinants of both processes.  These
              reactions are necessarily antagonistic as the relevant mRNA binding proteins,
              eIF4E and PABP, synergistically promote efficient translation initiation and
              inhibit PARN.  In concert, these two objectives will define the mechanism of a
              novel poly(A)-specific ribonuclease and provide information on how translation
              initiation and poly(A) stability are coupled.  Understanding the molecular
              basis of these evolutionarily conserved processes will provide insight into how
              maternal mRNAs are regulated to direct stage-specific programs of protein
              synthesis during early vertebrate development.  As this translational
              regulation underlies many crucial events including the completion of meiosis,
              activation of the mitotic cell cycle, formation of body axes and the
              specification of cell fates, its elucidation is of fundamental importance and
              direct relevance to numerous problems in developmental biology and
              post-transcriptional gene regulation. 
