Title       : Bioinformatics of Voltage-Gated Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0235792

Award Number: 0235792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Jakobsson jake@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1994      Bioinformatics Program
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will study a particular class of proteins, ion channels, by the
              tools of bioinformatics. The subclass of ion channels to be studied are
              potassium channels, that selectively permit the passage of passage of potassium
              ions.  Traditionally, the detailed function of ion channels has been studied by
              biophysical means.  This proposal will study the functioning of potassium
              channels with a different set of tools, the tools of sequence bioinformatics.  
              Essentially, this project will correlate sequence data with knowledge about the
              structure and function of some members of the potassium channel family, and use
              that to extrapolate to a prediction of functional details for the very large
              number of potassium channel genes for which we have no direct structural and
              functional data. 

This is very important in expanding our knowledge because
              it is now much quicker and cheaper to get sequence data than functional and
              structural data.  Any advance that we can make in inferring function from
              sequence will therefore lead to big advances in functional knowledge.  
              

This research clearly can have a large ultimate beneficial pay-off for
              biomedicine and biotechnology. In addition to disseminating results by the
              usual route of publishing and presentation at meetings, we will also develop
              for the general community use profiles and motifs that are specific for
              particular subclasses of potassium channels, and build them in the formats that
              are standard for motif/profile databases such as BLOCKS, PROSITE, PFAM, and
              PRINTS. The findings from this research will be able to be seamlessly and
              easily used by other researchers with existing analysis software.   

