Title       : Training Underrepresented Basic Science Researchers Utilizing Structure-Function
               Investigations of Neuropeptide Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0235146

Award Number: 0235146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395333             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Porter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1187,5500,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator:  James E. Porter
Proposal #:  0235146
Title of
              Proposal:  Training Underrepresented Basic Science Researchers Utilizing
              Structure-Function Investigations of Neuropeptide Receptors

Abstract:  The
              immediate goal of this project is to promote the teaching and training of
              students by characterizing fundamental processes by which a stimulus is
              detected and transmitted by organisms to initiate essential biological events. 
              The calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is an established neurotransmitter
              that is prominently associated with initiating complex multicellular
              interactions that regulate or modulate the function of many living organisms
              (e.g., sensory pathways).  Unfortunately, the types of CGRP ligands currently
              available limit information about the cellular effects associated with CGRP
              modulation of physiological responses.  This proposal will test the hypothesis
              that insights into the cellular mechanisms of CGRP mediated effects will
              provide a background for the rational development of novel non-peptide ligands.
               Pharmacological analysis of CGRP signaling mechanisms for mutant and wild type
              proteins will be examined using biochemical, molecular and cell biological
              techniques.  Differences in the properties of these mutant proteins from the
              wild type will be used to advance a molecular model associated with CGRP
              cellular effects.  Furthermore, this knowledge could be used to develop
              compounds that would help researchers understand the specific modulatory
              functions associated with this neuropeptide.  Moreover, results generated from
              completion of this proposal will forward our understanding of how ubiquitous
              peptides are recognized and communicated through sensory pathways using
              intracellular signaling systems.  Finally, this research would benefit the
              education and training of underrepresented groups in a demographically
              disadvantaged state, by providing support for advanced training in the
              biological sciences.


