Title       : RUI: Fragmentation of Terrestrial Salamander Populations by Forest Roads:
               Ecological and Genetic Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0235695

Award Number: 0235695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374754             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Marsh marshd@wlu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Cabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Lee Univ
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    540/458-8400

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Forest habitats are increasingly fragmented by road building. However, little is
              known about the effects of roads on animal populations in adjacent forests.
              Roads may affect populations by contributing to abiotic edge effects, by
              causing direct mortality, or by reducing rates of dispersal. This study will
              use two species of terrestrial salamander (Plethodon cinereus and P.
              glutinosus) to examine how fragmentation by roads can affect animal
              populations. Investigators will use detailed field surveys, field experiments
              and genetic analysis to answer the following questions: 1) How do the effects
              of roads on salamander densities vary among species, among sites, and among
              years? 2) What mechanisms are responsible for the effects of roads on
              salamander densities? 3) How do different types of roads affect salamander
              dispersal ability?, and 4) How do different types of roads affect patterns of
              gene flow?  

This project has general implications for the understanding the
              persistence of animal populations in fragmented habitats and has specific
              applications to the conservation biology of amphibians. Terrestrial salamanders
              are an important component of temperate forest ecosystems and have been
              proposed as useful indicators of forest health. Although terrestrial
              salamanders do not appear to have declined as severely aquatic-breeding
              amphibians, habitat fragmentation may threaten their long-term persistence. As
              an RUI project, this study also provides numerous research training
              opportunities for undergraduate students in genetics, ecology, and conservation
              biology. Students will participate in all aspects of the project, from study
              design to data collection to presentation of results.  

