Title       : Ecology and Evolution of a Novel Symbiont Lineage: The Interaction of
               Burkholderia Bacteria with Neotropical legumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0235766

Award Number: 0235766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew A. Parker mparker@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The symbiosis between legume plants and root nodule bacteria (rhizobia) is
              globally significant both to human welfare and to natural ecosystems, because
              it converts nitrogen gas to ammonia, which is often a key limiting nutrient for
              plant productivity.  Yet despite more than a century of intensive study,
              biologists did not discover until 2001 that certain legume plants use nodule
              bacteria in the genus Burkholderia, which have an extremely distant
              relationship to all other known rhizobia.  This project will analyze strains of
              Burkholderia from the tropical forest on Barro Colorado Island, Panama to
              determine which legume plant species use Burkholderia as nodule bacteria.  It
              will also examine whether legume species that associate with Burkholderia in
              this community also utilize similar Burkholderia strains in other parts of
              their geographic range.  Finally, it will also compare the relative benefits to
              plants of interacting with Burkholderia vs. other rhizobia.  The main value of
              this project is that it will provide a broader comparative understanding of
              legume-rhizobial symbioses, by analyzing a group of symbiotic bacteria unknown
              to biologists until very recently.   Many Burkholderia species are important
              human pathogens or plant pathogens, and at least one legume host of
              Burkholderia nodule symbionts is a serious invasive weed.  Therefore, this
              research will also provide a better understanding of the basic ecology of this
              bacterial genus, especially, whether bacterial pathogens may potentially evolve
              to become beneficial plant symbionts (or vice versa).   This information is
              important for evaluating the impact of this bacterial group on the environment
              and on human health.
