Title       : Molecular Studies of a Mitochondrial Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0235834

Award Number: 0235834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen W. Kinnally kathleen.kinnally@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Protein translocation across membrane barriers is an important process in all
              organisms, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic.  Protein translocation is critical
              to a variety of cellular functions, including protein secretion, biogenesis of
              organelles, compartmentalization, and cell signalling. Since about half of the
              proteins synthesized in a cell must cross at least one membrane before reaching
              their final destinations, protein translocation across membranes is a
              fundamental cellular process. The process by which precursor proteins are
              imported into the mitochondrion, a double-membraned organelle, is not only
              important in its own right, but it also serves as a model system for studying
              this ubiquitous process. There are complex sets of proteins in both the inner
              and outer membranes of mitochondria that recognize, sort and selectively
              translocate precursor proteins across each respective membrane to their final
              destinations. The outer membrane import machinery is called the Tom
              (translocation, outer membrane) complex and the inner membrane machinery is
              called the Tim (translocation, inner membrane) complex. Components of the
              complexes are designated Tim or Tom followed by their molecular weight.
              Integral membrane proteins are imported by the Tim22 complex. Water-filled
              channels are purported to play key roles in this process in both the inner and
              outer membranes, and these channels are named TIM and TOM, respectively. A
              major goal of this project is to define the mechanism of action and regulation
              of these mitochondrial channels during protein import, using yeast
              mitochondria. The findings should be applicable to this process in other cell
              membranes and higher eukaryotes. 

The protein import channels of the native
              mitochondrial inner and outer membranes will be studied by using a technique
              called "patch-clamping" in which electrophysiological measurements are made
              across single channels in a small patch of membrane.  Mitochondria and
              mitoplasts (mitochondria stripped of their outer membrane by French pressing)
              from various genetically manipulated strains of  yeast will be subjected to
              direct patch-clamping. The electrophysiological channel activities will be
              recorded and compared with those of mitochondrial channels reconstituted in
              proteoliposomes using recombinant Tim proteins thought to play a major role in
              protein translocation. The single channel behavior and peptide sensitivity of
              specific recombinant Tim proteins (e.g., 23, 17 and 50)  will be compared with
              TIM found in mitoplasts and proteoliposomes. The the single channel properties
              of TOM will also be studied, including its regulation by targeting peptides and
              architecture of the Tom complex. The channel activity of recombinant Tim22 will
              be compared with that found in the mitoplast, after establishing channel
              activation protocols. The mechanism of protein translocation through TIM and
              TOM will be further examined by patch-clamping genetically manipulated
              mitochondria and mitoplasts during actual protein import. The architecture of
              the complexes and the effects of preprotein folding on import will be addressed
              using mutants and model proteins. 

As head of the only lab in the U.S. with
              the expertise to routinely apply these techniques to native and reconstituted
              mitochondrial membranes, Dr. Kinnally is in a unique position to undertake
              these investigations of the mechanisms of protein import in
              mitochondria.

While these experiments will enable studies of the
              mechanism(s) and the role of channels in protein translocation in mitochondria,
              it is likely that the same principles are followed in all biological membranes.
              Therefore, understanding mitochondrial sorting and protein translocation can
              facilitate understanding of, for example, the same process in the prokaryotes,
              endoplasmic reticulum and chloroplasts. 

The results from this project will
              be published to increase the information base of a fundamental cellular
              process, i.e., protein translocation across membranes. This information is a
              resource for research in this and other areas, as well as education. The PI is
              keenly interested in development of human resources in science. Many graduate,
              undergraduate, and high school students, postdoctorals, senior scientists and
              teachers have visited and/or trained in this laboratory (this training has the
              added benefit of serving as a further mechanism for dissemination of both
              scientific results and the techniques uniquely employed in the laboratory).  

