Title       : Functional Analysis of Tocopherols in Plants and their Integration within the
               Plastid Antioxidant Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0235929

Award Number: 0235929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean DellaPenna dellapen@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,1168,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During its lifecycle, a plant is exposed to a wide range of abiotic and biotic
              stresses that can cause production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in excess
              of that normally generated by metabolism and for signaling in the absence of
              stress.  Although all subcellular compartments produce ROS, chloroplasts are
              the major ROS source in photosynthetic tissues.  In order to avoid oxidative
              damage and death, plants have evolved an interconnected, complementary network
              of compounds (e.g., ascorbate, tocopherols, carotenoids, glutathione), enzymes
              (e.g., superoxide dismutases, peroxidases, catalases) and biochemical responses
              (e.g., non-photochemical quenching) that serve to minimize plastid ROS
              production under stressful conditions or rapidly detoxify excess ROS species or
              byproducts that are produced.  
	Tocopherols, more commonly known as Vitamin
              E, are the major lipid soluble antioxidant in plastids and are proposed to be
              an essential component of the plastid antioxidant network.  Studies in mammals
              and artificial membranes indicate tocopherols are important for membrane
              structure, quenching of singlet oxygen and other ROS, scavenging of
              chain-propagating lipid peroxy radicals and other "non-antioxidant" functions
              related to signaling and transcriptional regulation.  In plants, tocopherols
              are assumed to function similarly though experimental evidence for this is
              lacking.  During the past five years, the DellaPenna laboratory has cloned all
              enzymes of the tocopherol biosynthetic pathway in Arabidopsis and developed
              mutant/transgenic lines whose leaves are completely deficient in tocopherols or
              accumulate tocopherols at 4-5 times wild type levels. These tocopherol-modified
              lines will be used:

1.	To define the role(s) of tocopherols in scavenging
              specific ROS species and control of lipid peroxidation.  
2.	In genetic
              combinations with mutations that affect other components of the antioxidant
              network to assess functional compensation and redundancy of antioxidant network
              components.
3.	To study a novel germination phenotype in tocopherol deficient
              lines.
4.	In whole genome expression analysis to assess the response of
              individual antioxidant network genes and other cellular components to
              tocopherol modifications. 

Tocopherols, more commonly known as Vitamin E,
              are the major lipid soluble antioxidant in chloroplasts of all plants and are
              proposed to be an essential component of the plastid antioxidant network.  The
              research being undertaken will provide a comprehensive understanding of
              tocopherol function(s) in photosynthetic tissues of Arabidopsis.  This work
              will also define and characterize the integration and complementation of
              tocopherols with and by other components of the plastid antioxidant network
              (Vitamim C, carotenoids and enzymes that scavenge reactive oxygen).  Because of
              the evolutionary conservation of the antioxidant network in chloroplasts, the
              data obtained will be of direct relevance to a wide range of plant species and
              crops.  


