Title       : Collaborative Research: Adaptation of daphniids to digestion resistant resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0235118

Award Number: 0235118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Klug klug@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The consumption of algae by invertebrates is a critical but poorly understood
              link in the food webs of all aquatic ecosystems: lakes, streams and oceans. 
              Previous research has shown that the productivity of these invertebrate
              grazers, and hence the productivity of the rest of the food web including the
              fisheries, is often limited by the quality of the algal food.  In the open
              water of lakes, a major determinate of algal food quality is their resistance
              to digestion while in the gut of the grazer.  While it has been long known that
              some algae may pass unharmed through the guts of small invertebrates, the broad
              relevance of this defense mechanism to food web ecology and to the evolutionary
              biology of the grazers has been ignored.  Major goals of this research will be
              to examine the physiology of grazer digestion of resistant algae, to quantify
              the extent to which grazer species vary in ability to overcome digestion
              defenses, and to experimentally test the importance of this grazer-algae
              interaction to the functioning of aquatic food webs. 

The general research
              approach will be to focus on an easily studied organism that is also a major
              grazer of algae in the open water of lakes: daphniids.  Using both cultured and
              natural algae that differ in digestion resistance, this research will measure
              feeding rate, gut processing, respiration, assimilation, and growth of daphniid
              grazers.  Several species, representing the breadth of diversity within the
              daphniids, will be studied at various animal ages from juvenile to adult. 
              Finally, the ecological consequences of variation in grazer digestive
              physiology will be examined using a large-scale enclosure experiment in a
              natural lake.  The experiment will manipulate grazer species and test the
              hypothesis that grazer digestive physiology influences population dynamics of
              grazers and algae in lakes.

This research is innovative in exploring the
              diversity of feeding and gut processing in an ecologically key group of
              grazers, and in testing the consequences of this physiological diversity to
              food web function.  Despite their role as dominate grazers in the open water of
              lakes, there is little understanding of how daphniids digest algae in nature. 
              Similarly, while it is known that algae vary in digestion resistance, there is
              little understanding of how grazers adapt to such defenses.  It is the general
              aim of this research to address these two deficiencies by studying the
              ecological and evolutionary physiology that constrains grazer-algal
              interactions in aquatic ecosystems.

Training of undergraduates and graduates
              at the interface of physiology and ecology is emphasized in this research.  The
              proposed work will also continue a research and training partnership between a
              primarily undergraduate institution and a research-intensive field station, and
              provide for year-round undergraduate involvement in laboratory and field
              studies that link organism physiology to the structure and function of food
              webs.

