Title       : Phylogeny of the Batrachospermales (Rhodophyta, Red Algae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0235676

Award Number: 0235676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151164             (Estimated)
Investigator: Morgan L. Vis-Chiasson vis-chia@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0235676
Vis-Chiasson
In the red algae, molecular DNA sequence data have
              challenged traditional morphologically based theories of relatedness.  The
              order of freshwater red algae, Batrachospermales, is no exception; and at
              present, evolutionary relationships among genera and species of this order are
              not well understood. To compound the problem, knowledge of the flora in most of
              the southern hemisphere is very poor. The object of this project is to produce
              a robust molecular framework as the foundation for future taxonomic revision in
              this group of algae.  Collection of specimens will focus on potential "hot
              spots" of diversity in New Zealand, Tasmania, Northern Brazil, Malaysia and
              South Africa.  Two gene regions will be sequenced from the taxa to ensure
              abundant molecular data.  The combination of new DNA sequence data and more
              taxa will result in a well-resolved framework of relationships.  This study of
              freshwater red algae is timely given that molecular evolution studies of marine
              red algae are underway, to which this research will dovetail.  Although the
              field research is localized, the results will tie together information from
              five continents (North America, South America, Africa, Asia and Australia) for
              an integrated understanding of the biogeography of a group of freshwater
              algae.
Freshwater red algae are important biological components of stream
              ecosystems worldwide, serving as food and shelter for numerous aquatic insects
              and fish.  The Batrachospermales tend to occur in streams that have had little
              anthropogenic disturbance and can be an indicator of good water quality.  Our
              ability to use them as biological indicators is hampered by our lack of
              knowledge of their systematics.  For example, a Batrachospermum species defined
              by morphological characteristics was thought to be cosmopolitan, occurring in a
              wide range of streams, but recent molecular research has shown that the
              organisms from Australia that were attributed to this species were in fact
              endemic to that region, and a new species unrelated to the North American
              species was described.  Knowing this information, the geographic and ecological
              range of each species has been refined.  In addition to the new knowledge
              produced, graduate students and undergraduate students will benefit from
              participation in this research.  The students will participate in the
              collecting trips to other parts of the world.  They will interact with
              in-country colleagues gaining not only field experience but also an
              appreciation for the science and culture of that country.  The laboratory
              research the students conduct will result in presentations at scientific
              meetings by the students and peer-reviewed publications. At the end of their
              studies, the undergraduates will be fully prepared to pursue research in
              graduate school and the graduate students will be highly trained professionals
              ready for a career in academia or industry.

