Title       : Physiology of Stress in Wild Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0235044

Award Number: 0235044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302280             (Estimated)
Investigator: L M. Romero michael.romero@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5500,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              L. Michael Romero
Physiology of Stress in Wild Animals
Proposal Number
              0235044

	All organisms are faced with noxious stimuli from the environment
              (such as predators or storms).  Vertebrates activate a suite of physiological
              mechanisms to protect themselves from these stimuli, collectively called the
              stress response.  A vital part of the stress response is the release of the
              glucocorticoid steroid hormones, but even after more than 60 years of studying
              stress we still have only a rudimentary idea of how glucocorticoids help wild
              animals survive.  Earlier work indicated that several free-living bird species
              seasonally regulate glucocorticoid release by varying concentrations of the
              hormone throughout the year.  This proposal builds upon these results to ask
              the following questions: why do animals seasonally regulate glucocorticoid
              levels; is there a physiological consequence; and does it affect their
              susceptibility to chronic stress?
	Answering these questions will require an
              integrated approach of both laboratory and field studies, such as the one
              proposed here.  We will capture wild free-living house sparrows (Passer
              domesticus) and test how glucocorticoids help regulate blood glucose and
              triglyceride levels at different times of the year.  We anticipate that glucose
              and triglyceride regulation will depend upon seasonal changes in glucocorticoid
              levels.  We will also bring house sparrows into the laboratory to test whether
              physiological responses to chronic stress vary seasonally.  We anticipate that
              the magnitude of the negative consequences of chronic stress will depend upon
              the time of year.  These results will help define the physiological
              consequences of seasonal glucocorticoid release during stress in wild animals,
              thus having a far-reaching impact on our basic knowledge of the ecological
              validity of stress responses.
This research will also provide important
              training for students.  Both graduate and undergraduate students will be
              exposed to, and learn, many important research skills in both the laboratory
              and field.  These findings will be valuable to researchers in diverse fields
              including Conservation Biology, Endocrinology, and Population Biology, just to
              mention a few.

