Title       : Membrane Protein Solid State NMR: PISEMA Development and the M2 Tetramer
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0235774

Award Number: 0235774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $516254             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Cross cross@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Quine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Riqiang Fu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Membrane proteins represent approximately 30% of all genomes yet characterized.
              Today, less than 40 unique membrane protein structures are in the Protein Data
              Bank. Membrane proteins carry out numerous critical functions for cells and
              they are vastly different from their water-soluble counterparts through: their
              amino acid composition, the forces that stabilize their structure, their
              internal dynamics, etc. Sold state NMR is a demonstrated technology for
              achieving 3D high resolution structure in a lipid bilayer environment. This
              technology uniquely utilizes fully hydrated lipid bilayers for solvating
              protein samples. This work will further develop the primary solid state NMR
              experiment used for the structural characterization, PISEMA. Several
              modifications including the use of ramped pulses during the Lee-Goldburg
              sequence suggests significant gains in making PISEMA a more robust experiment.
              Advanced NMR probes with balanced RF circuits in high field magnets available
              at the NHMFL will be a great help in achieving this goal. The analysis of
              PISEMA spectra of alpha-helical proteins has led to cover stories in both the
              Journal of Magnetic Resonance and Protein Science. The characterization of
              solid state NMR data leads directly to a description of the tilt and rotational
              orientation of the helix within the lipid bilayer. Here, this analysis will be
              advanced using mathematical expressions to show how degeneracies in the
              structural solutions are resolved, by showing that unique spectral patterns are
              predicted for alpha, 310, and pi helices, and by characterizing the more
              complex spectral patterns for helices in the plane of the lipid bilayer.
              Moreover, it is the aim of this project to solve the complete backbone
              structure and assembly of the 44 kDa tetrameric M2 proton channel in hydrated
              lipid bilayers above the phase transition of the lipids. 

 In this project
              Dr. Cross and his colleagues will develop a unique approach for determining the
              three dimensional structure of membrane proteins in their native environment -
              the lipid membrane that surrounds each cell. These proteins control everything
              that enters and leaves the cells, and they are responsible for accepting and
              sending information between cells. 30% or more of the proteins of a given
              genome are membrane proteins and yet technologies are very limited for their
              structural characterization. With a unique team of chemists, mathematicians and
              biophysicists, Dr. Cross brings together the necessary skills for the
              development of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance methodology that has now been
              demonstrated to achieve unique structures of membrane proteins. Dr. Cross and
              his coworkers are refining the technology and enhancing its sensitivity for
              greater applications. This research will have a broad impact in both the fields
              of membrane protein biophysics and structural biology and students in chemical,
              biological and mathematical disciplines will be trained in a proven
              interdisciplinary environment.

