Title       : Phenotype Matching and Trophic Complexity in the wild Parsnip-parsnip Webworm
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0235773

Award Number: 0235773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: May R. Berenbaum maybe@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur R. Zangerl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Coevolution is the process by which interacting organisms act reciprocally as
              selective agents on one another. Coevolutionary responses between the parsnip
              webworm and its wild parsnip hostplant are dramatically manifested in the
              chemistry of the two species. Parsnips defend themselves by producing an array
              of toxins called furanocoumarins; webworms disarm these toxins with
              detoxification enzymes called cytochrome P450s. Webworms and parsnips were,
              like many other invasive weeds and insect pests, introduced from Europe;
              throughout their range in the midwestern U.S., the defense profile of the
              plants matches the detoxification profile of the insect, suggesting intense
              reciprocal responses.  This chemical matching may be an artifact of
              introduction; in Europe, this two-species interaction is embedded in a more
              complex community, with predators, parasites, and alternate hostplants that
              could reduce the intensity of the interaction. This project is aimed at
              comparing the dynamics of coevolutionary responses in these two introduced
              species, both in Europe, where the interaction originally evolved, and in the
              U.S., where these species have been interacting in a novel environment.  The
              effects of increasing community complexity and length of association on the
              frequency of chemical matching will be determined, as will the consequences of
              mismatching for both the herbivore and the hostplant.
