Title       : Embryonic Development of a Tardigrade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  2002  
File        : a0235658

Award Number: 0235658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328206             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Goldstein bobg@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0235658
Goldstein

Tardigrades are a little-studied phylum of animals whose
              phylogenetic position makes them an ideal group for studies of how development
              evolves. The tardigrades are members of a clade that includes two of the most
              well-understood metazoan model organisms, Drosophila and C. elegans.  They also
              share some of the key features of Drosophila or C. elegans that are useful to
              developmental biologists, including segment-like repeating body units and
              limbs, a small and reportedly constant cell number, and optically clear
              embryos.  Despite this, very little is known about their development.  The
              three most informative studies of tardigrade development were published before
              1930, and there exists almost no developmental data from live embryos.  For
              example, there is no fate map, nor even a rudimentary cell lineage.  The
              Goldstein lab has begun to study tardigrade embryonic development.  The goal is
              to test hypotheses regarding how cell lineage and cell fate specification have
              evolved, while providing the basic information required to make tardigrades a
              model system for studying evolution of development.  Four-dimensional
              microscopy is being used to trace cell lineages and generate a fate map. 
              Methods used for laser-ablation of individual cells in C. elegans are being
              extended to tardigrades to identify cell interactions that play roles in
              specifying cell fates.  The long-term goal of this work is to contribute toward
              understanding how the developmental programs elucidated in model organisms have
              evolved to produce the morphological diversity found in nature.

Broader
              impacts resulting from the proposed activity (1) Discovery, understanding,
              teaching, training, learning: This research project will include training
              undergraduate students in scientific research, and each undergraduate student
              will attend an annual conference to present their findings.  (2)
              Underrepresented groups: The principal investigator is a faculty mentor in UNC
              Chapel Hill's Research Education Support Program, which supports students from
              underrepresented minority groups to gain research experiences and to enroll in
              Ph.D. programs.  (3) Research and education infrastructure: Live-embryo
              microscopy methods will be openly shared with other labs upon request.  (4)
              Broad dissemination: As well as publishing results in scientific journals, a
              web page of films of tardigrade development will be constructed, similar to the
              Goldstein lab's widely-used C. elegans movies web page, for use as a
              freely-available educational material by others. (5) Benefits to society: This
              work will contribute to both the research and education missions of American
              universities, and any results of broad interest will also be disseminated at
              publication time through UNC Chapel Hill's news service.




