Title       : The Neuroendocrine Stress Axis in Amphibian Development and Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0235401

Award Number: 0235401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Denver rdenver@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1193,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Animals make critical 'decisions' at all stages of their life cycles. These
              decisions are developmental, physiological and behavioral in nature, and
              represent a critical assessment of both external and internal factors. For
              example, the timing of metamorphosis, hatching, or birth may depend upon the
              tradeoffs between growth opportunity and mortality risk in the developmental
              habitat. Physiological sensors compute these tradeoffs as a function of energy
              balance and environmental stress, and effectors initiate physiological,
              developmental and behavioral responses to these determinations. The
              neuroendocrine stress axis provides a means for animals to integrate
              information from multiple sources (internal and external) and to respond
              accordingly (behaviorally, physiologically and developmentally). The objectives
              of the proposed studies are to provide a mechanistic basis for understanding
              signaling within the neuroendocrine stress system. These experiments will
              utilize a powerful model organism, the South African clawed frog Xenopus
              laevis. The proposed studies will use neuroanatomical, physiological and
              molecular approaches to understand 1) how central corticotropin-releasing
              hormone (CRH) stress circuits are organized and regulated in response to
              environmental stress, and 2) how corticosteroid (adrenal stress hormone)
              feedback and a CRH binding protein modulate CRH expression and action. The
              basic components and organization of the vertebrate neuroendocrine stress axis
              arose early in evolution, and the structure and function of these pathways are
              conserved. Thus, findings in the frog are likely to be applicable to other
              vertebrate species. Results of these studies should provide a better
              understanding of how amphibians respond to environmental stress, and, given
              recent documented global declines in amphibian populations, can provide
              knowledge vital to wildlife conservation efforts.  The broader impacts of these
              studies include opportunities for high school and undergraduate students to
              participate in cutting edge  science, continued international collaborations,
              and further identification of the consequences of environmental stress for the
              health of natural amphibian populations.
