Title       : An Integrative Approach to the Problem of Snake Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0235628

Award Number: 0235628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179854             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen M. Kearney mkearney@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Olivier C. Rieppel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Snakes form a natural group of squamate reptiles, an evolutionary lineage that
              also includes lizards and amphisbaenians. The evolutionary origin of snakes
              within squamate reptiles is a longstanding, unresolved problem, mainly because
              several lineages of lizards have independently evolved a snake-like body form
              (extreme body elongation coupled with limb reduction or complete loss) and
              basic skull structure. This creates difficult problems for the reconstruction
              of the evolutionary history (phylogeny) of snakes due to independently evolved
              (convergent) similarity.   In contemporary reptile systematics, two main
              hypotheses are at the heart of current debate on snake origins:  a marine
              origin of snakes from the extinct, aquatic mosasaurs or a burrowing/terrestrial
              origin of snakes from fossorial or terrestrial lizards such as the burrowing
              dibamids or amphisbaenians, or the terrestrial monitor lizards. This debate has
              recently been fueled by the description of fossil (Upper Cretaceous) snakes
              that combine a skull structure typical of evolutionarily advanced snakes with
              the presence of well-developed hind limbs (a presumably primitive feature).
              
For this research, the problem of snake origins is broken down into the
              following questions:  What group of squamates is most closely related to
              snakes? What are the relationships among the major groups of snakes? What do
              the answers to these questions tell us about the ecology of snake origins
              (aquatic vs. terrestrial) and about the morphological evolution of the snake
              body plan? Research addressing these questions will focus on anatomical
              investigation of all relevant fossil and living taxa, yielding results that
              will be combined with relevant molecular data. All anatomical characters used
              to date in the debate about snake origins will be re-evaluated, and new
              morphological data will be generated through the initiation of anatomical
              projects focused on understudied and/or controversial character systems. This
              will involve organ systems that either are at the center of current discussion
              (such as the development of the snake dentition), or that are essential for
              understanding the evolution of the snake body plan (such as patterns of change
              in the axial musculature and vertebral column that are correlated with the
              elongation of the body and the reduction or loss of limbs). Student training in
              anatomical investigative techniques and in methods of phylogeny reconstruction
              will form an integral part of this research project. Mastering anatomical
              complexity and methods of phylogenetic systematics, as well as the combination
              of anatomical and molecular data, are prerequisite for a modern approach to the
              study of biodiversity in all its aspects.

