Title       : Exploring Novel Nuclear Protein-Coding Genes for use in Metazoan Molecular
               Phylogenetic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0235794

Award Number: 0235794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank E. Anderson feander@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Frank Anderson at Southern Illinois University
              to use information collected from several genes to study the evolutionary
              relationships among and within major groups of animals (also known as "phyla",
              e.g., mollusks, annelids and arthropods).  Despite more than a century of
              research, the pattern of evolutionary relationships among and within the animal
              phyla remains confused.  New molecular biological techniques allow evolutionary
              biologists to compare genes from organisms to help them determine patterns of
              relationship.  Unfortunately, very few genes have been used to study
              relationships among the animal phyla.  To remedy this situation, Dr. Anderson
              has proposed to evaluate thirteen previously unstudied genes that may be useful
              for investigations of animal relationships.  DNA sequences of each of these
              genes will be determined for fifty specimens representing all major animal
              phyla, and these sequences will be used to reconstruct relationships among and
              within these groups.

This research will increase the number of genes that
              can be used for studies of animal relationships.  It will also yield
              information on the positions of enigmatic groups in the animal family tree, and
              serve as the first step in large-scale collaborative studies of animal
              evolution using several genes.  The research will enhance the education of two
              graduate students and one or more undergraduates, who will receive training in
              invertebrate collection methods, specimen identification and molecular
              laboratory techniques.  The research will also form the basis for at least one
              master's thesis.  In addition to publications in scientific journals, a website
              will be developed to rapidly disseminate protocols and information, serving as
              a resource for both students and researchers.  Finally, findings from the
              research will be incorporated into courses in invertebrate zoology and
              evolutionary biology at Southern Illinois University.

