Title       : Soil Pathogen-Mediated Coexistence of Tree Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0235907

Award Number: 0235907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287718             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Kobe kobe@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah E. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual merit: As an explanation for the maintenance of tropical tree
              diversity, Janzen (1970) and Connell (1971) proposed that natural enemies
              reduce seedling recruitment in the vicinity of conspecific adults and/or at
              high conspecific seedling density while allowing for heterospecific recruitment
              to occur. Numerous studies have documented mortality patterns consistent with
              the Janzen-Connell (J-C) hypothesis, without identifying particular causes.
              Soil fungal pathogens are likely causal factors of density- and
              distance-dependent mortality because of strong host specialization, short
              generation times, long persistence in soil as spores, and high fecundity.
              Furthermore, the potential importance of disease in structuring plant
              communities is only now becoming more widely appreciated. The proposed
              experiments, with a focus on soil fungal pathogens as the mortality agent, will
              test fundamental assumptions of J-C, including: 1) if host-specific soil-borne
              fungal pathogens cause distance and density-dependent mortality in seedlings in
              both temperate and tropical systems; 2) the effects of light availability in
              mediating pathogen effects through compensation in growth and/or more rapid
              lignification; 3) differential pathogen sensitivity among species varying in
              shade tolerance; 4) differential pathogen sensitivity among species varying in
              local abundance, with the possibility that pathogens keep common species in
              check and promote diversity or alternatively that rare species are
kept rare
              because they are more susceptible to pathogens; 5) differential pathogen
              sensitivity between tropical and temperate species.
Broader impacts: The
              proposed research is highly relevant to managing conservation reserves if
              diseases play a role in the population dynamics of their hosts and the
              structure and diversity of communities that they inhabit. Also, without
              adequate knowledge of plant-soil pathogen interactions in 'natural' systems it
              is more difficult to combat the spread of exotic, invasive pathogens. The
              research enhances participation of underrepresented groups in science (a female
              doctoral candidate and a minority female student intern), provides
              opportunities for undergraduate internships in Costa Rica and employment in
              Michigan, and provides training to Costa Rican field assistants.

