Title       : Collaborative Research: Photosynthetic Acclimation, Photoprotection, and Phloem
               Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0235709

Award Number: 0235709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67379              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Turgeon ert2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
As efficient collectors of solar energy, plants are subject to damage by light
              when it is particularly intense, or when harsh environmental conditions prevent
              the energy from being used productively.  Evergreen plants use one of two
              contrasting strategies to cope with strong light during the winter.  Some
              species protect themselves by completely shutting down photosynthesis and
              rearranging their light-collecting apparatus to harmlessly dissipate absorbed
              light. Other species are able to acclimate and remain productive, using solar
              energy for photosynthesis and growth during brief warm spells.  Plants using
              these two strategies sometimes grow side-by-side in the field.  There is
              speculation that these contrasting responses to environmental change involve
              differences in the mechanisms by which the products of photosynthesis (sugars)
              are loaded into the long-distance transport tissue (the phloem) from the leaf
              cells where they are made.  According to this view, species that maintain
              photosynthetic capacity in winter may be those that use transport proteins for
              phloem loading, whereas species that downregulate photosynthesis may load via
              the pores (plasmodesmata) that connect these cell types.  Loading via the
              latter path may be more sensitive to disruption by cold.  One representative of
              each plant type, spinach (with transport proteins) and Mullein (with pores),
              will be used to study the response to cold temperature under natural conditions
              in the field and controlled conditions in growth chambers.   These species have
              similar growth forms (rosettes) and retain leaves while overwintering in
              Colorado. They, as well as additional species of each type (pea, with transport
              proteins, and pumpkin, with pores) will also be used to study the response of
              plants when they are transferred from low to high light, which also subjects
              leaves to potentially damaging, excess energy.  An inhibitor of the sugar
              transport proteins will be used to determine whether species known to export
              sugars via pores acclimate to cold or high light by altering their sugar export
              strategy and adding a transport protein component.  The focus on these two
              sugar export strategies will be broadened by characterizing a range of
              additional structural and ultrastructural features related to carbon export
              capacity, including the number and cross-sectional area of exporting phloem
              elements, the density of pore connections, and membrane features associated
              with the transport proteins.  Some or all of these structural features may be
              augmented to increase carbon export capacity under cold or high light
              conditions, and it is hypothesized that the downregulating species will exhibit
              less flexibility in their ability to modulate these structural features. 
              Through these studies a better understanding of sugar export characteristics as
              potential pivotal determinants of photosynthetic acclimation will begin to
              emerge.  As to the broader impact of this work, this project will (1) involve
              graduate students in the process of scientific discovery, (2) facilitate a
              collaboration between disciplines within plant biology and between
              investigators at two institutions, and (3) allow a better understanding of the
              underlying mechanisms of the adaptability/resistance of crops and native plants
              to environmental stress.  This will furthermore contribute to a better
              prediction of changes in plant productivity in response to global change, as
              well as providing the underlying knowledge necessary for potential increases in
              the resistance of crops to increased stress through genetic engineering.

