Title       : RUI: Cell Wall Associated Protein Kinases and Cell Elongation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0235023

Award Number: 0235023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Kohorn bkohorn@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1132,9109,9141,9150,9151,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The plant Wall Associated Kinases,WAKs, which were discovered by Dr. Kohorn,
              are phosphorylating enzyme proteins that physically link the plasma membrane to
              the carbohydrate and protein matrix that comprises the plant cell wall. WAKs
              are of importance as they have the potential to directly signal cellular events
              through their cytoplasmic kinase domain. There are five Arabidopsis WAKs that
              vary primarily in their extracellular domain and that collectively are
              expressed in most tissues. WAK mRNA and protein are present in vegetative
              meristems, junctions of organ types and areas of cell expansion. They are also
              induced by pathogen infection and wounding.  Recent experiments indicate that
              WAKs are also involved in pollen tube growth in the gynoecium, and may possibly
              be involved in pollen tube orientation. WAKs can be found bound to pectin in
              the cell wall, and at least one isoform is associated with a secreted glycine
              rich protein (GRP).  Disruption by antisense and RNAi of WAK expression in
              leaves leads to the loss of cell expansion, indicating that WAKs play an
              important role in plant growth and development. It remains to be discovered how
              WAKs, pectins and GRPs combine to regulate the patterns of cell expansion in
              coordination with the complex architecture and mechanical constraints of the
              plant cell wall.

This project will explore the role WAKs play in cell
              expansion and in pollen tube growth.  A set of WAK specific antibodies will be
              generated to allow a thorough characterization of the protein expression of
              each family member and to serve as tools in the analysis of plants with
              mutations in individual WAKs.  Arabidopsis lines carrying an insertion mutation
              in a WAK gene are unable to produce progeny homozygous for the mutation because
              fertilization is affected (mutant pollen grains are able to germinate but do
              not reach the egg).  The exact nature of the defect will be determined using
              microscopy, antibodies and markers specific for the mutant pollen.

The
              pollen mutant phentoype will be complemented such that the progeny can be made
              homozygous for the WAK mutation. The resulting vegetative mutant tissue will be
              analyzed to understand how WAKs mediate cell expansion. Tests for altered
              turgor, cell wall extension and altered expansin and cell wall enzyme
              expression will be performed.  

Application of Gibberellin (GA) rescues
              plants that are rendered dwarf by WAK mutations.  Therefore, the relationship
              between the GA and WAK signaling pathways will be explored through a series of
              crosses with mutants in the GA pathway and through the analysis of GA
              biosynthetic enzyme expression.

Finally, the interaction of WAKs with both
              extracellular glycine rich proteins and with cytoplasmic transcriptional
              adaptor proteins will be explored using genetics and biochemical
              analysis.

The broader impacts of this project will be  manifested primarily
              through the teaching and training of undergraduates.  Bowdoin College is a
              predominantly undergraduate institution, and undergraduate student researchers
              will be extensively involved in performing these experiments.  

