Title       : Analyses of Germ Cell Migration and Programmed Cell Death in Drosophila
               melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0235332

Award Number: 0235332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark R. Coffman ccoffman@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0235332
Coffman

During animal development, many cells must migrate to their
              ultimate destinations in order to function. The regulatory mechanisms that
              control the elimination of cells that fail to migrate appropriately, present a
              danger to the animal, or that are in excess are often tightly linked to cell
              migration. However, the mechanisms that regulate how and where a cell moves and
              whether it lives or dies are not well understood.
     
Germ cell development
              in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, is a genetically tractable system
              for studying cell migration and programmed cell death. Successful screens from
              other labs have identified zygotically required autosomal genes involved in
              germ cell migration. However, those genes identified to date have enigmatic
              functions, and the relationships between the various known components are not
              clear. Programmed death of Drosophila germ cells was proposed over 50 years
              ago, but the cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating this process are
              virtually unexplored. To identify additional genes required for germ cell
              development, a genetic screen of the X chromosome was performed. This proposal
              outlines studies of 2 genes that, when mutated, severely disrupt germ cell
              migration and/or cell death. When both the maternal and zygotic functions of
              scattershot (sctt) are disrupted, the germ cells form normally and initiate
              migratory movements, but very few, if any, reach the gonad. Germ cells ectopic
              to the gonad, which normally undergo cell death, fail to die. A paternal
              wild-type copy of sctt can rescue the migration defect, but not the cell death
              defect. The function of the outsiders (out) gene is required zygotically. In
              out mutant embryos, a wild-type number of germ cells migrate to the gonads, but
              many germ cells ectopic to the gonads fail to undergo programmed cell
              death.

This project will:
1. Contribute to the emerging germ cell migration
              and cell death models by determining the molecular identity and characterizing
              the mRNA expression patterns of sctt and out.
2. Test the hypotheses that sctt
              and out functions are required in the germ cells.
3. Test specific hypotheses
              about interactions between sctt and out with previously identified cell
              migration or cell death components.
4. Educate undergraduate and graduate
              researchers from underrepresented groups.
5. Contribute to the understanding
              of the basic biological mechanisms regulating cell migration and cell death.
              This will lead to new hypotheses concerning the etiology of disease conditions
              including birth defects, autoimmune diseases, and cancer.

