Title       : LTREB: Response of a Reservoir Ecosystem to Declining Subsidies of Nutrients and
               Detritus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0235755

Award Number: 0235755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Vanni   (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria J. Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Renwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual Merit. The proposed LTREB  research will use long-term data to test
              hypotheses about how reservoir ecosystems respond to reduced nutrient and
              detritus (sediment) subsidies. Nutrient and sediment subsidies to the study
              site, Acton Lake, are declining because of changes in agricultural practices in
              the lake's agricultural watershed. These include a marked increase in
              conservation tillage and a reduction in phosphorus fertilizers. These changes
              appear to be
driving decreases in concentrations and loads of phosphorus and
              suspended sediments in Acton Lake's inflow streams, based on an 8-year trend.
              In Acton Lake, concentrations of suspended inorganic sediment have declined,
              and biomass of phytoplankton has increased, over this period. We hypothesize
              that reductions in detritus input will induce a decline in the population
              density of an important detritivorous fish, the gizzard shad, leading to
              further changes in the ecosystem. In addition, we hypothesize that
              phytoplankton and zooplankton species composition will change such that taxa
              typical of high productivity (eutrophic) habitats will decline and those
              typical of mesotrophic conditions will increase. This research will be unique
              in that it will consist of a long-term study on interactive effects of multiple
              ecosystem subsidies: 1) nutrient subsidies from watersheds, 2) detritus
              subsidies from watersheds, and 3) nutrient subsidies via detritivorous fish.
              The proposed research is also unique because it integrates watersheds, streams,
              and a reservoir ecosystem. Although there are many studies of eutrophication
              and recovery in natural lakes, we know little about how reservoirs respond to
              reduced nutrient subsidies. Because nutrient and sediment exports are declining
              in many agricultural watersheds in the US and globally, this research will shed
              light on how these understudied ecosystems respond to a widespread and common
              influence.
Broader Impacts. The proposed research will have several
              educational, environmental and societal impacts. Undergraduates will do summer
              research through a variety of programs including an REU Site Program. Primary
              school teachers will be recruited along with graduate students and postdocs, as
              well. Data will be shared and collaborations continued with state and federal
              agencies. This research will facilitate decision-making in regards to watershed
              management, alternative agricultural practices (hence socio-economic influences
              on farmers), water quality, and fisheries management.

