Title       : Neuronal Differentiation in the PNS vs. CNS: Role of Nel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0235575

Award Number: 0235575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances B. Lefcort lefcort@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1190,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	For the nervous system to function, neurons must establish their "correct"
              identities, meaning, they must express an appropriate set of genes in order to
              establish effective synaptic connections with their target(s).   The nervous
              system is divided up into two parts: neurons in the brain and spinal cord
              comprise the central nervous system (CNS) while neurons that reside outside of
              the CNS comprise the peripheral nervous system (PNS).  The neurons of the PNS
              include all the sensory neurons that are activated by touch, pressure, pain and
              temperature stimulations on the body.  They must transmit their information
              into the CNS in order for the organism to make an appropriate response to the
              particular stimulus: e.g. when one touches a hot surface, one pulls one 's
              finger away.  In order for an organism to respond effectively to one's
              environment, each neuron in this circuit must function correctly meaning, each
              neuron must have established their designated identity.  Thus the goal is to
              identify the sets of genes that distinct neuronal cell types must express in
              order for that particular neuron to establish its correct identity.
              
Considering the panoply of neuronal subtypes that exist within the CNS and
              PNS, our understanding of the complete sets of genes that drive these distinct
              patterns of cellular differentiation is sparse.   The goal of our proposal is
              twofold: one, to determine the function of one gene, NEL in both a PNS tissue
              and a CNS tissue, in order to compare the development of neurons in these two
              distinct regions of the nervous system, and two, to conduct a global comparison
              of genes expressed during the process of neurogenesis and differentiation
              within the CNS and PNS.  The data yielded from these experiments will
              significantly enhance our understanding of the molecular and cellular
              mechanisms that drive the establishment of the diverse spectrum of neurons
              within the nervous system. 

