Title       : Cyclophilins in Auxin-Regulated Growth and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0235252

Award Number: 0235252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri L. Lomax terri.lomax@oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The hormone auxin is central to the regulation of most plant growth,
              developmental, and environmental responses. Recent work has illuminated the
              cellular mechanisms underlying the uptake and efflux of auxin, transcription of
              auxin-regulated genes, and targeted destruction of auxin response factors. 
              However, important components of the auxin response mechanism remain unknown,
              including the signaling mechanisms that connect auxin perception and
              auxin-regulated gene expression. Until these signaling pathways are further
              elucidated, we will not fully grasp the cellular mechanisms underlying auxin
              action and using that knowledge to control plant productivity.  The general
              goal of this project is to identify and characterize additional intracellular
              components of the auxin signaling mechanism.

The diageotropica (dgt) mutant
              of tomato has greatly reduced sensitivity to auxin and exhibits a complex,
              pleiotropic phenotype with many morphological and physiological characteristics
              related to auxin, such as lack of lateral roots, altered vascular and fruit
              development, shortened internodes and a slow gravitropic response.  Through our
              previous NSF-funded research, we demonstrated that the dgt phenotype results
              from reduced expression of a subset of auxin-regulated genes, i.e. the DGT
              protein regulates specific auxin sub-pathways at the pre-transcriptional level.
              We have now identified the Dgt gene via map-based cloning and microsynteny
              between the tomato and Arabidopsis genomes. Our exciting discovery of a
              previously unknown component of auxin signaling now provides a powerful tool
              for filling in important missing links in the mechanism of auxin action.

              
The project addresses two major objectives:
1.  Elucidate the cellular
              mechanism(s) by which the DGT protein regulates the specific auxin response
              pathways identified by the pleiotropic dgt phenotype in tomato.  We will
              analyze protein activity, expression, and tissue and sub-cellular
              localization.

2.  Establish the role of DGT homologs in another plant
              species with a different growth form. Targeted knockouts of Dgt homologues in
              Arabidopsis, as well as analysis of existing mutants will allow us to determine
              to what degree the protein plays a similar role in a different plant. 

The
              proposed research will lead to the discovery of mechanisms to increase or
              refine plant productivity. For example, better understanding of the cellular
              mechanisms underlying the altered xylem development in dgt plants and callus
              tissue will have direct implications for wood production.  Similarly, rate of
              growth, final size, and seed production are all affected in dgt fruit,
              indicating that manipulation of the pathways regulated by the Dgt gene
              (cyclophilin) will eventually allow better control of those characteristics in
              a wide variety of plants grown for food, fiber, and fruit production. This
              research will also have broad impacts by integrating research activities with
              the training of students and dissemination of information to the public through
              science outreach program.

