Title       : RUI: Ret Signaling in Pronephric Duct Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  2002  
File        : a0235938

Award Number: 0235938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Drawbridge drawbridge@rider.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rider University
	      P O Box 6400
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086480400    609/896-5000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0235938
Drawbridge

The goal of the PI's undergraduate-based research program
              is to identify, characterize and elucidate the specific function of
              cell-surface and guidance molecules involved in pronephric duct (PND) migration
              in amphibian embryos, with emphasis on the axolotl, a urodele amphibian.  PND
              extension is a morphogenetic event critical to the establishment of the
              urogenital system in all vertebrates.  In the axolotl embryo, PND migration
              occurs with impressive precision:  cells of the PND primordium coalesce from
              intermediate mesoderm immediately ventral to somites 3-7 and actively migrate
              caudally as a cohesive stream until they reach and fuse with the cloaca.
              
	
In mammals, it has been demonstrated that GDNF activation of the
              transmembrane tyrosine kinase Ret and its ligand-binding partner, GFRa1, is
              required for proper development of the metanephros - the adult kidney of
              amniote vertebrates.  Asking whether Ret signaling might function in more
              primitive excretory systems, the PIs lab has recently shown that the activation
              of Ret is sufficient to explain PND pathfinding in the axolotl.  These data
              have led to the hypothesis that axolotl PND migration occurs via migration of
              the Ret/GFRa1-expressing PND cells up an endogenous gradient of GDNF.  During
              the course of the project proposed here, this model will be tested by (1)
              determination of the expression pattern of axolotl GDNF via in situ
              hybridization and whole mount immunocytochemistry; (2) inactivation of Ret,
              GFRa1 and GDNF in axolotl embryos to determine whether these proteins are
              necessary for PND migration.  These data will provide a rigorous test of the
              hypothesis that Ret signaling performs an essential role in PND morphogenesis
              in anamniote embryos.
Intellectual merit:
	
Despite the fact that PND
              morphogenesis is the central event in establishing the excretory system, 
              little is known about its formation in vertebrates that don't make a
              metanephros, i.e. fish and amphibians.  The PI is one of only a few
              investigators exploiting fish or amphibian embryos to ask questions about PND
              morphogenesis; she is the only investigator currently studying this in the
              axolotl, even though its PND morphogenesis has been better characterized than
              either Xenopus or zebrafish.  In addition, her work provides the first evidence
              showing that Ret function is required for morphogenesis of anamniote excretory
              systems.  Thus, the PIs work contributes fundamental information about
              excretory system development and evolution.
Broader impacts:
	
The proposed
              activities will be conducted by the PI and undergraduates at Rider University,
              some doing independent research projects, some as participants in the PIs
              Recombinant DNA Techniques course.  Rider's student demographic includes 15%
              underrepresented minorities, 37% first-generation college students and 58%
              women.  Thus, the PIs research program benefits several groups typically
              underrepresented in science careers.  In addition, most of her students
              performing independent research have the opportunity to present their work at
              regional or national scientific meetings. 















