Title       : Structure-Function of Heavy Metal Transport CPx-ATPases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0235165

Award Number: 0235165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $842398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose M. Arguello arguello@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1166,1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to understand the functional mechanism of heavy
              metal transport CPx-ATPases. These P-type ATPases transport heavy metals (ions
              of Cu, Ag, Zn, Co, Cd, Pb) across biomembranes. Found in all life kingdoms,
              these key enzymes are involved in micronutrient metal homeostasis. The
              transport stoichiometry, the determinants of metal ion specificity, and the
              regulatory mechanisms of CPx-ATPases are not known. This project aims to
              identify key structural features involved in ion selectivity and activity
              regulation. Simpler CPx-ATPases found in procaryotes will be used as models in
              these studies: Cu-ATPases from A. fulgidus, a Co-ATPase from A. pernix, and a
              Zn-ATPase from H. influenzae. A. fulgidus and A. pernix are extremophilic
              archaea. Experiments will be performed to test whether conserved sequences in
              the transmembrane region of CPx-ATPases determine ion specificity. CPx-ATPases
              have cytoplasmic N-terminal metal-binding domains, in addition to the
              transmembrane CPx site. The possible regulatory role of the metal-binding
              domain in enzyme kinetics will be studied. This project will also involve
              testing whether a metal chaperone molecule delivers the metal to the transport
              site. The fourth goal of this project is to determine the structure of a
              CPx-ATPase using X-ray crystallography. The structure of CPx-ATPases at atomic
              resolution would greatly enhance understanding the mechanism of heavy metal
              transport.

Broader Impact: The project will contribute to an understanding
              of heavy metal homeostasis. Insight gained in metal selectivity might
              facilitate the design of metal bioremediation processes and the management of
              plant and animal mineral nutrition. This research will also contribute to
              ongoing educational activities (undergraduate teaching, curriculum development
              and summer research). Moreover, undergraduate and graduate students will
              perform major parts of this project.

