Title       : Biotic Control of Calcium Supply: Distinguishing Sources to Regrowing Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0235650

Award Number: 0235650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth D. Yanai rdyanai@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:  The effects of forest management, and the changes associated with
              stand development, have not been given sufficient emphasis in studies of
              environmental stress in forested ecosystems.  Calcium budgets indicate that
              young northern hardwood stands (<30 yrs old) transfer Ca from mineral soil into
              aboveground vegetation, forest floor, and drainage water, whereas older stands
              are in approximate steady state.  This difference is important to understanding
              the relative importance of acid rain in Ca depletion in the northeastern United
              States.  Futhermore, if young stands tap a pool of soil Ca unavailable to older
              stands, then repeated harvest will not result in rapid Ca depletion, as has
              been predicted based on rates of export and weathering in older stands.  If, on
              the other hand, rapid Ca uptake by young stands hastens the depletion of
              readily available pools, sustainable forestry may be threatened. 
Our
              objectives are to determine the importance of non-silicate sources of
              weatherable Ca in the mineral soil, and the effect of stand age on the source
              and magnitude of Ca mobilized from the mineral soil.  We will use Sr isotopes
              and element ratios to identify the relative importance of different soil Ca
              pools to meeting the Ca needs of regenerating forests.
BROADER IMPACTS: 
              Multiple Universities will be involved in this research through subcontracts,
              and at least 3 graduate students and 2 undergraduates will be trained.  This
              work will provide information that will enable forest managers and policy
              makers to maker better decisions about silviculture.

