Title       : Studies of the Interrelationships Among Inbreeding, Resistance to Herbivores,
               and the Transmission of Pathogens in Wild Gourds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0235217

Award Number: 0235217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2010   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Stephenson as4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Winsor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Many plants suffer from diseases spread by insect herbivores.  The damage
              experienced by plants depends both on their attractiveness to insects and on
              their resistance to disease.  These, in turn, are influenced by the
              plants'genes.  These studies investigate interactions among herbivory by
              beetles and aphids, infection by bacterial and viral diseases, and the level of
              genetic inbreeding in wild gourds, which are free-living forms of cultivated
              squashes.  Field and greenhouse experiments will be conducted in which
              inbreeding, herbivory, and exposure to disease will be controlled.  Serological
              analyses and transmission bioassays will determine infection levels in the
              plants.

The proposed studies both will shed light on basic ecological and
              evolutionary issues such the consequences of inbreeding in natural populations,
              the establishment and spread of diseases in natural populations, and the
              dynamics of food chains, and will be relevant for the management and
              conservation of species with small populations. Moreover, because the same
              herbivores and pathogens that attack squashes, melons, and cucumbers will be
              studied, the findings will be useful in the development of integrated pest
              management programs for cucurbit crop species.  Furthermore, knowledge of the
              interactions among inbreeding, herbivores and pathogens is especially relevant
              now that transgenic squash cultivars with resistance to insect transmitted
              viruses are being cultivated.  If these genes escape into wild gourd
              populations, information on the effects of viral pathogens will assist in
              predicting the impact of these transgenes in nature.

