Title       : Evolution of Mating Systems in the Limnadiid Clam Shrimp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0235301

Award Number: 0235301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Weeks scweeks@UAKRON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter R. Hoeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clay A. Sassaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Among the diversity of reproductive types in plants and animals, one
              permutation - androdioecy (mixtures of males and hermaphrodites) - is
              distinguished by its rarity, being found in only 18 cases. Two of these 18
              species are found in the primitive crustacean class Branchiopoda, but another
              20 branchiopod species (in the genus Eulimnadia) have sex ratios suggestive of
              androdioecy. If these 20+ closely-related species are truly androdioecious,
              then this rare mating system would likely have been present in the ancestor to
              this lineage, placing the origin of androdioecy at ~280 million years ago. 
              This inferred age is orders of magnitude older than expected by theory. We
              propose to combine three parallel projects (laboratory rearing experiments,
              morphological comparisons, and DNA sequencing) to assess whether androdioecy is
              an ancestral or derived trait in these crustaceans. The rearing experiments
              will be used to determine the extent of androdioecy in these species. The
              morphological and DNA projects will produce data used to estimate the
              relationships among species within these crustaceans. We will measure 30
              morphological characters per species as well as sequence four DNA regions,
              which should enable a robust estimate of evolutionary relationships among these
              animals. We will then use these estimates to determine whether androdioecy is
              an ancestral condition for these crustaceans, which if true, suggests that this
              reproductive mode may have persisted for hundreds of millions of years, casting
              doubt on the notion that androdioecy is a transitory reproductive system. 
              
	This research project will accomplish two scientific and three educational
              goals.  First, these data will allow us to better understand the factors that
              maintain males with hermaphrodites in androdioecious species, which can shed
              light on the importance of mating between individuals relative to
              self-fertilization.  Such an understanding can help us to formulate better
              management practices for both domesticated plants and animals as well better
              preservation plans for endangered species.  Second, delineating the true
              relationship among the species within this crustacean group will be helpful for
              determining the true number of species in North America, which can be used to
              shed light on which of these species may be threatened or endangered in the
              United States.  For the educational components of this research, this project
              will integrate teaching and primary research on three levels. First, funding
              will directly support two graduate students and one undergraduate student for
              three years. Second, all three PI's will encourage undergraduate students to
              participate in research via independent research projects and honors thesis
              research. Third, part of this research program will be incorporated into two
              on-going educational programs at The University of Akron: (a) an NSF-funded
              program that brings basic research into the laboratories of the Introductory
              Biology course at U of A, and (b) a 5-year, privately funded program that
              involves minority high school students in basic research at U of A via a
              mentoring program, involving both undergraduate and graduate students in a
              "research team." In all research mentoring programs, priority will be given to
              qualified minority and women candidates at all levels of participation.

