Title       : SGER: Dynamic Economic Models: Calibration, Simulation, and Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0235077

Award Number: 0235077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Santos manuel.santos@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research addresses a central problem in
              quantitative economics: the estimation of parameter values in non-linear
              optimization models, where there seems to be a shortage of general, reliable
              estimation procedures.  This research project is made up of two projects. The
              first develops a general framework for the estimation and evaluation of dynamic
              economic models. The second is concerned with the simulation of a dynamic
              principal-agent model to address some important issues in top executive
              compensation. 

Growth theory can provide an appropriate framework to study a
              wide variety of problems in macroeconomics and asset pricing. But an
              unsatisfactory aspect of this research endeavor is that model predictions are
              usually confronted with data in a rather casual way.   The purpose of this
              project is to develop a general framework that allows for a rigorous
              application of statistical analysis for the evaluation, calibration and
              estimation of dynamic optimization models. Part of this analysis builds on
              important contributions by Lee and Ingram (1991) and Duffie and Singleton
              (1993). As these authors acknowledge, however, the conditions leading to their
              proofs of strong consistency and asymptotic normality of their simulated
              moments estimators are quite restrictive.  The investigator's goal is to offer
              a general proof of strong consistency and to explore the properties of the
              stochastic solution in order to establish asymptotic normality of the
              estimator. This work is based on some approximation results, which are also
              useful to evaluate numerical simulations. Further progress in quantitative
              policy research requires the development of a general framework, as proposed
              here, for reliable estimation and evaluation procedures. 

The second part of
              this research project focuses on the simulation of a dynamic principal- agent
              model to address several issues on executive compensation. Even though the
              seminal papers by Abreu, Pierce and Stacchetti (1986, 1990) and Spear and
              Srivastava (1987) seem to have laid the foundations for dynamic contracting, it
              is widely agreed that the empirical implications of this theory have not been
              explored in a systematic way. Because of some stringent assumptions in some of
              these models, the evolution of the distribution of consumption and earnings
              becomes degenerate, which seems counterfactual. Moreover, relatively little
              work has been devoted to the calibration and simulation of dynamic
              principal-agent models and to the evaluation of their predictions regarding the
              structure of compensation, the sensitivity of pay to performance, and the costs
              and benefits of stock option contracts. The ultimate objective of this research
              is then to enhance our understanding of the workings and performance of some
              compensation schemes for the provision of insurance and incentives

