Title       : Phylogenetics and Evolutionary Biomechanics of Coral Reef Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0235307

Award Number: 0235307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Westneat mwestneat@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1171,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fishes of the family Labridae are a diverse group of nearly 600 species that
              inhabit tropical and temperate marine waters throughout the world and
              constitute a major segment of the diversity found on coral reefs. Advances in
              our understanding of the labrid family tree and study of the biomechanics of
              feeding behavior will allow exploration of evolution in coral reef fishes.
              
	The first goal of this project is to collect new DNA sequence data for
              several species groups within the Labridae. With previous NSF support, a family
              tree for the Labridae was generated using data for 115 species. Resolution of
              phylogenetic relationships on this tree was excellent based on four genes from
              different parts of the cell (2 each from the mitochondrion and the nucleus).
              However several large species groups remain unresolved. In this project,
              sequences of genes that are appropriate for species-level questions will be
              obtained for 120 additional taxa. In addition, this project will investigate
              two genes involved in early growth and development of fish skulls. These
              include Otx1, a gene that plays a role in head growth and Dlx2, a gene involved
              in both lower jaw formation and tooth development. Sequences for these genes
              will be collected in 50 species, having diverse skull structures and jaw
              anatomy. Thus, this study will provide new information from many species and
              many genes, some of which have known regulatory involvement in building a key
              part of the animal, the skull.
	The second objective of the proposal is to
              combine evolutionary trees with concepts from engineering design and knowledge
              of feeding behavior to study skull function. Specific hypotheses of
              evolutionary convergence will be tested to determine whether the same
              engineering solution has been achieved multiple times in the history of the
              group. The extreme modifications of jaws and skull found in this family make
              them a model system for evolution in cranial structure and function.
              Biomechanical engineering models allow calculation of basic feeding mechanics
              such as jaw closing force and speed, and jaw protrusion. Biomechanical models,
              generated as physical constructs and computer models, are useful for research
              and education. Combining evolution with function in many species, this project
              will examine evolutionary change in the biomechanics of one of the most diverse
              radiations of vertebrates on Earth. The movement toward an integrated
              understanding of biological structure and function, from genes to tissues to
              whole organisms, is one of the major frontiers of biology. This project
              contributes to that goal by testing specific hypotheses of functional evolution
              using molecular phylogenies and engineering concepts. 
	This project
              contributes to education, training, exhibits, and research infrastructure in
              many ways. The Principal Investigator teaches undergraduate courses at the
              University of Chicago and lab exercises are held each year in the collections
              of the Field Museum. Students at the college, graduate, and postdoctoral levels
              are involved with all aspects of the proposed research, including sequencing,
              analysis, and biomechanics. Collaborations are underway with people from
              Austria, Australia, Chile, Kenya, Madagascar, New Zealand, The Philippines, and
              Thailand. Museum exhibits are now on display that feature models of fish head
              function developed from NSF-funded research, and exhibits are planned to
              feature both phylogenetic and functional research at the Field Museum. The PI
              gives museum lectures, has spoken on public radio, visits local schools, and
              presents coral reef fish biology to groups such as Elder Hostel and Rotary in
              the Chicago area. Physical and computer models of animal function featured in
              this proposal are fantastic tools for classroom education, research training,
              and museum exhibits. 

