Title       : Using Phylogenetically Independent Contrasts to Examine Temperature Acclimation
               of Root and Mycorrhizal Fungal Respiration Among Organisms from Broad
               Latitudinal Gradients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0235403

Award Number: 0235403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265187             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Eissenstat dme9@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger T. Koide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Temperature is a major constraint on mycorrhizal root metabolism in many
              environments.  In cold climates, temperatures in the spring restrict root
              metabolism and nutrient acquisition.  In the summer in temperate and tropical
              climates, unshaded soils may reach temperatures that cause excessive
              carbohydrate metabolism unless root acclimation occurs. The central objective
              of this proposal is to examine how latitude of origin affects plant root and
              mycorrhizal fungal respiratory responses to soil temperature.  These
              investigators  will use phylogenetically independent contrasts (contrasts using
              distinct evolutionary lineages) to permit general inferences on plant and
              mycorrhizal fungal responses to temperature as a function of latitude of
              origin. The research will focus on four, interrelated hypotheses associated
              with organism response to temperature.  Does diurnal temperature variation
              affect an organism's ability to acclimate to temperature?  Under conditions of
              no acclimation, do plants and mycorrhizal fungi from higher latitudes exhibit
              higher respiration than those from lower latitudes when measured at the same
              temperature?  Under conditions where acclimation occurs, do plants &
              mycorrhizal fungi from high latitudes exhibit less acclimation to high
              temperature (i.e., excessively metabolize carbohydrates) than those from lower
              latitudes?  Are the independent mycorrhizal fungal or plants respiratory
              responses to temperature the same when the organisms are measured in symbiosis?
               The use of multiple, distinct evolutionary lineages of both fungi and plants
              will provide new insight into how organisms respond globally to both average
              temperatures and temperature variation.
This work has several opportunities
              for broader scientific impacts.  Global climate change is an area of intense
              interest to both scientists and government policy makers. The Intergovernmental
              Panel on Climate Change predicts a 1.4-5.8 degree C increase in global surface
              temperature by 2100, using atmospheric models that assume increases in
              atmospheric CO2 will lead to increases in ambient temperature, which increases
              soil respiration, causing a positive feedback. Mycorrhizal root respiration
              represents the dominant source of soil respiration in many soils.  If
              mycorrhizal roots acclimate to increases in temperature, than predicted
              increases in surface temperatures may be overestimated.   
There will also be
              several opportunities to enhance scientific training.  At the undergraduate
              level, students will be involved in the project in several meaningful ways,
              including learning how to culture mycorrhizal fungi and assess their
              colonization on roots, growing plants and measuring the respiration of roots
              and fungi using a gas-exchange system that requires an understanding of data
              loggers, gas analyzers and gas flow meters and controllers.  The postdoctoral
              fellow will also have opportunities to become trained both in root and
              mycorrhizal fungal physiology and participate in a field project with a foreign
              graduate student in Poland.

