Title       : A Menominee-English/English-Menominee Dictionary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0235873

Award Number: 0235873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica A. Macaulay mmacaula@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne I. Milligan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Monica Macaulay and Ms. Marianne
              Milligan will conduct three years of research on Menominee, an endangered
              Algonquian language spoken in northeastern Wisconsin. They will create and
              publish a set of bilingual dictionaries. These will be derived from a computer
              database with grammatical notes, morphological analysis, and cultural
              information on Menominee. Because much of this information is unnecessary and
              even potentially distracting for some audiences, the database will be coded in
              such a way that several different dictionaries can be produced from it. At
              least three will be produced: one serving child learners, one serving language
              teachers and adult learners, and one serving scholars interested in the
              complete analysis of the entries. Each format will be produced in both printed
              and electronic form. The electronic versions will offer versatility unavailable
              in the printed versions. But because some audiences do not have access to
              computers, printed versions of the dictionaries are necessary, especially for
              the classroom.

This project will contribute significantly to scholarly work
              on Algonquian languages and, at the same time, provide the Menominee tribe with
              a much-needed tool for preserving their highly endangered language. There is
              currently no satisfactory dictionary resource available for language learners,
              teachers, and scholars interested in Menominee and historical or comparative
              research on other Algonquian languages. Thus, development of dictionaries for
              different audiences is urgently needed. The flexibility of the database will
              maximize the usefulness of this project, enabling the production of
              dictionaries for different levels and types of users.

