Title       : Physiology of Trout Natriuretic Peptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0235223

Award Number: 0235223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $407871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Olson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine the physiology of natriuretic peptides (NPs) in fish. 
              NPs are a family of peptide hormones that decrease blood volume and lower blood
              pressure in virtually all vertebrates.  NPs were first identified in mammals in
              1981and although their genetic code was determined a few months later, their
              physiological function remains unknown to the present time.  This proposal
              questions the applicability of mammalian models in NP research because mammals
              continually lose water through evaporation and renal excretion and thus are
              never naturally volume or pressure over-loaded.  However, freshwater fish
              (trout) are chronically volume over-loaded and as the earliest vertebrates that
              contain all members of the NP family of proteins, they form the basis for the
              present study.  Initially, specific assays will be developed for each trout NP
              (ANP, CNP, VNP). These assays will be used to determine how NP secretion is
              affected by independently manipulating water and salt balance via adapting
              trout to freshwater (volume overload, salt depletion), saltwater (volume
              depletion, salt overload), and freshwater plus high salt diet (volume and salt
              overload).  Only euryhaline fish, such as trout, thrive in all these conditions
              and they are the only vertebrates in which these parameters can be controlled
              independently, non-invasively, and without stress.  This information will then
              be used to examine the effects of physiological doses of NPs on trout fluid
              balance, in vivo and in vitro cardiovascular and renal function, and identify
              tissue-specific NP secretory processes.  These studies will provide the first
              comprehensive picture of NP physiology from the vertebrates in which they
              initially evolved.  This project is part of an international collaboration with
              laboratories in Canada and Japan and it will provide domestic and foreign
              training for graduate students and domestic training for undergraduates,
              teachers in secondary education, and high school students.
