Title       : Neuropeptide Modulation of a Vocal Motor Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0235903

Award Number: 0235903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414699             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunny K. Boyd boyd.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neuropeptide Modulation of a Vocal Motor Pathway
Sunny K. Boyd, Principal
              Investigator
Proposal Number: 0235903


The long-term objective of this
              research program is to identify the interactions among chemical messengers that
              control behaviors.  Peptide and steroid hormones regulate social behaviors in
              representative species from all vertebrate classes.  The mechanisms of action
              of these compounds and the site in the brain where they act on specific
              behaviors are poorly understood.  The interaction of testicular steroids and
              the neuropeptide arginine vasotocin will be investigated in the vertebrate
              brainstem.  Three experimental approaches will be used to assess the importance
              of these interactions in generation of vocalizations, which are a critical
              component of social behavior in many species.  First, neuropeptide effects on
              the brainstem will be tested by analyzing vocalizations prior to, and
              following,  neuropeptide administration.  Second, whether the necessary
              anatomical conditions are met at a cellular level will be determined with
              tract-tracing and peptide or receptor double-labeling.  Third, this project
              will determine whether peptide receptors in the brainstem are functional with
              receptor binding and electrophysiological recording techniques.  Neuropeptides
              alter a variety of vertebrate behaviors, including parental, aggressive, and
              reproductive behaviors. However, little is known about the effects of these
              peptides at the motor output level.  Findings from this research program will
              thus offer insight into conserved mechanisms for peptide control of behavior.
              These studies will provide excellent training for undergraduate and graduate
              students who will acquire skills at the organismal, tissue, cellular, and
              molecular levels.  These projects will also train high school science teachers
              and minority undergraduates via two institutional programs.

