Title       : Function of the Arabidopsis Gene TORMOZ in Cell Division and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0235548

Award Number: 0235548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkatesan Sundaresan sundar@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0235548
Sundaresan

The control of cell division is an important feature of
              development in multicellular organisms.  In higher plants, both the timing and
              the plane of cell division are regulated and responsive to developmental cues. 
              Although there are extensive studies showing that the cytoskeleton is important
              in executing the decision to divide in a predetermined plane, there is little
              information on the underlying molecular mechanisms.  A mutation in Arabidopsis
              called tormoz (toz) has been identified, in which longitudinal divisions of the
              embryo are randomized.  The mutant embryos arrest but can be rescued to
              generate seedlings which have severe morphological defects.  The predicted TOZ
              gene product appears to have a close homolog in every sequenced eukaryote from
              yeast to humans.  However, the function of the TOZ-related proteins has not
              been previously studied in any species.  The role of the TOZ gene product in
              cell division and development in Arabidopsis will be investigated.  First, the
              toz mutant seedlings will be used to examine how plant development has been
              affected by the mutation,  including the extent to which patterning, and cell
              specification have been perturbed by the defect in cell division planes. 
              Second, studies of toz mutant cells will be undertaken to determine possible
              functions of TOZ in the organization of the plant cytoskeleton for mitosis and
              cytokinesis.  Third, the intracellular localization of the TOZ gene product
              during cell division in Arabidopsis will be studied to generate clues to the
              mechanism by which it may be involved in the control of division plane. 
              Fourth, we will attempt to identify putative interacting partners of TOZ in
              order to gain further information on the molecular mechanism by which the TOZ
              protein executes its function.  These studies will help to understand the
              control of cell division in plant development, and may add to the knowledge of
              cell division in animals and fungi.  The project includes training of students
              and postdoctoral fellows and minority participation.

