Title       : Calculation of Protein-ligand Binding Affinity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0235440

Award Number: 0235440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim A. Sharp sharpk@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to understand the basis of molecular recognition in
              biology. The overall objective is to calculate the binding constant from the
              structure and chemical properties of the molecules taking part in a reaction to
              understand the biochemical basis for high affinity binding. The research will
              use recent theoretical advances in the statistical mechanical treatment of
              binding, developments in methods for computer simulation of biomolecules, and
              recent experimental data on protein-ligand complexes.  The basic method is to
              evaluate, using computer simulations, the appropriately weighted interaction
              free energy between protein and ligand by integrating over all the relevant
              degrees of freedom of the system: translational, rotational, internal and
              solvent, leading directly to evaluation of the binding constant.  Molecular
              mechanics methods will be used for the first three components.  Implicit
              solvent methods will be used to render the latter, most expensive integration,
              tractable. Recent algorithms for implicit solvation are, for the first time,
              accurate and fast enough to be used within the molecular mechanics integration
              step, so that the entire calculation can be done in a self-consistent way in a
              practical amount of computer time.  

Biological recognition is a fundamental
              property of proteins and other macromolecules. All living things contain
              proteins and many life processes rely on the right protein 'recognizing' the
              right molecule at the right time.  A protein may be said to recognize another
              molecule when it attracts that molecule more strongly, and binds to it more
              tightly, than the many other molecules present.  Strong attraction or binding
              depends on the protein being complementary in its shape and chemical properties
              to its binding partner.  However, even if the detailed structures of the
              protein and its target are known, it is not enough to determine how tightly
              they will bind. To determine this, one would need to know all the different
              forces that act to attract or repel the two molecules, and sum them up
              accurately.  Since thousands of atoms are involved, this is a formidable task. 
              The approach is to construct a simulation of the protein and its binding
              partner in their environment on the computer, encoding the laws of physics and
              chemistry to describe how all the atoms interact, then 'run' computer
              simulation to determine how tightly the two bind, test the results against
              experiment, improve the description and repeat, iteratively making the
              simulation more realistic.  This software for simulating protein recognition
              will be made available to the wider research and teaching community. Software
              to realistically simulate protein recognition would help researchers understand
              at a molecular level basic processes in living organisms, such as how cells
              communicate, and help train students in the principles of molecular recognition
              & simulation of molecules with computers.  Specifically, this software will be
              used in the yearly course for graduates and undergraduates at the University of
              Pennsylvania, developed and taught by the PI entitled "Molecular modeling."

