Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Culture Change in the 18th Century Maya
               Missions of Peten, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0235464

Award Number: 0235464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11861              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Webster DXW16@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. David Webster, MA Matthew Rockmore will obtain data
              for his doctoral dissertation.  He will undertake archaeological excavations at
              the dual sites of San Jeronimo, located 2 kilometers apart on the shores of
              Lake Peten-Itza in northern Guatemala.  The sites constitute a small mission
              settlement from the colonial period, initially occupied in 1703 AD, resettled
              around 1734 and abandoned near the end of the 18th century.  The colonial
              period has been understudied in lowland Guatemala and this represents the first
              attempt at mission archaeology in the region.  These sites are particularly
              significant because the resettlement allows for chronological control of the
              rate and pattern of social changes in the colonial setting.  Where prior
              studies of Maya missions in Mexico and Belize have focused on religious
              conversion and an earlier time period (the 16th century), this research
              attempts to examine the effects of conquest and incorporation into the colonial
              system on the household practices of the Maya.  The excavation of households
              and their surrounding environs in a temporally controlled setting will allow
              the identification of changes in the economic structure of the region, as well
              as changes in settlement plan, demographic trends, religious practice, and
              socio-political organization.
The combination of archaeological and
              ethnohistoric data is particularly informative with regards to changes in
              economic systems, ranging from alterations in patterns of long-distance
              exchange to the adoption of Old World domesticates.  One goal is to assess the
              rate at which changes occur in the settlement.  The area was considered
              marginal by the Spanish, and was at the fringes of the Spanish supply system. 
              The lack of direct oversight and limited availability of imported goods
              probably slowed changes of all sorts and provided the Maya greater latitude in
              negotiating the institution of changes.  Material changes in economic systems
              at the household level are likely to be the most obvious and easiest to
              interpret, but will be accompanied by data concerning the correlates of
              religious and political changes.  Evidence at the level of individual
              households can also be used to cautiously assess changes at higher levels of
              social organization.
The observed patterns will be used to assess the
              explanatory power of several theoretical models of culture change in colonial
              settings.  Existing models of indigenous resistance to colonial domination will
              be contrasted with practice-based models suggesting less intentional modes of
              change.  Culture change in colonial settings is typically highly complex, with
              changes negotiated between factions (including ones within larger indigenous
              and colonial groups), albeit across a distinct power differential.
This
              research is enabled by earlier studies of the preceding Late Postclassic period
              and is informed by several existing ethnohistoric studies of the area and
              through archaeological work at similar sites in Mexico and Belize. This
              research is important in part because it fills a gap in our archaeological
              knowledge of the region, but the primary significance is the exploration of how
              culture change is instituted within colonial contexts and how it developed over
              the space of a century.


