Title       : Pattern of Tropical Forest Succession Subsequent to Hurricane Damage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0235761

Award Number: 0235761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Vandermeer jvander@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Inigo Granzow-de la Cerda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Hurricane Joan severely damaged an extensive area of tropical rain forest on the
              eastern
seaboard of Nicaragua in 1988. This proposal seeks to continue a
              twelve-year study on post hurricane forest succession in the damaged area.
              Since the hurricane the forest has undergone significant changes and is now
              entering a critical as thinning (mortality) stage. At this juncture it is
              essential to determine whether individual trees die at random with respect to
              their species identity. This question is relevant to recent theories of the
              maintenance of species diversity in tropical rain forests and represents a
              potentially important contribution to the understanding of how interspecific
              tree competition is related to canopy growth in such a forest. It is a crucial
              aspect of Neutrality Theory that mortality events in the thinning canopy happen
              randomly within guilds of tree species. Part of the theory supposes first, that
              recruitment and growth into the thinning canopy is at random and second, that
              subsequent mortality from the thinning canopy is also random (with respect to
              species identity). According to some analyses, even small deviations from this
              critical assumption may have dramatic consequences. Data will be collected by
              yearly monitoring of all trees and large saplings in nine permanent plots.
              
Intellectual merit. This research project will help to clarify the
              definitions of ecological species guilds based on successional status.
              "Niche-based" models, alternative to the neutrality models, suggest that as
              thinning proceeds, some species will be more likely to die at the beginning of
              the thinning process and others will do so at the end of that process. Recent
              theory emphasizes the probable colonization-competition tradeoff, in which
              species are placed on a continuum between poor competitors/good colonizers and
              good competitors/poor colonizers. Most proponents of neutrality theory would
              argue that it is within tree species guilds (pioneers, primary forest species
              and intermediates), not among such guilds, that neutrality applies, and since
              there are only a few guilds, some form of neutrality is likely to be a dominant
              force. Alternatively, proponents of niche-based theory would argue that the
              faint division into pioneers and non-pioneers is only an initial rough cut and
              that finer divisions are not only possible, but also explain much of species
              coexistence. While theory has been developed to treat a more complete division
              of these successional niches, thus far the data on which these ideas are based
              are not quite fully satisfying.
Broader impacts. Approximately 100 Nicaraguan,
              four Costa Rican, and 30 North American (mainly from the University of
              Michigan, Hood College, and University of Guelph) graduate and undergraduate
              students have participated in data gathering for this project. In addition to
              the direct field work on the project, all students are encouraged to develop
              their own individual projects related to the general subject matter. Prior to
              field campaigns, participating students are provided with an intensive one-week
              classroom and lab course in biodiversity, forest natural history, basic
              ecological theory, and field research methods, taught by PI, co-PI and
              participating collaborators (including graduate students at Michigan) through
              the University of the Autonomous Regions of the Nicaraguan Caribbean Coast
              (URACCAN). Partly as a result of this research project and its teaching value,
              URACCAN developed their Institute of Natural Resources, Environment and
              Sustainable Development (IRENMADES)which now sponsors these yearly field
              course, and which includes the two sites at which this research continues. In
              1996 the group received the Nicaraguan Sempervirens Award for the best research
              project on natural resources in the country. Various field guides and
              illustrated popular pamphlets have been produced in local languages for  use in
              environmental education.

