Title       : Phylogeny of the Spiny Solanums (Solanaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0235339

Award Number: 0235339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn A. Bohs bohs@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1329,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0235339
Bohs
This project will examine evolutionary relationships among the
              so-called "spiny Solanums," a group of about 450 species of plants in the
              Solanaceae (tomato or potato family).  Included within this group are
              economically important fruit crops such as the eggplant (Solanum melongena),
              the lulo or naranjilla (S. quitoense), and the cocona (S. sessiliflorum) as
              well as species with potential as sources of glycoalkaloids useful in medicine.
               The spiny Solanums exhibit much variation in their morphology and reproductive
              biology and show intriguing biogeographical patterns through the tropics. 
              Despite their potential as economic crops and their use as model systems for
              the study of biological questions, the taxonomy and phylogeny of the spiny
              Solanums have been neglected.
The primary data for the phylogenetic analyses
              will come from DNA sequencing of three genes or gene regions, with measures of
              mutational differences used to define major lineages within the spiny Solanum
              group.  Sequences will be obtained from the nuclear ribosomal and waxy genes
              and from chloroplast gene regions, from exemplar species samples representing
              as much of the taxonomic diversity of the group as possible.  These data sets
              will be analyzed separately and in combination to achieve an overall view of
              evolutionary relationships within the spiny Solanums.  Collecting trips to
              Mexico and Ecuador are planned to gather material for morphological and
              molecular analyses, in collaboration with local botanists.  More detailed
              sampling will taxa place in two focal groups, the S. mammosum and S. quitoense
              groups, in order to clarify relationships at the species level and examine
              evolutionary patterns of floral biology, biogeography, and fruit chemistry and
              morphology.
This project will contribute to teaching and learning by employing
              post-doctoral associates and undergraduate students who will be trained in
              taxonomy, molecular methods, and data analysis.  Substantial national and
              international collaboration will result through foreign collecting and
              herbarium trips and interaction with Solanaceae specialists in the U.S. and
              abroad.  This project will generate extensive DNA sequence data as well as
              herbarium collections, leaf and DNA samples, and germplasm accessions that will
              be distributed to international repositories and available for wide
              dissemination.  The scientific information gathered as part of this project is
              expected to impact humankind by increasing the agronomic potential of important
              or emerging crop species such as the eggplant, lulo, and cocona and by
              contributing to conservation of germplasm of economically useful plants.

