Title       : Regulation of Programmed Cell Death During C. elegans Vulval Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0235922

Award Number: 0235922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Eisenmann eisenman@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0235922
Eisenmann

Apoptosis or programmed cell death is a form of
              physiological cell death that is essential for normal development and
              homeostasis in many animals, including vertebrates.  Apoptotic cell death is
              used to sculpt and hollow out structures during development, to remove unused
              or unwanted cells or structures, to control cell numbers, and to remove
              damaged, infected or otherwise potentially dangerous cells.  Much of our
              understanding of the genetic basis for programmed cell death has come from
              analysis in the model organism C. elegans.  The Eisenmann laboratory studies
              the development of the vulva of C. elegans, part of the animal's reproductive
              system.  The vulva is produced from the progeny of three of twelve epithelial
              'Pn.p' cells born during early larval life.  In a screen for mutants with
              defects in vulval formation, two mutants, pvl-4 and pvl-5, were found in which
              fewer than twelve Pn.p cells were found. In these mutants the correct number of
              Pn.p cells are born, but many of them undergo abnormal cell death within hours
              of their birth, and these abnormal cell deaths can be suppressed by two
              mutations (ced-3(lf), ced-9(gf)) that inactivate the programmed cell death
              pathway in C. elegans. Surprisingly, the pvl-5 mutant phenotype was not
              suppressed by a loss-of-function mutation in ced-4, another gene that has been
              previously found to be essential for programmed cell deaths in C. elegans.   
              The fact that the pvl-5 phenotype is suppressed by mutations inactivating
              apoptotic genes, suggests that the Pn.p cells undergo apoptosis when the pvl-5
              gene is inactivated.  This implies the normal function of pvl-5 is to protect
              the Pn.p cells from inappropriate activation of the programmed cell death
              pathway during normal development.  As little is known in C. elegans or other
              systems about the mechanisms by which particular cells become sensitive or
              resistant to programmed cell death, experiments are proposed to identify and
              characterize the pvl-5 gene, determine in which cells in the organism it is
              expressed, and identify factors that interact with it.  In addition, the
              further genetic characterization and molecular identification of the pvl-4 gene
              will also be undertaken.  Therefore, this work will advance our understanding
              of an evolutionarily conserved mechanism used to remove cells during normal
              growth and development in most animals.  In addition to the scientific
              importance of the research questions addressed in this proposal, the work
              proposed here will have a significant impact on the development of human
              resources for scientific research, as two graduate students as well as
              undergraduate students will receive scientific training as a result of the
              completion of the work proposed here.



