Title       : Supercritical Fluids: Tunable Media for Chemical Reactions and Materials
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0235768

Award Number: 0235768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark R. Pederson                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei Egorov sae6z@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sergei Egorov, at the University of Virginia,  is supported by the Theoretical
              and Computational Chemistry Program  to pursue research in  supercritical
              fluids and their uses as a tunable media for chemical reactions and materials
              processing.   The project deals with the theoretical and computational
              simulation of diblock copolymers, such as partially fluorinated alkane chains,
              in a supercritical carbon dioxide fluid. The diblock copolymer is modeled as a
              chain of  fluorinated and hydrogenated units which may exhibit bond bending or
              torsional distortions. Nonbonded units interact via Lennard Jones potentials.
              The fluid is modeled by treating the carbon dioxide molecule as three partial
              charges interacting with neighbors via coulomb and Lennard-Jones potentials.
              Specific phenomena to be modeled include density-induced formation and
              disintegration of micellar aggregates, a statistical mechanical treatment of
              sterically stabilized nanoparticles and the study of ionic mobility in
              supercritical fluids. Long-term interest is in understanding how
              environmentally friendly supercritical fluids may be used for chemical and
              materials processing.

This project deals with understanding how to replace
              conventional liquid solvents, currently used in the chemical industry, with
              environmentally friendly nontoxic, nonflammable, abundant and cheap
              supercritical solvents such as carbon dioxide.  The work will proceed by
              understanding the structure and dynamics of supercritical fluids at the
              molecular level by the development and implementation of new theoretical and
              computational methods.  Activity includes training of students in nanoscale
              materials processing and preparing them for entry into industry.

