Title       : Physiological basis of germination responses to seasonal cues in Arabidopsis
               thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0235662

Award Number: 0235662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Donohue kdonohue@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Timing of seed germination is highly responsive to environmental conditions. 
              Consequently, if environments change, due to habitat alteration, global
              warming, or dispersal into new regions, for example, germination behavior is
              likely to change as a direct and immediate response.  Germination responses to
              seasonal cues contribute to fundamental life-history variation and can strongly
              influence important demographic properties of populations such as generation
              time and reproductive success within a generation.  Characterizing the genetic
              and physiological basis of germination responses to seasonal environments can
              identify mechanisms for basic life-history variation and can identify causes of
              variation in population growth rates and distributions in desirable and
              undesirable species.  The proposed research is an investigation of the
              physiological basis of germination responses to seasonal cues in mutant and
              natural genotypes of A. thaliana.
The project has two components. The first
              component characterizes the physiological basis of germination responses to
              seasonal cues experienced during the maternal generation and after dispersal. 
              This component uses mutant lineages that are defective in one or more
              phytochromes in order to identify the phytochromes involved in germination
              responses to different seasonal cues, and to further characterize the
              phytochrome-mediated mechanisms that regulate germination.  Mutant A. thaliana
              lines will be grown in controlled environments in growth chambers and in the
              field.  By combining studies in controlled environments and in the field, we
              will investigate the physiological basis of responses to real ecological cues
              that influence germination in the field. The second component uses variable
              natural genotypes to investigate the physiological basis of natural variation
              in germination responses to seasonal cues. Studies using natural genotypes will
              complement the mutant studies by testing whether the same physiological
              mechanisms that influence germination in mutants also influence germination in
              natural genotypes.
By combining classical genetics, quantitative genetics and
              ecological manipulations, the research will expand the context of physiological
              studies on this model organism.  It does so by characterizing responses of
              mutants to actual ecological environments and by characterizing the
              physiological basis of germination responses of natural genotypes in addition
              to those of mutants.  As such, it will contribute to our knowledge of natural
              variation in physiological mechanisms and our knowledge of specific genes
              associated with variation in germination in natural populations.


