Title       : Nanoscale Switching Phenomena and Size Effects in Ferroelectric Thin Films
               Studied by Scanning Force Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0235632

Award Number: 0235632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $591083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexei Gruverman alexei_gruverman@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angus I. Kingon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project address fundamental materials science issues associated with
              ferroelectric thin films and their potential application as nonvolatile
              memories. The approach is to use, and further de-velop, scanning force
              microscopy (SFM) to investigate structure/property relationships on the micro-
              and nanoscale levels. Salient areas for investigation include: reconstruction
              of the 3-D domain structure of ferroelectric films and capacitors at the
              sub-grain level; characterization of capacitor domain structures before and
              after pulse switching to evaluate the role of pulse charac-teristics and
              microstructural features such as film composition, thickness, grain size and
              orienta-tion, and defects, on switching and domain stability. It is expected
              that the combination of fast pulse switching with domain imaging will allow
              testing of the applicability of quantitative switching models. The capability
              to characterize domain structure, domain motion and switching at the nanoscale
              will allow further insight and understanding of scaling and intrinsic
              variability issues. The proposed research links expertise in nanoscale
              characterization of ferroelectric mate-rials by SFM (Gruverman) with strength
              in synthesis of functional ferroelectric films at NCSU (Kingon). The
              experimental research in combination with recently refined phenomenological
              theory for ferroelectric films will be undertaken in collaboration with S.
              Streiffer of Argonne Na-tional Laboratory. 
%%% The project addresses
              fundamental research issues in areas of ceramics and electronic ma-terials
              science having technological relevance. An important feature of the project is
              the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and
              education. The project provides clas-sic materials science research for
              graduate student training, linking processing, local (nanoscale)
              characterization, device properties, and theory. Additionally, demonstrator
              experiments, based on SPM research will be developed and used to attract future
              students, including under-represented minorities, into materials science. The
              research program provides excellent opportunities for hands-on experience in
              the use of sophisticated scientific equipment. The broad resources, and
              collaborative aspects, provide special opportunities for education and training
              of graduate and undergraduate students involved in interdisciplinary forefront
              research. 
***  

