Title       : Plant-soil Feedback: A Mechanism to Explain the Spread of Invasive Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0235052

Award Number: 0235052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $591855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan G. Ehrenfeld ehrenfel@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:  Positive feedback has been proposed as a mechanism that results in
              the
stable persistence of alternative states of an ecosystem.  Such
              feedback
may operate through plant-induced alterations in soil
              microbial
communities, which in turn alter plant communities through changes
              in
nutrient dynamics.  The recent replacement of native understory
              plant
communities in eastern deciduous forests by apparently stable
              communities
of exotic species provides an excellent model system in which to
              test the
presence of soil-mediated positive feedbacks. Previous studies of
              this
system have shown that the recent shift in community composition is
              related
to changes in both nutrient cycling processes and microbial
              community
composition.  I propose greenhouse microcosm and field plot
              experiments to
test whether plants drive changes in soil-based ecosystem
              processes by
altering the soil microbiota, and whether these changes in turn
              promote the
dominance of the exotics.  The proposed studies will explicitly
              contrast a
litter-driven above-ground mechanism with a root-driven
              below-ground
mechanism.  
BROADER IMPACTS: If the hypothesis of plant-soil
              positive feedback created by
altered nutrient cycling is supported, it would
              both demonstrate a
plausible mechanism for the persistence of alternative
              stable communities
and help explain the establishment of dominance by some
              exotic plant
species.  In addition, this project will train at least 1
              graduate student and 3 undergraduates.

