Title       : Design as Creative Model for Technical Education: The Development and
               Implementation of Interdisciplinary Studio Models-National Graduated
               Distribution Concept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0235257

Award Number: 0235257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances Bronet bronef@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Gabriele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to transfer, through workshops to graduate students and
              faculty, studio models for teaching engineering design in a way that
              effectively integrates technical, social/cultural, and aesthetic issues. This
              model is based on Rensselaer Polytechnic's (RPI) NSF funded interdisciplinary
              Product Design and Innovation Program and Deep Dive design exercises.

Recent
              changes in ABET put an emphasis on design as a critical component of the
              engineering curriculum. The ABET Strategic Plan intends to "Recognize programs
              that promote educational quality and innovation by identify(ing) and
              disseminat(ing) educational best practices; Cooperate with other organizations
              to develop programs that promote educational quality and innovation; Expand
              diversity of participation by increase(ing) the numbers of those historically
              under-represented in ABET to reflect the full spectrum of participants in the
              engineering community; Encourage and accommodate new educational paradigms."
              These are the premises for this proposal.

The first phase workshops include
              Hampton University (HU), a master's university, with a deep commitment to
              undergraduate education and diversity activism and the University of Colorado
              (UC), a doctoral/research state university with a strong foundation in
              problem-based learning. The second stage workshops are open to applicants from
              other interested institutions. RPI, using experienced engineering, social
              science, and architecture faculty, will deliver the workshop sessions and
              associated support to help develop and deliver these studios. This project
              updates best practices of normative and cross-disciplinary design education;
              and develops and implements models for dissemination and distribution to
              colleague institutions.

