Title       : Controlling Ionomer Morphologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0235106

Award Number: 0235106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen I. Winey winey@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will investigate the morphology of ion-containing
              polymers, in particular ionomers, using model materials and a variety of
              analytical electron microscopy (AEM) methods.  Ionomers are random copolymers
              with a majority of non-polar monomeric units and a minority (~5-10 mol%) of
              polar monomeric units, typically acids such as -COOH.  The acid groups can be
              neutralized with cations to create ionic species such as -COO-Na+ in the case
              of a Na-neutralized carboxylic acid.  Because these ionic species are
              considerably more polar that the surrounding matrix, there is a driving force
              for the ionic species to microphase separate and form ionic aggregates although
              the resulting morphologies of ionic aggregates are not well understood. 
              Controlling the morphologies of ionomers is the primary goal of the proposed
              research and the first step to developing both a predictive theoretical model
              of these materials and a robust understanding of their structure-property
              relationships.  These ionic aggregates act as physical crosslinks to toughen
              the polymer and lead to both current industrial applications (chemically
              resistant thermoplastics, tough coatings, permselective membranes for fuel
              cells, and food packaging materials) and a variety of potential technological
              applications (e.g. protection against chemical warfare).  These complex
              polymeric materials spur scientific interest, because (1) these amphiphilic
              materials have ionic interactions that mimic biological macromolecules, (2)
              ionomers are readily available with a wealth of chemistries that includes
              amorphous and semicrystalline polymers and a range of cations, and (3)
              high-resolution analytical tools are now available to investigate the
              interdependencies of chemistry, processing, morphology and properties.  Winey's
              scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) studies of ionomers since 1998
              provide a valuable foundation to the proposed research in which Winey endeavors
              to identify the materials parameters and processing conditions that have the
              most substantial influence on the ionomer morphologies.  The proposed work
              seeks to uncover reliable trends in the ionomer morphology in order to provide
              fundamental understanding of these complex materials.  As Winey determines how
              the various materials and processing parameters influence the ionomer
              morphology they will be able to control the ionomer morphology.  Two hallmarks
              of the proposed experimental plan are (1) the use of model materials, that is
              materials designed to address specific scientific questions, and (2) the use of
              multiple characterization tools including SAXS, FT-IR, and, in particular, a
              range of analytical electron microscopy (AEM) methods.  

Industrial,
              academic and military scientists have scientific interest in both the proposed
              research about ion-containing polymers and the development of AEM
              characterization tools for polymers.  Winey will collaborate with the Lehigh
              Microscopy School to ensure that electron microscopists take full advantage of
              the AEM methods that are used within the proposed work to investigate complex,
              chemically heterogeneous polymeric materials.  In addition, Winey will continue
              to both serve as a faculty co-advisor to the Society of Women Engineers on
              Penn's campus and hold an annual panel about opportunities for graduate studies
              and academic careers in engineering.


