Title       : Molecular Basis of Self-Incompatibility in Petunia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0235176

Award Number: 0235176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teh-hui Kao txk3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0235176
Kao		

Most flowering plant species produce bisexual flowers with
              both male and female reproductive organs located in close proximity.  A number
              of reproductive strategies have been adopted during the course of evolution to
              allow flowering plants to prevent inbreeding and promote out-crosses.  One
              strategy is self-incompatibility (SI), which allows pistils of flowering plants
              to reject self-pollen and accept non-self pollen.  Three families of flowering
              plants, Solanaceae, Rosaceae and Scrophulariaceae, all use an RNase-based SI
              mechanism.  Here, the pistil S-RNase gene and the yet unidentified pollen
              S-gene located at a genetic locus, the S-locus, control the outcome of
              pollination.  In any given species, there are many different S-haplotypes
              (i.e., variants) of the S-locus, with each S-haplotype carrying a specific
              allele of the S-RNase gene and the pollen S-gene.  During pollen tube growth in
              a pistil, if the S-haplotype carried by the pollen tube matches one of the two
              S-haplotypes carried by the pistil, the growth will be inhibited and thus the
              pollen tube cannot deliver the sperm cell to the ovary for fertilization.  It
              is thought that S-RNases produced in the pistil are taken up by pollen tubes,
              and that the RNase activity of S-RNases is responsible for growth inhibition of
              pollen tubes.  Although all S-RNases can enter a pollen tube, only the self
              S-RNase (the S-RNase of the same S-haplotype as the pollen tube) is able to
              function inside the pollen tube.  This raises a question as to how S-haplotype
              specific inhibition can be achieved.  To address this question, the pollen
              S-gene must be identified. 
	
The PI's group has been using Petunia inflata,
              a wild relative of garden petunia, as a model to study S-RNase based SI, and
              has recently identified a very likely candidate, named PiSLF, for the pollen
              S-gene.  It is located near the S-RNase gene, expressed in pollen, and shows
              allelic sequence differences, all of which are properties expected of the
              pollen S-gene.  Moreover, a similar gene has been found to be located near the
              S-RNase gene of Antirrhinum hispanicum, a species in the Scrophulariaceae. 
              PiSLF will be a major focus of this project.  In vivo approaches will be used
              to confirm whether PiSLF is indeed the pollen S-gene.  Most F-box proteins are
              components of SCF complexes that are involved in ubiquitin-mediated protein
              degradation.  Thus, several in vitro approaches will be used to examine whether
              PiSLF mediates specific degradation of non-self S-RNases in the pollen tube. 
              Another focus of the project will be on the completion of the cloning of a
              contiguous chromosome region (contig) of the S-locus.  This contig will be used
              for identifying other S-locus linked genes and, in the event that PiSLF is
              found not to be the pollen S-gene, for identifying additional candidates.
              

Accomplishment of this project will not only significantly advance
              understanding of the RNase-based self/non-self recognition mechanism, but also
              contribute to the understanding of selective protein degradation mediated by
              F-box proteins.  The latter has recently emerged as an important regulatory
              mechanism for a variety of cellular and developmental processes in diverse
              organisms.  On the practical side, if PiSLF is confirmed to be the pollen
              S-gene, one can explore the possibility of restoring the SI trait to
              self-compatible cultivated species by transferring the S-RNase gene and the
              PiSLF gene to facilitate hybrid seed production.  If successful, this will have
              a very important agronomic impact.  In the United States, the majority of crops
              are grown from hybrid seed, because such plants have greater vigor and produce
              higher yield than plants grown from seed obtained from self-pollination. 
              Currently, hybrid seed production requires manual or mechanical removal of
              anthers from the plants serving as female parent to prevent self-fertilization.
               This is a very labor-intensive, costly, and inefficient process.  Thus, there
              is a pressing need for more economically advantageous methods for hybrid seed
              production.  

