Title       : Analysis of Gibberellin Signal Transduction Pathway in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0235656

Award Number: 0235656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tai-ping Sun tps@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1136,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bioactive gibberellins (GAs) are important plant growth hormones that promote
              seed germination, leaf expansion, stem elongation and flower development in
              higher plants.  The dwarf cultivars of wheat and rice developed during the
              'Green Revolution' in the 60s and 70s remarkably increased grain yields. 
              Recent studies revealed that these cultivars are modified in their GA
              production or GA response, illustrating the important role of GA in regulating
              plant development relevant to agriculture.

	The GA signaling pathway is
              inhibited by repressor proteins.  Growth and development occur through
              inactivation of these repressor proteins by the GA signal.  Two such
              repressors, RGA and GAI, have been identified in the model plant Arabidopsis. 
              Similar proteins (homologs of RGA/GAI) with conserved function have also been
              isolated in crops, including rice, wheat, corn, barley and grape.  In fact, the
              dwarf wheat cultivars (part of the Green Revolution) carry specific mutations
              in the RGA/GAI homolog in wheat (Rht).  Therefore, studies on RGA/GAI proteins
              and GA signaling in Arabidopsis may have a broad impact in improving the
              quality of agricultural crops.

	The amino acid sequences of RGA and GAI are
              over 80% identical, and they have partially redundant function in repressing GA
              signaling in Arabidopsis.  The major role of RGA and GAI is to inhibit
              GA-stimulated stem growth, leaf expansion and floral induction.  However, they
              do not control seed germination and flower development, suggesting that
              additional repressors must modulate these processes.  Three candidate
              Arabidopsis genes RGL1, RGL2 and RGL3 (for RGA-LIKE) were identified by DNA
              sequence comparison.  To determine which RGL gene(s) play a major role in
              modulating flower development, the phenotypes of mutants that are defective in
              these genes will be characterized.  GA de-represses its signaling pathway by
              causing degradation of the RGA protein.  Expression patterns of RGL genes and
              the RGL protein stability in response to GA will be examined to elucidate the
              molecular mechanisms by which RGLs modulates GA signaling.  

	RGA/GAI
              proteins are thought to repress expression of downstream genes in the GA
              response pathway.  To identify the target genes of RGA and GAI, the new
              GeneChip technique will be employed to survey alterations in expression
              profiles of the whole Arabidopsis genome after GA treatment and by mutations in
              RGA and/or GAI genes.  Identification of GA-response genes and RGA/GAI targets
              will help to dissect GA signal transduction pathway.  Because the homologs of
              RGA/GAI are highly conserved in plants, the knowledge gained from this project
              will also facilitate strategies in future manipulation of crops.  



