Title       : Animal Impulsivity: Discounting or Ecological Rationality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0235261

Award Number: 0235261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Stephens dws@forager.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


Animal Impulsivity: Discounting or Ecological Rationality

David W.
              Stephens

Animals often prefer a small-immediate food item, even when waiting
              for a more delayed alternative could produce more food in the long-run.   This
              impulsiveness is theoretically and practically important.  For example,
              impulsiveness is thought to play a role in addiction and cooperation.  The
              conventional explanation of animal impulsivity is that economic processes
              reduce or discount the value of delayed benefits.  Yet, it has proven difficult
              to construct a plausible discounting model that explains animal impulsivity. 
              This research program develops an alternative explanation based on ecological
              rationality  The ecological rationality approach hypothesizes that impulsive
              choice mechanisms exist, not because immediacy is fundamentally valuable, but
              because choice rules based on immediacy offer advantages in natural choice
              situations, even if they do poorly in typical experimental situations. 
              	

The objective of this research program is to assess the ecological
              rationality hypothesis.  Experiments, using captive blue jays (Cyanocitta
              cristata), will explore the difference between binary and sequential choice
              situations.  Preliminary evidence suggests that blue jays achieve higher
              long-term rates of food gain in the sequential situation.  Extending this idea,
              experiments will compare the sensitivity of choice behavior to differences in
              long-term consequences in both situations.  Further experiments will test the
              effect of experimental interruptions on impulsiveness, which is long-standing
              claim of the discounting hypothesis.  In addition, computational techniques
              will be used to expand the predictions of the ecological rationality
              approach.


