Title       : Undergraduate Engineering Education Enhancement via Parallel Participation in
               the Visual & Performing Arts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0235214

Award Number: 0235214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343904             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Lee lee@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Heller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos A. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Spielberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develop undergraduate engineering pathways which include the visual
              and performing arts.  For students with definite talents in both engineering
              and the visual & performing arts (V&PAs), an environment will be created that
              is supportive of the development of both areas will definitely enhance the
              educational process and student academic performance of the engineering
              component.

Furthermore, engineering students will benefit from participation
              in the V&PAs terms of two areas: 1) development of creativity-related skills
              (beyond that typically achieved by traditional engineering students); and 2)
              stress management.

Perception of engineering as a possible academic major
              will be enhanced by the offering of such a dual program, leading to additional
              engineering student recruitment.

A web site and flyer will be created that
              contains: a)"Why students should care about the V&PAs; b) opportunities for
              engineering students in the V&PAs; and 3) examples of student it success
              stories". The impact of these on middle and high school students and teachers
              will be explored.   The potential impact of such a program on middle and high
              school students and teachers attitudes towards engineering will be
              investigated.

Undergraduate Certificates will be created in the following
              V&PA areas: dance, theater, music, and art.

.

