Title       : Investigation of a Brood Fostering Hypothesis that Explains Variation in Levels
               of Sociality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0235311

Award Number: 0235311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Riechert sriecher@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Investigation of a Brood Fostering Hypothesis that Explains Variation in Levels
              of Sociality
Susan E. Riechert & Thomas C. Jones

 The exhibition of
              altruistic and cooperative behavior in a world, which favors individualism and
              selfishness is a problem that has been approached through the study of bee,
              wasp and ant social systems. The social insects, however, possess a unique
              mechanism of inheritance (haplodiploidy) that makes self-sacrifice easier to
              achieve than in other systems. Spiders make a better model for investigation of
              the determinants of social behavior as they have the typical diploid pattern of
              inheritance. This study involves the analysis of the factors underlying
              cooperative brood care in a spider that exhibits a higher incidence of multiple
              female colonies caring for a common brood at higher latitudes. A mathematical
              model indicates that females will cooperatively care for a brood in those
              environments in which a single female has a high probability of dying before
              her offspring are able to care for themselves. A series of field measures and
              experiments will be completed along a latitudinal gradient to quantify the
              effect of cooperation on reproductive success under different environmental
              conditions. Breeding experiments and molecular genetics analyses will also be
              completed to examine the degree to which cooperative behavior is flexible and
              to learn whether cooperating individuals are relatives.

