Title       : Merging Physical Bioinformatics and Molecular Simulations: Investigating the
               Function and Docking of HisH/HisF Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  2002  
File        : a0235144

Award Number: 0235144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zaida Luthey-Schulten zan@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1144,1164,1956,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The transient formation of protein complexes and the channeling of ammonia to
              the active site are major factors in the regulation of histidine biosynthesis. 
              The objective of this project is to investigate the energy landscape of the
              docking process and the conduction of ammonia through a putative protein
              channel by integrating methods from molecular dynamics simulations,
              bioinformatics, and experimental biochemistry. This channel through a globular
              protein presents a novel scenario not previously studied. The free energy
              profile of the ammonia transport will be reconstructed from constant velocity
              steered molecular dynamics trajectories using the Jarzynski identity as well as
              other statistical mechanical sampling procedures. The overall goal of this
              research is to understand the mechanism of protein-protein interactions in the
              formation of large complexes.  A bioinformatics approach will be used to
              suggest pathways for the docking process which can be probed using both steered
              and interactive molecular dynamics protocols. Merging the techniques of
              physical bioinformatics and molecular simulations to model this process in a
              more realistic environment provides an opportunity to understand how these
              proteins communicate to achieve metabolic regulation. Recently published
              structures on the transient protein complex of cytochrome c2 to the reaction
              center of photosynthetic bacteria offer another valuable opportunity to apply
              the energy landscape analysis to the docking of small redox proteins to
              integral membrane proteins.


Histidine biosynthesis is a model system for
              studying complex metabolic networks. Regulated production of histidine depends
              on the complex interplay between nine active sites located on several
              polypeptide chains. It has been suggested that the formation of protein
              complexes through protein-protein interactions is a major factor in the
              regulation of this metabolic pathway. An understanding of how these proteins
              communicate will have an impact on our understanding of the mechanism of the
              formation of transient complexes in biological systems. This work will involve
              a collaboration between experimental biologists and computational biophysicists
              and the results will be incorporated into the course "Computational Chemical
              Biology" which is aimed at undergraduates and first-year graduate students
              interested in research at the interface of chemistry, biology and computer
              science. The algorithms and approaches to docking developed in this project
              will be made available to the broader scientific community through a NSF
              sponsored Summer School on Computational Biophysics and through plugins for the
              visualization program VMD that is freely distributed.  This work is funded
              jointly by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
              Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program 
              in the Chemistry Division.

