Title       : GOALI: An Information Technology-Based Template for a Background Curriculum in
               Computer-Aided Modeling and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0235113

Award Number: 0235113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51797              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Zhou zhoug@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this GOALI project, Carnegie Mellon proposes to develop a web-based
              Background Curriculum, allowing computer-aided simulation, design, modeling and
              prototyping skills to be transparently overlaid onto and distributed through
              the traditional engineering curriculum.

This proposal involves a partnership
              between Carnegie Mellon University, Parametric Technologies Corporation, Drexel
              University and Pine-Richland High School.   An objective of this project is to
              grow our experience base and create a readily transferable suite of web-based
              course modules that others can  use  to  teach  and  motivate  their  students.
               Undergraduate  students  at  Carnegie  Mellon  will collaborate with faculty
              and develop a series of modules for use in mechanical engineering undergraduate
              courses.  Colleagues with expertise in assessment and cognitive psychology from
              the CMU Eberly Center for  Teaching  Excellence  will  assess  the 
              effectiveness  of  our  efforts  by  using  focus  groups,  survey instruments,
              and software for tracking web page use patterns.  A work product of this
              project will be a suite  of  freely available  web-based  course  materials 
              appropriate  for  use  as  a  template  for  integrating computer  modeling 
              and  design  skills  into  any mechanical  engineering  undergraduate  program,
               and  for exposing high school students to the excitement of the mechanical
              engineering profession.

Dissemination  of  our  work  product  will  be  a 
              critical  aspect  of  this  project.    Carnegie  Mellon  will partner with
              Drexel University to integrate the web-based course modules developed at
              Carnegie Mellon into the Drexel curriculum.  In turn, Drexel will provide
              assessment and feedback data for refining and improving the  learning  modules.
               High school students and the instructors in the Pine-Richland   High School  
              Engineering Systems course will use a subset of the web-based modules and
              computer-controlled prototyping hardware with the objective of exposing their
              students to the excitement, hardware, and tools of the mechanical engineering
              profession.


