Title       : Emergent Homeostasis and Mound Morphogenesis in Colonies of Macrotermes
               Michaelseni (Isoptera: Macrotermitinae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0235206

Award Number: 0235206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240597             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Turner jsturner@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5928,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Emergent homeostasis and mound morphogenesis in colonies of the termite
              Macrotermes michaelseni
J Scott Turner
State University of New York at
              Syracuse
This research will study how colonies of the mound-building termites
              of southern Africa (Macrotermes michaelseni) provide regulated environments for
              their nests. These termites, popularly called "white ants" or rysmeere
              (Afrikaans), build large mounds that are prominent features of the savannas of
              sub-Saharan Africa. These mounds are devices for capturing wind to power
              ventilation of the termites' underground nests, which can house as many as two
              million individuals. In addition, the termites cultivate fungi to aid in
              cellulose digestion. The termites and fungi form a symbiosis whose collective
              respiration is similar to a goat's. The viability of this symbiosis depends
              crucially on the maintenance of a humid, CO2-rich atmosphere in the nest.
The
              atmosphere in the Macrotermes nest is under homeostatic control, the result of
              a balance between the colony's respiration and the wind-powered ventilation of
              the mound. If the nest atmosphere is regulated, this implies that the mound
              itself is a regulated structure, its wind capture for ventilation adjusted to
              meet the colony's respiratory demands. How do the termites in a colony
              collectively "know" how to build a mound of just the right structure? How do
              they collectively "detect" whether their mound's structure is not
              correct?
These questions are the basis of this research. Nest homeostasis
              follows from coupling the maintenance of the mound structure (mound
              morphogenesis) to the colony's physiology (emergent homeostasis). Importantly,
              soil transport by termites within the nest is linked to the distribution of
              respiratory gases in the mound. Termites translocate soil along gradients of
              CO2 concentration, effecting a net movement of soil from the nest (high CO2) to
              mound surface (low CO2). Soil redistribution thus alters the mound's
              ventilation, thereby altering CO2 concentration within it. Homeostasis involves
              "tuning" the sensitivity of soil transport to CO2 concentration in the
              mound.
When a mound is damaged, the nest atmosphere is disrupted, and the
              termites respond with repair of the mound, in which a new network of tunnels is
              built, restoring the nest atmosphere to its prior state. In this project, the
              mound will be damaged by drilling a shaft, and inserting a large PVC pipe.
              Repair will be confined to the pipe, a controlled environment, thereby
              affording a way to study all aspects of the regulatory system for nest
              ventilation, and the developing architecture of the new tunnel network. Gas
              exchange in the tunnels will be assessed via tracer gases. Soil movements will
              be quantified by marking the soil with colored plastic beads. 
This research
              has broad significance both for the biology of social insects and for
              fundamental questions in ecology, evolution and physiology. Social insect
              colonies comprise a diverse array of semi-autonomous individuals, from which a
              degree of homeostasis of the nest environment emerges. This emergent
              homeostasis is well-documented: how it actually works is less well-understood.
              This research, by quantifying all aspects of the regulatory process, will be a
              significant advance in our understanding of emergent homeostasis among social
              insects. Practically, these termites are dominant factors in the functioning of
              tropical savanna ecosystems, controlling as much as half the total carbon flow.
              Understanding how their metabolism works and is controlled therefore has
              ramifications for our understanding the functioning of tropical savanna
              ecosystems. Finally, homeostasis in social insect colonies provides a
              provocative glimpse into the forces that must have driven the emergence of
              homeostasis in other "proto-organismal" systems that were the ancestors of
              multicellular organisms. This award is co-funded by EEP and the NSF Office of
              International Science and Engineering.

