Title       : The Role of Ornamentation Versus Genetic Compatibility in Passerine Bird Mate
               Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0235778

Award Number: 0235778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey E. Hill ghill@acesag.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herman L. Mays Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Role of Ornamentation Versus Genetic
Compatibility in Passerine Bird Mate
              Choice

PIs: Dr. Geoffrey E. Hill and Dr. Herman Mays

How do female
              animals choose mates? It has long been known that female animals the use
              expression of ornamental traits, such as bright coloration, as the basis for
              choosing mates.  Indeed there is growing evidence that such ornamental traits
              evolved as indicators of mate quality.   A new theory in behavioral biology
              suggests that animals may also choose mates based on genetic compatibility.
              Recent studies indicate that genetic diversity is linked to important aspects
              of individual fitness, such as the ability to fight disease.  There may,
              therefore, be an advantage for females to choose males within a population
              whose genetic makeup is most dissimilar to hers, thereby producing offspring
              that are genetically diverse and healthy.  Whether females use the expression
              of ornamental traits, genetic complimentarity, or both in their choice of mates
              is the focus of this study of Eastern Bluebirds, a species with bright blue
              plumage coloration that is used by females in mate choice.  New genetic
              techniques will be used to determine the genetic compatibility of pairs of
              bluebirds.  The health of offspring from pairs that are more or less similar in
              genetic makeup will then be measured.  Mate choice experiments will also be
              conducted in which females are allowed to choose between potential mates who
              are either genetically similar or brightly colored.  Throughout this project
              high school, undergrad, and grad students will be involved in research.  

