Title       : Researching and Creating Cognitive-Based Resources for Effective Application in
               Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0235262

Award Number: 0235262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Ambrose sa0n+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Indira Nair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Therese Huston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project supports preliminary planning work to address the very large
              question of the integrating cognitive theory into teaching practice in
              undergraduate engineering education. This project proposes to both study and
              bridge the gaps among research, application and
dissemination. Its goal is to
              facilitate more research-based teaching and curriculum and course design by
              making this research more relevant and widely accessible to faculty in
              engineering and related disciplines. The first steps are to identify (a) common
              problems across courses in engineering and associated fields and (b) the
              principles underlying these problems, based on findings from cognitive
              psychology. The next phase is to identify teaching strategies that successfully
              implement one or more research-based principles of learning. Once successful
              teaching strategies have been identified, then the task will be to find the
              best mechanisms for supporting faculty access to and implementation of these
              strategies. Furthermore, if this tool is to be effective in helping engineering
              faculty design their own teaching activities grounded in cognitive theory, then
              this mechanism will also need to facilitate the comprehension and
              implementation of sound learning principles within engineering and related
              domains. This process of developing a dissemination and support mechanism will
              be an iterative process, involving design, implementation, assessment and
              redesign as faculty feedback and other forms of formative assessment will be
              used to further improve the system. The assessment of this prototype will
              include tracking individual case studies to determine how faculty use this
              information in the design or redesign of their courses and teaching.


