Title       : Understanding the Basis of Flight-enhanced Reproduction in Melanoplus
               sanguinipes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0235892

Award Number: 0235892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $556400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Rankin rankin@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine the relationship between migration and reproduction in
              an economically significant migratory grasshopper, Melanoplus sanguinipes.
              Previous work has shown that migratory behavior has a genetic basis in this
              species and that the performance of migratory flight significantly accelerates
              onset of reproduction and enhances fecundity over the entire life of the
              insect.  This observation challenges the conventional assumption that migration
              necessarily involves a reproductive cost. 

The proposal addresses two
              general objectives: to determine the endocrine mechanisms involved in
              flight-enhanced reproduction, and the possible effect of long-duration flight
              on nutrient acquisition or utilization.  To accomplish the first objective, the
              effects of long-duration flight on the release or synthesis of neurohormones,
              that might in turn cause changes in the pattern and/or level of hormones
              involved in reproduction, will be determined. In pursuit of the second
              objective, the effect of flight performance on two avenues of nutrient
              acquisition, mating and feeding, will be determined.  In the model species,
              males contribute nutrient to females at mating via spermatophore transfer with
              sperm.  Thus, this study will establish whether the performance of long flight
              changes the frequency or duration of mating behavior after flight and if it
              does, whether this change is hormonally regulated.  It has been shown that
              feeding activity does not increase after long flight, but this study now
              intends to establish whether performance of long-duration flight improves food
              utilization, and whether this occurs via endocrine stimulation.

A long-term
              goal of this project is to analyze the consequences and limits of these
              physiological relationships through genetic analysis. The results of this work
              will be of interest to population biologists studying life history theory and
              evolution, physiologists interested in understanding endocrine relationships in
              insects, physiological ecologists interested in resource allocation and
              coordination of life history characters, and entomologists interested in
              controlling M. sanguinipes and other serious agricultural pests. This project
              will involve minority and women undergraduates (usually 4 students/semester).
              It will also involve pre-service math and science high school and middle school
              teachers as research interns (2/semester) as a part of an innovative new
              teacher-training program (UTeach) at The University of Texas.



