Title       : CAREER: Characterization of Propagating and Receding Flame Edges in Composition
               and Velocity Gradients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0235114

Award Number: 0235114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Renfro renfro@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Non-premixed flames in practical combustors are often operated such that local
              extinction of the flame occurs.  For example, large fuel velocities relative to
              the oxidizer can lead to sufficiently large scalar gradients at the flame base
              to cause extinction, and large Reynolds numbers can lead to extinction at
              downstream locations.  Localized extinction can result in stable flames that
              are lifted from the burner, can result in local holes in the reaction sheet, or
              can lead to global extinction of the flame.  A common feature of localized
              extinction is a flame edge, which may either propagate toward unburned fuel and
              air (ignition) or may recede toward combustion products (extinction). Because
              the edge flame separates fuel from air, a strong composition gradient can exist
              beyond the edge.  Theories for the propagation of edge flames in composition
              gradients have been developed, and a few measurements of stable propagating
              flames have been made. 

Intellectual merit

This project addresses
              edge-flame propagation through measurements of velocity and concentration
              fields in numerous reacting mixing layers. The measurements provide a complete
              examination of the effects of mixture and velocity gradients at the flame edge.
              In addition, stable flames that recede (negative propagation velocities) are
              established and compared to theoretical developments for the first time. Since
              both receding and propagating edge flames are important to turbulent lifted jet
              flames and turbulent flames with localized extinction, the proposed
              measurements permit development of a more accurate and complete model for this
              important feature of turbulent flames.  Raman scattering, Rayleigh scattering,
              laser-induced fluorescence, and particle image velocimetry are applied to the
              proposed geometry for many selected flames.  The work is expected to provide an
              understanding of flame stability at interfaces between reacting and nonreacting
              flows. 

Broader impacts

This study draws its potential importance from
              its impact on future industrial combustor designs that propose to use local
              extinction or lifted flames to reduce pollutant production. Therefore, an
              understanding of edge flames and the development of models for edge-flame
              propagation in turbulent flows are critically important. This development also
              impacts other areas of combustion including flame spread over liquid and solid
              surfaces (which may be the result of unwanted fire) and flame propagation with
              solid propellants.  Undergraduates are involved through the accelerated M.S.
              program in the Department of Mechanical Engineering, and through direct
              undergraduate assistantships.  The undergraduates focus on short-duration
              projects that examine only a few test conditions.  In addition to this research
              element, senior undergraduates will design a simple model combustor to be used
              for demonstrations with local high-school science educators. This combustor
              will be designed to allow for discussion and model demonstrations of flame
              stability, modes of combustion, and the application of combustion in
              industry.

