Title       : Interdisciplinary Study in Image and Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1999        
File        : a9972662

Award Number: 9972662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yunmei Chen yun@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Glover  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a research proposal with an educational emphasis under the
              Interdisciplinary Grants in the
Mathematical Sciences program.  The principle
              investigator proposes to obtain a broad back ground
in the engineering science
              specific to image and signal processing, to  build an interdisciplinary
              research  program on image processing via morphological neural networks  and
              PDE-based methods, and  to prepare  materials for a graduate special topics
              course on mathematical methods in image processing.  She plans to study and
              develop mathematical theories and methods for modeling and analyzing neural
              networks, especially to investigate the partial differential equations
              governing phase transition phenomenon related to neural networks.  She also
              proposes to improve existing PDE models and to develop new PDE models for image
              processing, as well as to study the theories and methods for nonlinear
              degenerate  parabolic equations
arising from image processing.

The PI will
              spend the 1999-2000 academic year in the Department of Computer and Information
              Science and Engineering (CISE) at the University of Florida.  She plans to take
              several courses from CISE and  to  interact closely with computer scientists
              and their graduate students by paricipating in seminars and projects.  She
              plans to work on two projects, one  is focused on applying morphologicalneural
              networks to automated target recognition, and the other one is concerned with
              the application of image analysis via PDE-based methods to computer assisted
              radiation therapy.

The PI expects to be involved in the creation of new
              mathematical ideas to meet the needs of emerging technology. She plans to share
              her findings with her colleagues through seminars, colloquia, conferences and
              publications. She proposes to involve graduate students in her finding through
              the special topics course, individual works, projects and research problems,
              and to involve undergraduate students through an Undergraduate Research
              Program.   This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences
              (DMS).
