Title       : Introducing NMR into the Techniques and Projects Program in Organic Chemistry
               Laboratory: A Research - Based Project Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9972383

Award Number: 9972383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31412              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew N. French afrench@albion.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford E. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albion College
	      611 East Porter
	      Albion, MI  492241831    517/629-5511

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As part of its ongoing curriculum reform, the Chemistry Department at Albion
              College is upgrading an existing NMR spectrometer to a multinuclear Fourier
              Transform (FT) NMR spectrometer.  This upgrade (Anasazi, Inc.)  is in response
              to the new approach the department has taken in the organic chemistry
              laboratory with the Techniques and Projects Component Program. This approach is
              rooted in the growing movement towards research-based laboratories, such as
              those developed by Amenta and Mosbo, Licht and Thurlow (NSF-DUE 9456035), and
              Kharas (NSF-DUE 9455681).  An aggressive pursuit of such ideals requires the
              use of modern analytical instrumentation.  We are building on these innovative
              programs as we adapt them to our own institutional and departmental vision for
              the future of chemical education.   This vision includes involving students in
              authentic research experiences as soon and as often as possible.  Access to
              modern FT-NMR spectroscopy allows our students to experience a more realistic
              research environment.

The Techniques and Projects Component Program places
              the student in the center of a project-based research experience and provides
              the student with the necessary tools and skills to investigate a research
              problem.  The student experiences multiple research environments including: 
              library and on-line literature and structure searches, performing novel
              experiments in the organic laboratory, and careful analysis of experimental
              samples in the instrument laboratory.  The laboratory experience is divided
              into two components; Techniques (Chem 211L and the first 5 weeks of Chem 212L)
              and Projects (the last 9 weeks of Chem 212L).  Each component provides ample
              opportunity for students to make positive connections with the research
              experience.  The Techniques component focuses on the acquisition of proper
              laboratory skills.  Built into this component are a number of research-based
              laboratories.  The Projects component is a nine-week experience in which the
              students carry out their own research projects.  This includes searching the
              literature for information about the project, finding or designing appropriate
              experiments, and analyzing the outcomes of these experiments.  A number of
              projects have been suggested for students to investigate, and the student are
              encouraged to create their own, subject to instructor approval.  Spectroscopic
              analysis of reaction products is a necessary part of both components. 
              

Following our first year of this new laboratory program, the need for NMR
              analysis has become evident. The upgraded instrument is critical to the success
              of this curriculum revision in that it allows students to obtain for themselves
              a more complete spectroscopic data set for use in product and intermediate
              analysis.  This, in turn, provides students with experiences critical to their
              ability to operate in a modern research environment.  




