Title       : FRG: Fragility of the d-wave Order Parameter at Interfaces and Defects in High
               Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a9972087

Award Number: 9972087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1318178            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale J. Van Harlingen dvh@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Yazdani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura H. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Myron B. Salamon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Eckstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a Focused Research Group (FRG) project which is investigating the
              perturbation of the d-wave order parameter at interfaces and defects in high
              temperature, unconventional superconductors. The FRG will investigate the
              behavior of the superconducting order parameter at surfaces and interfaces by
              quasiparticle tunneling spectroscopy that can look at the local density of
              electronic surface states, and by SQUID interferometer measurements capable of
              determining directly the phase anisotropy that characterizes unconventional
              superconductors. Thermal conductivity and penetration depth measurements at low
              temperatures will be used to confirm and characterize the onset of secondary
              superconductor phases suggested by recent experiments and predicted to occur in
              doped unconventional superconductors. The FRG will explore the structure of
              bound and extended vortex states in the vortex core by scanning tunneling
              microscopy, the only probe with sufficient electronic sensitivity and spatial
              resolution to map out the structure of the vortex core. A unique magnetic
              scanning instrument, the scanning Josephson microscope, is being developed to
              search for the anisotropy of the circulating supercurrents around the vortex,
              another important feature of vortices in unconventional superconductors. The
              FRG provides a special environment for training graduate student and
              postdoctoral research through their involvement in the full spectrum of the
              project's research topics and techniques
%%%
This is a Focused Research Group
              (FRG) project which investigates fundamental questions in the field of
              high-temperature superconductivity. The collaborative highly integrated
              structure of the FRG provides and effective approach to this complex problem,
              allowing a merging of high-quality samples, powerful unique experimental
              probes, and close interactions with theoretical predications and modeling. It
              also provides a special environment for training graduate student and
              postdoctoral research through their involvement in the full spectrum of the
              project's research topics and techniques. The issues addressed here are of
              great interest and importance in condensed matter physics because of their
              relevance to the growing list of superconductors confirmed to be unconventional
              (cuprate, heavy fermion, organic, ruthenate, bobocarbide, etc.) and to the
              general subject of highly correlated electron systems.
***
