Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Education of the Next Generation of Environmental
               Scientists and Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9972817

Award Number: 9972817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2704692            (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Petersen jnp@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Yonge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brent M. Peyton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Markus Flury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Candis S. Claiborn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research in environmental science and engineering. Graduate
              students from a variety of fields will be trained in a dynamic
              multidisciplinary context that will produce environmental scientists and
              engineers who will be able to lead the development of solutions to global
              environmental problems. These professionals will have a strong desire to work
              with experts in other disciplines, be ready for both industrial and academic
              careers, and be able to cross cultural and national barriers. Trainees will
              work in co-located laboratories with researchers from eight departments in
              three colleges at WSU, performing cutting-edge, fundamental, and applied
              research focused on understanding the physical, chemical, and biological
              phenomena that occur at the interfaces between material phases. Students will
              participate in an integrated training program that includes a formalized
              instructional mentoring program and specialized coursework and educational
              activities. The program is enhanced by internships at national laboratories,
              government agencies, industrial facilities, Indian nation environmental
              departments, or at cooperating international institutions. Outstanding graduate
              students will be recruited via undergraduate research participation and
              interactions with targeted regional colleges and universities, including two
              Tribal colleges. Women, Hispanic and Native American participants will be
              actively recruited. During the five-year training program, participation by at
              least 66 students is anticipated.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
              facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs
              that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared
              to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides
              doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed
              multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational boundaries
              and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to establish a
              highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and research.
              In this second year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by funds from
              the Directorates for Biological Sciences, for Geosciences, for Engineering, for
              Education and Human Resources, and from the Office of Polar Programs. 


