Title       : Fourteenth International Conference on Banach Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9972904

Award Number: 9972904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandy Grabiner sgrabiner@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexader Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8131

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Fourteenth International Conference on Banach Algebras will
be held at
              Pomona College in Claremont, California, from July 25
through August 7, 1999. 
              This series of conferences emphasizes both
Banach algebras and their
              connections with other areas of analysis.
The title of this conference is
              "Banach Algebras and Operators on
Banach Spaces".  The formal conference
              program will involve about
sixty talks on the general theory of Banach
              algebras, on concrete
Banach algebras, and on related areas of analysis.  Some
              areas
that will be emphasized in the talks include automatic
              continuity,
amenability and Banach homology, structure of Banach
              algebras,
spectral theories and operator theory, group algebras and
              other
convolution algebras, and complex analytic methods.

One of the great
              accomplishments of modern mathematics is abstraction.
Much like the way
              elementary algebra generalizes arithmetic, abstraction
gives mathematicians
              the power to solve not only individual problems,
but entire classes of
              problems.  One of the most important twentieth-
century examples is the field
              called functional analysis.  Functional
analysis uses new abstract techniques
              to treat problems that had been
studied for more than two hundred years by
              what we now call classical
analysis, which is the collection of methods that
              grew out of the calculus.
Functional analysis, instead of concentrating on
              individual functions,
studies spaces of functions and abstractions of such
              spaces. Not only
could new problems and previously intractable old problems be
              solved by
combining the new and old methods, but the new structures of
              functional
analysis also provided a new language which was needed to express
              many of
the results of modern physics and, later, of other areas of science
              and
of economics.  The spaces considered by functional analysis all have
              some
sort of operation of addition, but many of the most important spaces
              have
other operations as well.  In particular, Banach algebras and
              related
areas involve the very large and important collection of problems
              and
structures which have some sort of multiplication as well as the
              usual
addition.  By the 1960s, Banach  algebras, the subject of the
              conference, 
had become a recognized field of mathematics.  Since 1974 the
              regular
international conferences on Banach algebras have become an
              important
way for researchers worldwide to keep abreast of the field, to
              initiate
and continue research collaborations, and to exchange ideas with
              researchers
in related areas.

