Title       : Developmental Integrated Multimedia Mathematics (DIMM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9972445

Award Number: 9972445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60477              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Patrick Kinney kinne002@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Brothen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas F. Robertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Interactive Multimedia Developmental Mathematics Project in the General
              College at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities adapts and implements
              Prentice Hall's Interactive Mathematics software designed for developmental
              mathematics.  The General College is a two-year developmental education program
              for students not academically qualified for regular university admission.  The
              courses affected are arithmetic and algebra courses designed for adults,
              especially those who were not successful in these courses prior to college.
              

Utilizing this software we develop instructional approaches with the goals
              of increasing course completion rates, developing strong conceptual
              understanding of key concepts, and achieving the level of symbolic skill
              development needed for success in future mathematics courses.  We measure how
              multimedia coursework impacts transfer rates from the College to
              degree-granting colleges and self-reported attitudes towards mathematics.  We
              also track student enrollment and achievement patterns in mathematics courses
              following their experience with multimedia learning.

Our main goals in this
              project are: 1)to improve our developmental students' pass rates in
              developmental mathematics courses and mathematics courses in which students
              subsequently enroll; 2) to research the effect a multimedia environment has on
              students' attitudes towards mathematics and the process of learning
              mathematics, along with beliefs about what constitutes 'mathematics'; 3) to
              effectively disseminate our research to assist other developmental mathematics
              programs incorporating multimedia instruction.



