Title       : RUI: Soliton Propagation and Amplification in Magnetic Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9972507

Award Number: 9972507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig Zaspel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The U of Montana-Western
	      
	      Dillon, MT  59725    406/683-7151

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9162,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972507
Zaspel
This is a grant under the Research at Undergraduate
              Institutions (RUI) program.  It also involves an international collaboration
              with the Ukraine.  The focus of the research is the theoretical study of
              magnetic microwave envelope soliton propagation in magnetic thin films.  In
              general, a soliton occurs in a nonliner system as a result of a balance of
              dispersive effects, which tends to broaden a pulse, and the narrowing effects
              from nonlinearities.  Solitons have been produced in both optical fibers and in
              magnetic thin films, and they have potential applications in the fields of
              information processing and communications systems owing to their ability to
              propagate large distances without changing shape.  In the laboratory magnetic
              microwave envelope solitons can be produced from an initial rectangular input
              pulse, which changes shape as it propagates until the soliton forms.  The fully
              formed soliton has been modeled by the nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS) equation,
              but recent experimental results indicate that this may not be an adequate
              model.  For this reason, this project will study a model of soliton formation
              and propagation when higher order terms are included in the NLS equation, which
              has explained experimental data not accounted for by the standard NLS theory. 
              Additional exact solutions of the higher order NLS equations will be obtained
              and these will be used to develop a theory of soliton formation in thin films. 
              Experimentally it can be observed how far the pulse must propagate until it
              developes into a soliton.  Both analytical and numerical techniques will be
              used to determine this propagation distance in terms of parameters in the
              higher order NLS model.  Dissipation from spin wave damping is an important
              effect in magnetic thin films that cannot be neglected.  Therefore, the effect
              of dissipation on the propagation of the exact solutions will be considered. 
              This part of the research will also include higher order dissipative terms.   
              
Recently, magnetic microwave envelope solitons have been amplified in a
              region of localized parallel pumping.  A nonlinear theory of soliton
              amplification and formation by localized pumping will be developed. 

This is
              a grant under the Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program.  It
              also involves an international collaboration with the Ukraine.  The focus of
              the research is the theoretical study of magnetic microwave envelope soliton
              propagation in magnetic thin films.  Besides addressing a fundamental issue in
              nonlinear physics, the project may find applications in information processing
              and communications.


