Title       : Robots for Teaching about Autonomous Agents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9972414

Award Number: 9972414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Fox fox@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to create a robotics laboratory to support
              undergraduate teaching and learning in artificial intelligence and to provide
              undergraduates with experience with autonomous agents in a real-world
              environment. The lab will be used in junior and senior level courses on
              artificial intelligence, as a one- to three-week module for introductory
              computer science courses, and to support student capstone or honors projects in
              Al.

Autonomous agents, computer systems that take action in the world
              without human intervention, are increasingly important in computer science.
              Current developments include software agents to search the Internet, filter
              news articles, or schedule meetings, and robot agents to explore Mars, navigate
              factory floors, or explore the ocean. Undergraduate students must learn about
              the issues involved in creating autonomous systems, such as planning, managing
              uncertainty, and interacting with other agents. Robots are an intuitive
              platform for this purpose. While robot tasks (e.g., "avoid obstacles") appear
              simple to students, autonomous agent issues arise naturally and immediately:
              the real world is complex and confusing.

The artificial intelligence courses
              will be primary focuses of this project. In these courses, students will study
              issues of autonomous agents through hands-on work with robots. Other aspects of
              Al will be framed around agent issues: planning, vision, knowledge
              representation, and scalability of algorithms. Students performing advanced
              individual work - independent research, honors projects, or capstone projects -
              will also have access to robots for studying advanced Al issues. Students in
              introductory courses will use the robots as an exciting test bed for studying
              program design. Further in the future, we anticipate extending its use to
              interdisciplinary seminars on cognitive science, and perhaps outreach to area
              youth. This project will foster an environment of experimentation and
              excitement about artificial intelligence and autonomous agents.



