Title       : RUI: Disulfide Bond Reduction: A Powerful Chemical Probe for the Study of
               Structure-Function Relationships in the Hemocyanins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9972667

Award Number: 9972667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Topham rtopham@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972667
Topham
Hemocyanins are high-molecular-weight, copper-containing
              proteins that serve as oxygen carriers in many arthropods and molluscs. 
              Although oxygen is bound to dinuclear copper centers in both, the quaternary
              structure of the proteins differ dramatically.  Crystal structure analyses show
              that disulfide bonds are a common feature in both hemocyanin types. Recently,
              it has been demonstrated that the disulfide bonds of Limulus hemocyanin are
              essential to the integrity of its oxygen-binding sites. The first objective
of
              this work is to determine the general importance of disulfide bonds in
              maintaining the integrity of the oxygen-binding sites in both classes of
              hemocyanins. The loss of oxygen-binding function and active-site copper is
              determined spectrophotometrically.  Structural changes that result from the
              cleavage of the disulfide bonds will be analyzed by gel electrophoresis, high
              performance liquid chromatography, luminescence spectroscopy, and circular
              dichroism.  A second objective of this work is to use the loss and recovery of
              oxygen-binding function upon reduction and restoration of the disulfide bonds
              as a chemical probe to determine how intersubunit contacts and allosteric
              regulators of oxygen affinity affect the conformation and stability of the
              oxygen binding sites of arthropod and mollusc hemocyanins.

Most animals live
              in an oxygen-rich environment and rely upon aerobic metabolism.  The vast
              majority have specific proteins specialized for the transport of oxygen to
              interior tissues.  Although hemoglobins are the
oxygen transport proteins most
              extensively studied, other oxygen transport proteins are used by as many
              different species as the hemoglobins.  Hemocyanins are high-molecular-weight,
              copper-containing proteins that serve as oxygen-carriers in many arthropods and
              molluscs.  The hemocyanins have attracted the interest of researchers, not only
              because of their physiological role, but also because of the appreciable
              alterations that occur in their structure and function in response to changes
              in environmental conditions.  In this project, a simple, yet powerful, chemical
              tool, the ability to reversibly lose and regain function upon the
reduction
              and restoration of protein disulfide bonds, is used to probe the internal and
              environmental factors that govern physiologically important structure-function
              relationships in the hemocyanins.  The factors
that govern the assembly,
              stability, and function of the hemocyanins are of general significance in view
              of the many reactions of biological importance conducted by complex aggregates
              whose assembly, stability, and function are similarly controlled by pH, metal
              binding, specific ions, and metabolites.



