Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Floral Symmetry Genes in the Evolution of
               Stamen Development in Mohavea (Scrophulariaceae, Antirrhineae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a9972647

Award Number: 9972647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9402               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elena M. Kramer ekramer@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Baum  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972647
Baum and Hileman

	 Recent studies focusing on model plant systems
              including the snapdragon Antirrhinum majus (family Scrophulariaceae) have
              identified individual genes affecting flower development, floral shape, and
              floral parts.  Graduate student Lena Hileman, under the direction of Dr. David
              Baum at Harvard University, is investigating close relatives of the snapdragon
              in the genera Mohavea and Sairocarpus, to construct a molecular phylogeny of
              the species (mostly based on chloroplast ndhF sequences) in order to explore
              evolutionary changes in the floral development genes. The specific aim is to
              determine the genes that cause Mohavea flowers to have only two stamens as
              opposed to the four produced by snapdragon flowers.  The search for the genetic
              basis of this difference is facilitated because a gene influencing stamen
              abortion, CYCLOIDEA (CYC), has been characterized in snapdragon.  In
              snapdragon, CYC is expressed in one of the five stamen primordia and results in
              that stamen aborting (leaving four stamens to mature). Expression of CYC-like
              genes in the tetraploid Mohavea (where there may be multiple copies) will be
              studied in tissue preparations to see if these genes are expressed in early
              stages of the three aborted stamens. The work constitutes a fine-scale genetic
              dissection of the developmental control of floral characters used in the
              species- and genus-level classification of Scrophulariaceae plants. 
	Because
              plants of Mohavea are tetraploid (contain two complete genomes), they are
              expected to possess two copies of CYC and two copies of a closely related gene,
              DICHOTOMA (DICH). The project will include DNA sequencing of the members of the
              CYC/DICH gene family in order to provide information regarding molecular
              evolutionary changes in this gene family. Preliminary work has already
              identified four potential gene products, thus providing material for sequence
              analysis to determine whether some of the genes have been subject to stronger
              natural selection (as indicated by reduced rates of molecular evolution). By
              combining a detailed understanding of the selective history of these genes with
              studies of gene expression patterns, we will learn about the fate of duplicate
              genes during genome evolution and their role in morphological
              diversification.


