Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Relationships in the Cistaceae (Rockroses)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9972646

Award Number: 9972646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Manos pmanos@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972646
Manos and Arrington

	Rockroses are ecologically important
              components of Northern Hemisphere

Mediterranean-type shrublands.  The
              Iberian peninsula followed by the U.S. Atlantic Coastal Plain is particularly
              species-rich.  Even though a diverse assortment of vegetative and floral
              features are present in the family, the Cistaceae are usually known for their
              aromatic, showy-flowered species which dominate Old World maquis (Corsican for
              rockrose) ecosystems.  This is largely due to their
economic value to
              perfumery and horticulture, and their association with a spectacular parasitic
              flowering plant, Cytinus (family Rafflesiaceae), a root parasite whose only
              above-ground structure is its flowering stalk.  The Cistaceae are promising
              candidates for studies geared toward a better
understanding of morphological
              form, breeding systems, chromosomal evolution, biogeography, shrubland ecology,
              and host-parasite relationships; however, research has been hindered by the
              lack of a reliable natural classification.  The family has largely been
              neglected taxonomically, and higher- and lower-level taxonomy remain obscure
              because traditional schemes have revolved around "field identifiable"
              vegetative and floral attributes, with little agreement on their value in
              defining natural groups.  In the past, prevailing ideas on what constitute
              primitive, specialized or convergent features have produced disparate opinions
              on cistalean relationships.  This research by graduate student Jennifer
              Arrington, under the direction of Dr. Paul Manos at Duke University, represents
              the first phylogenetic approach to the classification of the Cistaceae and the
              first  comprehensive taxonomic treatment since 1925. 
In order to delimit taxa
              and develop a morphological matrix for evolutionary analyses, a close
              examination will be made of promising diagnostic traits of the flower such as
              the stigma, style, pollen and ovule, as well as chromosome number and
              developmental characteristics
pertaining to merosity (number of flower parts).
               Samples of all the known genera and of many of the described species have been
              or will soon be collected from throughout the native range of the family in
              North America and in Europe. This information will be supplemented by molecular
              genealogies based on chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences, which will provide
              a comparative phylogenetic framework for research on morphological form,
              chromosomal evolution, host-specificity, and biogeography.


