Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: PICCS: Program in Integrative Computer and Computational
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a9972930

Award Number: 9972930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4212000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremiah P. Ostriker jpo@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Dobkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jaswinder P. Singh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
               
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research at Princeton to provide the next generation of computer
              scientists and users of high-performance computing with integrated graduate
              training across disciplinary boundaries. On one hand, dramatic advances in
              computer technology are poised to revolutionize computational science as an
              equal partner of theory and experiment, but their nature is such that
              harnessing them will require cross-disciplinary fertilization and expertise in
              both application areas and computer science. At the same time, advances in
              computer science will increasingly be driven by knowledge of applications, both
              scientific simulations and others. The PICAS program will address the entire
              computational and information pipeline in a variety of areas, from models and
              methods through parallel algorithms and systems to immersive visualization and
              information management. It will train a new breed of researchers to
              cross-disciplinary boundaries, develop new areas between disciplines, and
              exploit synergies. Centered around the computer science department, the program
              will include many departments throughout the university. Program components
              include curriculum development, cross-department advising, integrated research
              across disciplines, cross-cutting annual thematic programs to focus
              collaboration, and activities like a recent interdisciplinary seminar series
              that attracts many researchers from various local institutions.

IGERT is an
              NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative,
              research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group of scientists
              and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of
              career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to
              develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend
              organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or
              institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for
              both training and research. In this second year of the program, awards are
              being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is
              supported by funds from the Directorates for Computer and Information Science
              and Engineering, for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities), for Engineering, and for Education and Human
              Resources.

