Title       : POWRE: Regulatory Reform and Consumer Safety -- Examining the Impact of User
               Fees on New Drug Safety
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9972669

Award Number: 9972669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary K. Olson mary.olson@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the impact of recent regulatory reforms
in the Food
              and Drug Administration (FDA) on new drug safety
in the U.S. pharmaceutical
              market.  Since the agency introduced
prescription drug user fees in 1993, the
              speed of FDA review for new
drugs has increased.  Although new drugs are being
              approved faster,
there have also been several newly approved drugs that were
              withdrawn
from the market because of safety reasons.  This suggests that
              there
may be a trade-off between the speed of FDA review and new
drug safety.
               This analysis will empirically investigate how
the length of an FDA-approved
              drug's review time and how important
changes in the regulatory or political
              environment such as the
introduction of user fees impact new drug safety.  To
              examine this
relationship, this analysis will utilize data from the
              FDA's
Spontaneous Reporting System (SRS) which is a computerized database
              of
adverse drug reactions (ADR) reported to the FDA under its
post-marketing
              surveillance program called MedWatch.  This data will be
used to construct
              measures of new drug safety for the 1990-1995
approvals.  These measures will
              be used to explore patterns and sources
of variation in new drug safety over
              time.

The user fee program is one of the few reforms introduced in the
              last
twenty years to significantly increase the speed of the FDA
              review
process for new drugs.  While the program has received a
              positive
evaluation from politicians and pharmaceutical firms, there has
              been
no subsequent analysis of the effects of this reform on consumer
              safety
outcomes.  The goal of this analysis is to provide a more
              thorough
understanding of the effects of this reform on new drug
              safety.
Results from this analysis will help policy makers better
              understand
and evaluate the impact of the user fee program on the market
              for
pharmaceuticals.  In addition, there has been little investigation in
the
              pharmaceutical regulatory literature of the impact of regulatory
change on
              consumer safety outcomes because of the difficulty in
observing and
              quantifying new drug safety.  This study will utilize a
medical database to
              develop proxies for new drug safety that can be
used in the proposed study and
              in future economic analyses of
pharmaceutical regulation.  Finally, political
              efforts to increase
agency accountability have led to many different reforms
              in different
agencies. However, the reasons why certain reforms succeed while
              other
reforms fail are often not well understood.  One reason is that
              politicians
fail to understand how different reforms alter bureaucratic
              incentives
and the trade-offs facing regulators. The data and results from
              this
study will address these important issues and help provide a
              better
foundation for developing and evaluating future FDA reforms.

The
              investigator's recent transition from an economics department to a
Division of
              health policy and management within a school of public health
Marks an
              important change in her career path.  The POWRE grant will greatly
facilitate
              this transition and improve her chances of succeeding in her new
environment. 
              Second, this research represents the begining of a new approach
for examining
              the impact of regulatory change on pharmaceutical safety.
Given such data has
              not previously been utilized by economists, this project
is perhaps more
              exploratory in nature to determine the pros and cons of
(i)using this data to
              measure changes in pharmaceutical safety over time;
and (ii) using this data
              to examine how user fees have altered the trade-offs
facing FDA
              regulators.


