Title       : IGERT Proposal: Biosphere-Atmosphere Research and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a9972803

Award Number: 9972803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2741013            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Anne Carroll mcarroll@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Teeri  (Principal Investigator former)
              David N. Karowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Curtis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven B. Bertman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary, multi-institutional graduate
              training program of education and research in Biospheric-Atmospheric Research
              Training (BART) at the University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS), in
              collaboration with eleven other universities. The purpose of this program is to
              provide doctoral students with enhanced multidisciplinary training in the
              skills required for conducting research at the interface of the biospheric and
              atmospheric sciences. The over-arching research theme is to improve the
              understanding of the interactions and feedbacks that occur between biospheric
              and atmospheric properties and processes. BART builds on the unique collection
              of scientists, research projects and academic programs that exist at UMBS. BART
              training will commence with a novel 10-week residential research experience.
              Students will conduct research using state-of-the-art equipment and facilities
              for conducting research on atmospheric composition, atmospheric flux
              measurements, and ecosystem dynamics. Each student will have two co-mentors for
              his/her doctoral career: an atmospheric scientist and a biospheric scientist.
              In addition to the residential research experience, students will receive
              continuing multidisciplinary training including: biannual workshops, and
              activities suppported through Internet discussion groups, and the BART web
              site.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment
              of innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group
              of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad
              spectrum of career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an
              opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs
              that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several
              departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative
              environment for both training and research. In this second year of the program,
              awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively
              span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award
              is supported by funds from the Directorates for Geosciences, for Biological
              Sciences, and for Education and Human Resources, and the Office of Polar
              Programs.

