Title       : Mechanical Properties of Films, Coatings and Interfacial Materials, June 27 -
               July 2, 1999, II Ciocco, Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9972950

Award Number: 9972950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivar E. Reimanis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972950
Reimanis

Materials in which interfaces are prevalent, including thin
              films, coatings, multilayered structures, composites, and nanophase compacts
              have attracted much scientific and technological interest in recent years
              because of the possibilities of using these "interfacial materials" to engineer
              behavior through the control of microstructure.  Despite a growing amount of
              data in recent years on mechanical behavior, relatively little is understood
              concerning the deformation mechanisms in interfacial materials.  Furthermore,
              there is an increasing awareness that it is important to focus attention on
              microstructural features such as geometrical constraints, chemistry, and
              defects to due to processing in order to fully understand and control
              properties in these materials.  While interfaces are important in controlling
              the mechanical behavior of a large number of materials types, there are
              relatively few opportunities for interaction between, for example, materials
              scientists studying the properties of nanophase compacts, materials scientists
              investigating thin films or multilayered materials, and the solid mechanics
              community.  In addition, scientists and engineers from other disciplines
              including chemists, physicists, and geophysicists are heavily involved in the
              study of different kinds of interfacial materials. The objective of the
              conference is to provide a unique forum for discourse among scientists and
              engineers from varied backgrounds who share interests in identifying and
              understanding the effects of interfaces on mechanical behavior.   
%%%
The
              United Engineering Foundation is sponsoring this international conference on
              "Mechanical Properties of Interfacial Materials", to be held June 27 - July 2,
              1999 in 11 Ciocco, Italy.  An international organizing committee has been
              formed to coordinate the meeting, and in order to enhance the participation of
              overseas researchers, a European meeting location was selected.  The invited
              speakers include the top US and international researchers in this topical area.
               The conference format will consist of morning and evening oral sessions and a
              poster session.  Attendance is estimated to be about 100 scientists from
              academia, national laboratories, and industry, with an estimated 10-15% of the
              participants being Ph.D. students.  The requested budget will be used to
              provide travel and registration fee support for young faculty and students. 
              Dissemination of the results of this meeting will be in the form of a group of
              papers published in Acta Materialia
***

