Title       : Conservation Laws with Partial Dissipation in Continuum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9972031

Award Number: 9972031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yanni Zeng zeng@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is to study laws for continuum mechanics, describing the
              conservation
or balance of physical quantities such as mass, momentum, energy,
              etc. The
mathematical description of those laws are complicated nonlinear
              systems of
partial differential equations. The systems contain certain terms
              representing
the dissipative mechanism such as viscosity, heat conduction,
              frictional damping,
relaxation, species diffusion, etc. On one hand, the
              nonlinearity of the systems
tends to generating singularities (shock waves) in
              the flows. On the other hand,
the dissipative mechanism eases such a tendency,
              but gives rise to richer wave
patterns at the same time. The overall behavior
              of the flows then depends on
the competition between the two. The difficulty
              of the problem lies in the fact
that the dissipation exists only in certain
              equations (laws) of a system. For
instance, physics dictates that the
              conservation of mass should not have any
dissipation. Such a fact then further
              complicates the competition between
nonlinearity and dissipation. In different
              wave directions, one or the other
dominates. It is then easy to understand
              that in general there is no explicit
formula for a solution. In fact, even the
              existence of a solution can be an open
question. In this project, the awardee
              will study when a solution can
exist all the time. Furthermore, if a solution
              exists all the time, what is
its qualitative behavior? To this aim, the
              awardee will first reduce the system
into a set of simplified, decoupled
              equations. Each of them represents a wave
along a particular direction, and
              can be solved explicitly. These waves together
give the time asymptotic wave
              pattern of the original system. Next, the awardee
will study how well the
              asymptotic solution approximates the actual solution.
Through such a study,
              the understanding of the underlying physical phenomena can
be obtained.

The
              problems addressed in this research can be illustrated by an example. 
When a
              space shuttle returns to the earth, the temperature of the air 
around it
              becomes so high that the internal structure of the molecules in the air 
gets
              excited, and chemical reactions occur. The air then loses its local
              thermodynamic 
equilibrium state. The departure from equilibrium in turn
              provides the ``driving force" for 
internal changes. The air relaxes towards
              its local equilibrium state through
molecular collisions. Such relaxation
              processes have significant influence in
the acoustic directions, but not the
              particle path direction. The awardee
will study how the relaxation processes
              change the overall behavior of
the air flow in this situation.


