Title       : First-Principles Studies of Raman-Active Modes in IV-VI Chalcogenide Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a9972333

Award Number: 9972333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Koblar A. Jackson jackson@risky.phy.cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972333
Jackson
In this Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) grant, 
              first-principles, density functional theory cluster calculations will be used
              to study the Raman-active modes of IV-VI chalcogenide glasses GexSe1-x and
              SixSe1-x .  The Raman spectra of these materials exhibit clear signs of the
              rigidity transition predicted for glasses as a function of x.  The object of
              the calculations is to link the observed changes in the Raman spectral features
              to corresponding changes in the underlying atomic structure.  In this way the
              calculations will lead to a more detailed understanding of the rigidity
              transition and of the short and intermediate range order in these materials.
              

This research project will feature systematic studies of cluster models of
              the glasses.  The clusters will each contain one or more of the basic
              structural units of the glass.   The vibrational modes of each cluster will be
              computed using standard methods and then the absolute Raman spectral
              intensities for these modes will be computed from first-principles using a new
              DFT-based technique.  The calculations will produce predicted Raman spectra
              that can be compared directly to experimental results.  The comparisons will
              serve to identify the short-rang order responsible for the characteristic
              spectral features.  In addition, the calculated absolute Raman intensities can
              be used to predict the relative concentrations of basic structural units in the
              glass.  This is an entirely new capability that will b used for the first time
              in this project.  The concentration information is fundamental to many
              questions regarding the structure of the glasses and to important details of
              the rigidity transition.  Both undergraduates and masters students will
              participate in this project.
  
This is an RUI award to support theoretical
              research on the properties of glassy semiconductors.  Both undergraduate
              students and masters students will participate.


