Title       : Homotopy Theory of Commutative Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9972546

Award Number: 9972546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48374              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Turner jturner@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
9972546
Turner
     The central focus of this project is to translate the
              methods and
technology of the homotopy theory of spaces to the realm of
              algebras and
then apply them back to questions in the homotopy theory of
              spaces.  The
approach is to view algebras themselves as special cases of
              simplicial
algebras.  In this larger category, there exists a homotopy theory
              and
notions of homotopy groups and homology groups, depending on the type
              of
algebras considered, which are homotopy invariants.  Restricting
              to
(simplicial) commutative algebras, the resulting homology theory is
              called
Andre-Quillen homology, which has proved useful for both
              commutative
algebra and topology.  In particular, understanding when this
              homology
theory vanishes has implications in both commutative algebra and
              topology.
On the commutative algebra side, conjectures of Quillen indicate
              that the
vanishing in high degrees of the Andre-Quillen homology of
              Noetherian
algebras, over a Noetherian ring, implies the homology must vanish
              above
degree two.  It is the intent of this project to resolve this
              conjecture
and its implications for commutative algebra.  On the topological
              side,
obstructions to the existence of a topological space with given mod
              p
cohomology, as an unstable algebra over the Steenrod algebra, lie
              in
certain Andre-Quillen cohomology groups of that unstable algebra. 
              This
project will also investigate finding conditions for those obstructions
              to
vanish as well as relating other aspects of the Andre-Quillen
              cohomology
to the homotopy of that space, if it exists.
     Central to
              studying topological spaces is the theory of their homotopy
type, which can be
              understood using the methods provided by algebraic
topology.  These methods
              involve assigning to spaces algebraic invariants,
called homotopy, homology,
              and cohomology groups, whose internal structures
help discern the internal
              structures of the original topological object.  A
dual perspective can be
              developed whereby the methods of homotopy theory
can be used to study algebras
              on their own grounds.  In particular, there
is a (co)homology theory, called
              Andre-Quillen (co)homology, for commutative
algebras that has proved useful to
              both commutative algebra and topology.
The goal of the present project is to
              understand under what conditions this
homology theory vanishes, either locally
              or globally, and the implications
for commutative algebra and topology.  For
              example, one focus will be on the
implications for commutative algebra of the
              global vanishing of Andre-Quillen
homology in high degrees.  Under certain
              special conditions, it is known that
such a vanishing implies that the imputed
              commutative algebra has the very
special feature of being a type of algebra
              called a local complete
intersection.  Part of the present project is
              concerned with determining the
implications of such global vanishing under a
              weakening of these special
conditions.  On the topological side, the
              cohomology of a space can be viewed
as a commutative algebra.  One question
              that arises is: when can a given
commutative algebra be realized as the
              cohomology of a space?  An answer can
be given in terms of certain elements in
              the Andre-Quillen cohomology of the
given commutative algebra: the space is
              realizable if and only if these
elements vanish.  Another goal of the present
              project will be to understand
these obstruction elements and the conditions
              under which they vanish as well
as relating other aspects of the Andre-Quillen
              cohomology to the homotopy of
that space, if it exists.
***



