Title       : QM Tools--Realizing the Promise of Multimedia in Teaching Introductory Quantum
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9972322

Award Number: 9972322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curt A. Moyer moyerc@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Advances in desktop computing power and information technology are converging to
              make possible, superior pedagogy and promote active classroom learning. But
              individual efforts toward technological innovation in higher education have not
              fulfilled their promise, in part due to the reluctance of educators to employ
              "canned" learning aids. We contend that systemic change will follow only when
              instructors can readily craft their own materials that effectively exploit
              today's technology. The proposed project endeavors to provide educators with
              the tools needed to seamlessly integrate multimedia and computational elements
              into their classroom materials, and to do so with minimal investment of time
              and effort. The required tool set for Quantum Physics - dubbed QM Tools - is
              developed and distributed free of charge to the academic community. Prior to
              final release, the product is field tested extensively  nationwide, thereby
              ensuring maximum value of the tool set for its intended purpose and
              acceptability to a broad spectrum of college and university physics faculty. We
              also outline a non-proprietary strategy that uses QM Tools together with other
              stock hypermedia elements to assemble "live" documents that can be tailored to
              individual needs and preferences. Widespread adoption of the QM Tools concept
              would expose a vast majority of technically oriented students to a rich
              multimedia educational experience, with improved prospects for retaining the
              best and brightest among them, and even attracting traditionally
              under-represented groups to the study of science and engineering.



