Title       : AMBIGUITY: Meaning and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a9972442

Award Number: 9972442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry G. Epstein lepn@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
A decision-maker choosing a course of action typically does not know
              with
certainty the consequence of any chosen action. However, if she
              knows
enough about the likelihoods of the various consequences that she
              can
assign probabilities to them, then she can use these to weight the
              benefits
and costs of any action and thereby rank alternative actions. In
              such
situations, we describe the choice problem as one of risk and the
              decision
procedure is the well-known expected utility theory. However, in
              many
settings, particularly in a new or changing decision environment, there
              may
not be much information available on which to base the assignment
              of
probabilities. Then we refer to the situation as one of ambiguity. This
              project is concerned with modeling decision-making under ambiguity.
	
In the
              early 1920's both Keynes and Frank Knight suggested the importance of the
              distinction between risk and ambiguity and the prevalence of the
latter, while
              Ellsberg, in his famous 1961 experiment, showed that the
distinction was
              empirically meaningful. This project will focus on the
precise formal meaning
              of ambiguity. In particular, it will address the
question ``how can we tell
              from behavior that the decision-maker views a
prospect as ambiguous rather
              than risky?'' Then it will examine the
consequences for the theory of
              financial markets of modeling asset returns
as involving not only risk but
              also ambiguity. It is to be expected that
such a theory would deliver, as one
              component underlying asset prices, a
premium for bearing ambiguity in addition
              to the traditional premium for bearing risk.

