Title       : The Mathematics of Decision Making: A Model for Collaboration Between
               Mathematics and Other Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9972350

Award Number: 9972350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495823             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. McCallum wmc@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher G. Lamoureux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Hughes-Hallett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Each year, hundreds of thousands of prospective students in business and public
              administration (BPA) degree programs take required mathematics courses because
              they need to learn to use mathematics effectively in making decisions. However,
              this need is often not addressed by the traditionally required courses. The
              main goal of this project is to produce materials that convince students that
              mathematics and modern computer technology are valuable tools in solving
              realistic problems and to teach them to utilize these tools effectively. We
              plan to develop, site-test, and nationally disseminate an archive of
              substantial, technology-based case studies (a realistic scenario which can be
              used to introduce the mathematical content) in the mathematics of
              decision-making. These will take between a few days and a few weeks to teach,
              and can be used instead of or in addition to a text. Each case study will be
              developed by teams consisting of faculty from mathematics and BPA, to be chosen
              from around the county. The co-PIs Thompson and Lamoureux, in a partnership
              between the University's Department of Mathematics and the College of Business
              and Public Administration, have produced case studies on whether to foreclose a
              commercial loan or work out an arrangement with the creditor, and on how to
              price a stock option. Hughes Hallett, in collaboration with E. Connally of
              Wellesley College and faculty at Harvard University's Kennedy School of
              Government, has produced case studies on the Austrian state pension system,
              population projection using US census data and data from the CIA World-book,
              and water flow in the Charles River using data from the US Geological Survey.
