Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Science and Engineering of Laser Interactions with Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9972790

Award Number: 9972790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2503991            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Harrison harrison@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brooks H. Pate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis A. Bloomfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of an multidisciplinary, multi-institution graduate
              training program of education and research in the Science and Engineering of
              Laser Interactions with Matter (SELIM). The SELIM IGERT program links the
              University of Virginia (UVa), Norfolk State University (NSU), and the Jefferson
              Laboratory (JLAB) Free Electron Laser (FEL) Facility and its affiliated
              industrial Laser Processing Consortium (LPC) in a collaborative venture to
              develop graduate students with enhanced mastery and practical experience of the
              knowledge and state-of-the-art technical skills required for advancements in
              modern science and technology. Graduate students will employ ultrashort-pulse
              lasers at UVa and NSU in conjunction with the high-power FEL at JLAB in
              fundamental and problem-oriented research on the modification of materials
              under novel regimes of high laser intensity and short pulse duration. Training
              elements will include interdisciplinary graduate research directed by multiple
              faculty; advanced SELIM courses and a biweekly seminar; a second-year
              industrial summer internship at JLAB; active participation in semi-annual LPC
              Workshops; and opportunities for off-site research experiences at international
              laboratories. Program diversity will be encouraged and enhanced by a seamlessly
              coupled NSU/UVa M.S./Ph.D. degree sequence and graduate student mentoring of
              minority undergraduate scholars.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
              facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs
              that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared
              to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides
              doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed
              multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational boundaries
              and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to establish a
              highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and research.
              In this second year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by funds from
              the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities), for Engineering, and for Education and Human
              Resources.

