Title       : Luminescence Dating on the Southern High Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9972309

Award Number: 9972309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86415              (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Feathers jimf@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. James Feathers will apply the techniques of optical luminescent and
              thermoluminescent dating to sediments from a series of archaeological important
              sites in the Southern Great Plains. This region in northwestern Texas and
              eastern New Mexico contains a long cultural sequence which documents most of
              the prehistory of the New World. Early sites such as Clovis, Lubbock Lake and
              Midland provide insight into the earliest Paleoindian phase of occupation and
              these are followed by remains left by Archaic hunters and gatherers who adapted
              to severe and rapid climatic variation in this semi-arid region. Archaeological
              advance in the Great Plains region has been slow because charcoal and other
              carbon based materials are only rarely preserved in sites and thus radiocarbon
              dating often cannot be employed. Thus many important sites remain undated.
              Luminescent dating is based on radioactively caused time dependent changes
              which take place in soil samples. While the technique has proven useful in many
              parts of the world, it has been used only infrequently in this region and it is
              uncertain how well it will work. Dr. Feathers will first analyze sediments that
              have widely accepted independent dating controls in order to demonstrate the
              precision and accuracy possible by luminescence on a variety of
              archaeologically important deposits. These include lacustrine, alluvial and
              aeolian deposits in different settings including draws, playas and dunes. After
              completion of this phase, dating of previously undated deposits that have a
              bearing on chronological problems in interpreting the archaeological record
              will be undertaken. Both thermoluminescence and optically stimulated
              luminescence will be applied to primarily quartz grains using a number of
              recently developed techniques.

This project is important for several
              reasons. It will help to apply developing techniques to a region of
              archaeological importance. It will also produce data which illumines the
              prehistory of the US Plains.

