Title       : RUI: Vibrational Structure of Amorphous Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9972041

Award Number: 9972041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Pollard wpollard@valdosta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Valdosta State University
	      1500 North Patterson Street
	      Valdosta, GA  316980429    229/333-5952

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972041                                                                         
                                                                                             
                     Pollard                                                                 
                                                                                             
                            This is a grant for Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)
              which focuses on the vibrational properties of amorphous semiconductors. 
              Crystalline gallium nitride (GaN) and aluminum nitride (AlN) are two of the
              most promising wide band-gap III-V semiconductors for short wavelength
              optoelectronic devices.  A great deal of experimental and theoretical effort
              has been expended to understand the bulk properties of the crystalline phase of
              these materials for various applications.  Although amorphous III-V nitrides
              may be viewed as a by-product of these efforts, they have been the subjects of
              few theoretical and experimental investigations.  Nevertheless, scientifically,
              amorphous III-V nitrides should have structural features and properties which
              are sufficiently different from those of amorphous semiconductors like Si and
              GaAs, and amorphous insulators like a-SiO2 to justify a detailed investigation.
               A systematic study will be done for the vibrational structure of amorphous
              III-V nitrides, a-GaN, a-AlN, and a-InN.  The primary objective of this work
              will be a full characterization of the topological and chemical disorder of the
              amorphous networks and the identification of the structural point defects (like
              dangling bonds).  Insight will be gained into the vibrational properties of the
              amorphous III-V nitrides by determining the vibrational densities of states and
              infrared absorption from first-principles.  For each amorphous network model
              considered, the frequencies, optical activities, symmetry, degree of
              localization, and character of the vibrational modes of various structural
              models will be determined.  The results of this study should be useful in
              understanding the electronic, vibrational, and optical properties of amorphous
              III-V nitrides and in interpreting and predicting the results of experimental
              measurements.  Moreover, this study is an essential first step in elucidating
              the nature of the short range order, and the structural properties of impurity
              and defect bonding conformations which may characterize the structure of
              amorphous III-V nitrides.
%%% 
This is a grant for Research at Undergraduate
              Institutions (RUI) which focuses on the vibrational properties of amorphous
              semiconductors.  Crystalline gallium nitride (GaN) and aluminum nitride (AlN)
              are two of the most promising wide band-gap III-V semiconductors for short
              wavelength optoelectronic devices.  A great deal of experimental and
              theoretical effort has been expended to understand the bulk properties of the
              crystalline phase of these materials for various applications.  Although
              amorphous III-V nitrides may be viewed as a by-product of these efforts, they
              have been the subjects of few theoretical and experimental investigations. 
              Nevertheless, scientifically, amorphous III-V nitrides should have structural
              features and properties which are sufficiently different from those of
              amorphous semiconductors like Si and GaAs, and amorphous insulators like a-SiO2
              to justify a detailed investigation.  A systematic study will be done for the
              vibrational structure of amorphous III-V nitrides, a-GaN, a-AlN, and a-InN. 
              The primary objective of this work will be a full characterization of the
              topological and chemical disorder of the amorphous networks and the
              identification of the structural point defects (like dangling bonds).  Insight
              will be gained into the vibrational properties of the amorphous III-V nitrides
              by determining the vibrational densities of states and infrared absorption from
              first-principles.  For each amorphous network model considered, the
              frequencies, optical activities, symmetry, degree of localization, and
              character of the vibrational modes of various structural models will be
              determined.  The results of this study should be useful in understanding the
              electronic, vibrational, and optical properties of amorphous III-V nitrides and
              in interpreting and predicting the results of experimental measurements. 
              Moreover, this study is an essential first step in elucidating the nature of
              the short range order, and the structural properties of impurity and defect
              bonding conformations which may characterize the structure of amorphous III-V
              nitrides.
***

