Title       : Quantum Operator Approaches to Condensed Phase and Multidimensional Reaction
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9972864

Award Number: 9972864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Schwartz steve@risc1.aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Steven Schwartz of Yeshiva University  is supported by a grant from the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his research in
              quantum operator approaches to condensed phase multidimensional reaction
              dynamics.  Schwartz' approach to the solution of the quantum dynamics of a
              system in solution is based on a Generalized Langevin Equation using a
              microscopic Hamiltonian system in which a discrete harmonic bath is bilinearly
              coupled to a system coordinate.   Using an evolution operator expansion and
              resummation methodologies, Schwartz applies this methodology to the study of
              reaction coordinates in solvated chemical systems.  In addition to extending
              the methodology to quantum simulations in many dimensional systems involving
              quantum activated rate theory, Schwartz will apply his operator approach to the
              following systems of chemical interest: 1) proton transfer from phenol to amine
              in aprotic, polar solvents; 2) internal proton transfer in glycine dissolved in
              water; and 3) hydride transfer in alcohol dehydrogenase reaction.  Specific
              questions to be examined include the effect of spatially dependent friction,
              the temperature dependence of the bath, and the importance of promoting
              vibrations.

A great deal of progress has been made in the theoretical
              treatment of gas phase chemical reactions of systems consisting of relatively
              few atoms. Using state-of-the-art theoretical methods, it is now possible to
              explain a great deal of the experimental detail for such systems. However, the
              large majority of reactions which are of interest to chemists occur in
              condensed phase systems in the presence of solvent. The theoretical models for
              treating such complex systems are in a much earlier stage of development.
              Schwartz is developing new theoretical approaches for dealing with solvated
              chemical systems undergoing chemical reactions where quantum effects may be
              important.
