Title       : Peer-Led Team-Learning:National Dissemination by the Workshop Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9972457

Award Number: 9972457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2394955            (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Gosser gosser@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor S. Strozak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph G. Griswold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a comprehensive national dissemination effort to educate SMET faculty
              about a robust, powerful, and accessible instructional approach that has been
              successfully beta-tested across a wide variety of colleges and universities. 
              This approach is the Peer-Led Team-Learning model.  It is called the Workshop
              Model because its key feature is collaborative student groups working in close
              harmony with the course faculty.   In the Workshop Model, collaborative student
              groups provide a unique leadership role for undergraduate students that
              complements the lecture component of courses.  

In this project, an
              11-member team of faculty drawn from seven institutions have devised a
              coordinated plan to disseminate the Workshop Model over a three year period to
              a broad variety of institutions and faculty in five disciplines -- biology,
              chemistry, geology, mathematics, and physics.  The participating institutions
              are the CUNY City College, the University of Miami (FL), Prince Georges
              Community College, the University of Rochester, St. Xavier University, the
              University of Montana, and Portland State University (OR).  

This national
              dissemination project is based on a variety of outreach activities, of varying
              intensity and commitment, conducted in part on the campuses of the
              participating institutions, ranging from 1-hour presentations at regional and
              national meetings to 3-day workshops, with substantial follow-up support.   In
              support of faculty adopting the Workshop approach, there is a Web page with 
              substantial resources.  

The project includes a set of activities to promote
              scholarship about the Workshop Model and is designed to create an expanding
              leadership of faculty to ensure continued dissemination beyond the life of the
              project.  










