Title       : A Virtual Exploratorium to Support Inquiry-based Learning in Geoscience Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9972491

Award Number: 9972491
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Marlino marlino@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Virtual Exploratorium or VE (a World Wide Web and CD ROM-based educational
              resource) addresses a national call for inquiry-based materials in the
              geosciences at the introductory survey level adaptable to a variety of
              instructional approaches.  Our Pyramid Framework approach fosters understanding
              through scientific exploration of geoscience phenomena and processes relevant
              to the broad geoscience community, i.e., volcanoes and plate-tectonics; and
              hurricanes and their interactions with oceans and land; and fluid
              visualizations.  We have developed comprehensive scenarios addressing these
              phenomena and processes through a focus on fundamental principles, building
              blocks established from these principles, and processes explored through the
              use of building blocks.  Within the VE there are learner-centered scientific
              modeling and visualization tools, discovery-based curricular elements that use
              these tools, a series of data sets of relevant phenomena, and a virtual
              encyclopedia of basic scientific concepts. These components are created/adapted
              from advanced scientific modeling and visualization capabilities that utilize
              rapidly evolving desktop computing capabilities and the World Wide Web. Simpler
              fluid models and visualizations are being developed. 
VE materials are
              developed with input from the geoscience community and a national advisory
              group with expertise that includes: 1)  cognition, learning theory, and science
              education; 2)  advanced visualization and numerical modeling; and 3) in
              evaluation and assessment.  Materials are being evaluated at ten institutions
              including 4-year, 2-year and underrepresented institutions representative of
              the geoscience community. The materials will continue to be maintained at the
              University of Illinois and PAGE, and will be accessible through our website and
              CDs. We also provide support to faculty seeking to incorporate these tools into
              their courses. PAGE provides a singular opportunity to nationally distribute
              the products. 
