Title       : Mathematical and Computational Approaches to Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9972316

Award Number: 9972316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74699              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Miller millerd@wpunj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. Vail  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gilbert Ndjatou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Paterson Universit
	      300 Pompton Road
	      Wayne, NJ  074702103    201/595-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is producing curricular materials for an advanced,
              interdisciplinary undergraduate course for students majoring in the life and
              quantitative sciences that surveys mathematical and computational approaches to
              molecular biology. These include applications of statistics, combinatorics,
              computational concepts, graph theory and basic topology to the sequence and
              structural analysis of DNA, RNA, and proteins. These materials include a
              working prototype of a textbook/lab manual for such a course. This text is
              being disseminated on the WEB, where the materials include Java based
              demonstrations and exercises, and is being prepared for commercial
              publication.

During the project, the course and materials are being tested
              and refined, based on evaluations of their effectiveness. Emphasis is placed on
              the use of real-world data from publicly accessible molecular biology
              databases. Students are being introduced to the basic use of these databases
              and software for analyzing the data.

This project is providing a curriculum
              and educational materials that gives students of the life sciences proficiency
              in quantitative and computational skills and techniques that expands their
              capabilities for further scientific development and their access to emerging
              career opportunities that require a substantial quantitative and information
              science background. The project is also giving students of the quantitative
              sciences an opportunity to be exposed to an important area of applications. The
              nationwide implementation of curricula such as this one is helping to satisfy
              the growing need for quantitatively trained life scientists in industry that is
              resulting from the biotechnology revolution.



