Title       : IGERT: Nanostructural Materials and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9972892

Award Number: 9972892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Akins akins@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary, multi-institutional graduate
              training program of education and research at five New York City and state
              institutions, resulting in Ph.D.s who are highly trained to conduct
              multidisciplinary research in areas of nanostructural materials and their uses
              in photonic devices. The Ph.D. graduates, because of the recruitment pool from
              which students are drawn, will be in large measure from groups that are
              historically underrepresented in science, engineering and mathematics fields.
              The mechanism that leads to the aforementioned outcomes involves City College
              of New York-working cooperatively with Hunter College and The College of Staten
              Island, as the City University of New York contingent-establishing a
              steady-state population of graduate students from which Columbia University and
              The University of Rochester will have the opportunity to attract and
              matriculate graduate students. There are five major activities that comprise
              this IGERT project: (1) interdisciplinary research and training; (2) new
              courses; (3) a new strategy for mentoring and advising students; (4) the use of
              video teleconferencing to facilitate research, education and communication
              between IGERT students and faculty; and (5) the introduction of enrichment
              activities that are designed to improve the prospects that students successful
              complete their degrees.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to facilitate
              the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs that will
              train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take
              advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides doctoral
              institutions with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed
              multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational boundaries
              and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to establish a
              highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and research.
              In this second year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by funds from
              the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities), for Engineering, and for Education and Human
              Resources.

