Title       : NMR Investigations of High Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9972200

Award Number: 9972200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Pennington   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972200
Pennington

This research uses primarily Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
              (NMR) measurements designed to address key issues concerning the normal state
              and superconducting state electronic structure and the charge and spin dynamics
              of the cuprate "high temperature superconductors." A primary thrust of the
              project is an effort to exploit fully a technique, known as "small tip angle
              echo NMR," to characterize as fully as possible the spin correlations in the
              cuprates and their dependence upon temperature and composition.  The small tip
              angle technique was developed recently to measure individually the "indirect"
              or "electron mediated" couplings between pairs of nuclei, and thereby to probe
              the real part of the electronic spin susceptibility.  The information derived
              is complementary to that obtained from inelastic neutron scattering (INS), and
              from NMR spin-lattice relaxation, both of which probe the imaginary part of the
              susceptibility.  Two additional thrusts are pursued.  The first is a
              continuation of investigations of the contrasting high temperature NMR behavior
              of the 63Cu, 17O, and 89Y nuclei, in order to assess the validity of the
              "single component" electronic structure picture of the CuO2 planes.  The second
              is a continuing probe of the magnetic field and doping dependence of the
              "pseudo-gap" phenomenon, using fields up to 27T accessible through the National
              High Magnetic Field Laboratory.
%%%
This project is an investigation of high
              temperature superconductor compounds, using the experimental technique of
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). Project experiments are designed to test
              competing theoretical models of the "mechanism" of superconductivity in these
              materials. The improvements in our basic understanding will also assist in the
              development of new classes of superconductors with more desirable properties
              for applications. The NMR experiments are of a challenging nature and the
              project provides varied educational experiences for a diverse team of graduate
              and undergraduate students and post-doctoral research associates. 
***


