Title       : Numerical Methods in General Relativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9972835

Award Number: 9972835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas N. Arnold dna@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In view of large-scale national and international programs to construct
              gravitational wave observatories, there is a pressing need for accurate
              simulation of the gravitational wave emission from massive cosmic
events such
              as inspiralling black hole collisions. This requires the accurate numerical
              simulation of the Einstein field equations, an extremely complex system of
              partial differential equations, which have thus far resisted attempts to
              develop stable numerical methods.  Progress in the development of numerical
              methods for the Einstein equations will require both a deep physical
              understanding of general relativity and gravitation and the mastery of many
              areas of modern numerical analysis and scientific computation. The
              principal
investigator will spend one year in residence at the Department of
              Physics of Penn State University, in a period of intense interdisciplinary
              collaboration and scientific interchange with a group of gravitational
              physicists.  In this period he will complement his expertise and experience in
              the numerical solution of partial differential equations with the physical
              background and understanding necessary to develop and implement new numerical
              approaches to the Einstein equations.  At the same time he will convey to his
              physicist collaborators recent advances in numerical analysis relevant to
              computational relativity.

The interdisciplinary collaboration will focus on
              two directions relevant to the simulation of gravitational radiation. First,
              the principal investigator and his collaborators will apply recent advances in
              finite element technology, especially adaptive tetrahedral mesh refinement
              algorithms and multigrid solvers, to the generation of physically relevant
              initial data satisfying the constraints implied by the Einstein equations.  The
              resulting initial data will be disseminated to the community of researchers
              working on numerical simulation of gravitational radiation.  Second, the
              principal investigators and his collaborators will study the application of new
              adaptive unstructured mesh methods for evolution problems, such as
              discontinuous Galerkin methods, to the Einstein equations.  These methods hold
              promise not only for the efficient resolution of the complex and highly
              variable solution structure, but also for dealing with a variety of other
              numerical problems that arise with the Einstein equations.

This project will
              bring about a quantum leap in the principal investigator's involvement with
              numerical relativity which will continue well beyond the period of the grant. 
              In addition to the ongoing collaboration, the principal investigator will offer
              a graduate course and give seminars and lectures, in order to recruit students
              and postdocs and to form a group in computational relativity.  Through
              conference presentations, lectures, and articles he will work to develop
              awareness and interest in the numerical analysis community of
the problems and
              challenges in numerical relativity.  This IGMS project is jointly supported by
              the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
