Title       : The Use of Virtual Reality Simulated Accidents to Improve Laboratory Safety
               Through Increased Safety Awareness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9972302

Award Number: 9972302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194541             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Scott Fogler sfogler@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Tens of millions of dollars are lost each year due to accidents in chemical and
              other laboratories, not to mention the accompanying pain and suffering.
              University laboratories are worse than industrial laboratories, both because
              the rate of accidents is much higher and because this is the training ground at
              which generations of future scientists learn their unsafe laboratory
              skills.

These accidents continue to occur in spite of extensive safety
              training programs already in place. One contributing factor is that people only
              have a limited memory and respect for written rules, and over time tend to
              either forget their safety training or become complacent about safety
              rules.

Experience has a much greater impact on the human memory than written
              text, and therefore people who have experienced laboratory accidents are more
              likely to remember those experiences, and follow safe laboratory practices as a
              result, than those who have not. Obviously, however, the idea of deliberately
              causing accidents in order to improve safety is not an acceptable
              solution.

Virtual Reality, VR, is a computer interface designed to deliver
              highly realistic "experiences" that are (ideally) indistinguishable from the
              real thing. Although this ideal has not yet been achieved, (and probably never
              will be), many high-end VR simulations are extremely believable, and even
              low-end systems produce experiences having a much greater impact on the user
              than written text.

This project is developing a series of VR-based
              laboratory accidents that give users valuable experience in the safety of their
              homes, offices, and computing laboratories. These modules graphically
              illustrate the consequences of disregarding safety rules, using the high impact
              medium of virtual reality. A World Wide Web framework provides for on-line VRML
              simulations, extensive support materials, and fast distribution of more
              rigorous executable programs. Formative and summative evaluations and site
              testing will determine the optimal effectiveness of virtual accidents for
              laboratory safety, in order to guide their development and eventual
              implementation.  The modules in the form of CD-ROMs will be distributed to a
              variety of schools at the end of the project.

