Title       : Ion Beam Induced Exfoliation of Silicon Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1999       
File        : a9972859

Award Number: 9972859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360001             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Mayer james.mayer@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Silvanus S. Lau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972859                                                                         
                                                                                             
                     Mayer                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                 This proposal addresses fundamental materials science issues
              underlying ion-beam induced exfoliation of silicon structures (ion-cutting)--a
              topic of interest in Si technology for 3-D integration of silicon based
              circuitry. As the density of devices on chips increases to a
              lithography-imposed limit, device interconnection in planar ICs is increasingly
              problematic. Integration of circuits in three dimensions is a possible future
              direction for increasing circuit packing density and functionality. In addition
              to homogeneous integration in vertically integrated chips (e.g. Si on Si),
              heterogeneous integration (e.g. Si with photonic, microwave or ferroelectric
              material), allows for the possibility of multiple functionality of the
              integrated structures. The project approach consists of four elements: 1) use
              of (111) and (110), in addition to (100) Si wafers, to investigate the process
              of patterned layer transfer. This approach should confirm if the cleavage
              planes of Si and the preferred location of implanted H platelet are correlated
              to yield an evenly transferred layer. 2) investigate the mechanism of enhanced
              exfoliation due to radiation damage. Co-implant Ar and H initially to test if a
              heavier mass of the co-implanted inert gas ion has a similar or improved effect
              as compared to He and B co-implanted with H. 3) Investigate the low temperature
              migration of H towards B and the effect in patterned layer transfer in
              providing an even cut. Investigate the rate of migration of H toward B by SIMS
              and/or forward scattering to track the motion of H atoms. 4) Study the combined
              effects of wafer orientation, radiation damage and electric fields to yield
              evenly cut patterned layers. The project is collaborative and will be carried
              out at both ASU and UCSD making use of the complementary nature of the combined
              facilities. At ASU, transmission electron microscopy and ion beam analysis is
              featured, and at UCSD, sample preparation and electrical evaluation are
              provided. There is the capability for ion beam analysis (Rutherford
              backscattering and channeling) at both institutions.
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              high potential technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new aspects of
              electronic/photonic devices. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from
              the research is expected to contribute new knowledge to improving the
              perform-ance and stability of advanced devices and circuits by providing
              increased fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing
              improved materials, and processing technologies.  An important feature of the
              program is the integration of research and education through the training of
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.

