Title       : Symmetry-Breaking and Pattern Formation, with Applications to Parametrically
               Excited Surface Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9972059

Award Number: 9972059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Silber m-silber@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972059
Silber

The research project addresses the formation of free surface
              standing wave 
patterns that arise when a container of fluid is vibrated
              vertically. This 
well-studied hydrodynamic problem represents a model system
              for 
studying pattern formation via symmetry-breaking parametric instability.
              
Understanding the dynamical mechanism for the experimentally observed
              
"superlattice patterns" is a primary focus for much of the research.  These
              
two-dimensional wave patterns are characterized as being
              spatially-
periodic, with structure on two disparate length scales.  The
              analysis will 
be based on methods of equivariant bifurcation theory.  The
              role of normal 
form symmetries, and spatial/temporal resonance in the pattern
              selection 
process will be elucidated by the analysis. Aspects of the research
              project 
will contribute to our understanding of the effects of weak external
              
symmetry breaking on equivariant bifurcation problems. It will also 
develop
              applications of some recent mathematical results on bifurcation of 
periodic
              solutions with spatio-temporal symmetries.  Finally, possible 
symmetry-based
              methods for controlling spatio-temporal patterns will be 
investigated.

The
              research project is aimed at a basic mathematical understanding of a 
variety
              of experimental observations of exotic wave patterns on the 
surface of a
              vibrated liquid. The results are expected to carry over to other
              
pattern-forming systems of technological interest, such as magnetic fluids
              
and nonlinear optical systems. The research will contribute to our basic
              
understanding of the effects of vibration on nonlinear systems with many
              
degrees of freedom; vibration that may be detrimental because it causes
              
instability or useful because it suppresses instability. The research will
              
also address control of the nonlinear pattern-formation process in certain
              
hydrodynamic, nonlinear optical and chemical reaction-diffusion systems.
              
The training of graduate students in applied mathematics is an integral part
              
of the research project.

