Title       : SUMMER INSTITUTE ON METHODS IN LINGUISTIC ANTHROPOLOGY, Champaign-Urbana,
               Illinois, July 19-31, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9972896

Award Number: 9972896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19363              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary B. Palmer gbp@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Brandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972896
Palmer

An Institute in Methods in Linguistic Anthropology will be
              held under the auspices of the 1999 Linguistic Institute. The Linguistic
              Institute, which is conducted every two years by the Linguistic Society of
              America, offers courses for college credit, sponsors concurrent scholarly
              conferences, and invites talks by eminent scholars for plenary sessions. This
              institute on methods will offer four two-week courses on methods in linguistic
              anthropology.  Students will earn one semester credit for each course
              completed.

The purpose of offering this institute on methods is to correct a
              perceived deficiency in the training of linguistic anthropologists. Because
              contemporary disciplinary structures are weak in linguistic anthropology, it is
              very hard for students to obtain practical training in the methods of their
              discipline. The methods institute will offer courses on linguistic elicitation,
              the analysis of gestures and body-language, the uses of videotape in linguistic
              anthropology, and the uses of computers in linguistic anthropology. The course
              on linguistic elicitation will include recording and transcription of topical
              lexicons and short narratives, discovery of native-language questions
              pertaining to the structure of nature and society, and the design of systematic
              sets of questions for the exploration of special topics. The course on the
              analysis gestures and body-language will show how this information can be used
              to discover cultural models of spatial information. The course on videotape
              will include methods of videotaping in the field, the analysis of videotaped
              communication, and the ethics of videotaping. The course on computers in
              linguistic anthropology will demonstrate how they can be used for the analysis
              of grammars, for the discovery of meaningful themes in data, for the discovery
              of historical relationships between languages, and for automatic
              translation.

Students in linguistic anthropology who attend the institute
              will also benefit from their association with the many outstanding scholars who
              attend the institute to teach and give talks at conferences and plenary
              sessions. The institute will help to foster the use of sound linguistic methods
              in the field of linguistic anthropology.


