Title       : Rare Earth Based Nanoparticles and Nanocomposites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9972035

Award Number: 9972035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Hadjipanayis hadji@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Q. Xiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Siu-Tat Chui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972035
Hadjipanayis

This project is co-supported by the Condensed Matter
              Physics Program and the Metals Program. The research is focused on small
              magnetic particles, with emphasis on rare-earth nanoparticles and
              nanocomposites. The work relies on a new sputtering technique which produces
              pure nanoparticles with controlled size while simultaneously embeding them in
              an inert matrix. The objectives are (1) to prepare nanoparticles of rare earth
              metals and rare earth intermetallic compounds and to study their fundamental
              and technological properties including size and surface/interface effects, and
              (2) to fabricate simple nanocomposite structures consisting of hard (soft)
              nanoparticles embedded in soft (hard) matrices and to study magnetization
              reversal mechanisms. The large surface area in nanoparticles, together with
              properties of the long range RKKY exchange interaction is expected to lead to a
              variety of magnetic structures and magnetic phenomena quite different from
              those found in the bulk forms of the magnetic materials. The nanocomposite
              materials will allow the study of magnetic hysteresis, including the domain
              wall pinning and nucleation of reverse domain structures.
%%%
This project is
              co-supported by the Condensed Matter Physics Program and the Metals Program.
              The work deals with the fundamental and technological properties of rare earth
              nanoparticles and nanocomposites. These particles, with a size of a fraction of
              a millionth of an inch, have properties which make them attractive for both
              ultrahigh density magnetic recording, and permanent magnet applications. This
              research offers excellent training and educational opportunity for graduate
              students and post-docs within a divers interdisciplinary program focused on
              magnetic materials. The students will be trained in state-of-the art methods,
              such as fabrication of nanoparticles, imaging with transmission electron
              microscopy, structural characterization with x-ray diffraction, and magnetic
              measurements with modern magnetometry techniques.

