Title       : Randomness in Waves and Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9972869

Award Number: 9972869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jared C. Bronski jared@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a number of problems in the general area of nonlinear
              
wave propagation. Most of the problems considered are attempts to 
assess
              the effects of random inhomogeneities in the medium of propagation 
on
              nonlinear structures such as solitons. In the case of linear media, 
it is
              well known that the effect of random inhomogeneities is to inhibit 
the
              propagation of waves, an effect known as Anderson localization. The proposer
              
will study the competition between the effect of the inhomogeneities, which
              tend to 
destroy a localized pulse such as a soliton, with the effect of
              nonlinearity,
which acts to hold a pulse together. In earlier work he found
              
interesting and complicated behavior, with different ``phases'' in which
              
one effect or the other is dominant. He will also begin a project involving
              the 
application of some of the tools of wave propagtion, most importantly the
              
Feynman path integral, to problems of the transport of a passive scalar,
              
such as a dye or tracer, by a fluid flow.   

The kind of problems
              addressed in this project are best 
illustrated by one important application,
              that of laser light propagating 
in an optical fiber. Very intense light in an
              optical fiber has the somewhat 
surprising property that it can interact with
              itself, and can actually focus
itself. This process of self-focusing leads to
              the formation of bright spots, 
called solitons, which propagate along the
              fiber without changing shape. These 
solitons are of great interest due to the
              possibility of using them as the 
basis for optical communications systems.
              This project studies how these 
kinds of structures are effected by variations
              in the fiber properties. 
The fundamental question is this: Do these solitons
              persist when the 
properties of the fiber are allowed to vary, or are they
              destroyed?


