Title       : Applied Probability and Time Series Modelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9972015

Award Number: 9972015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Brockwell pjbrock@stat.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972015

This research deals with problems in time series analysis related to
              the theory and application of non-linear models in both discrete and continuous
              time and to models for integer-valued data.  It is concerned with the
              development of such models, the study of their properties and the investigation
              of systematic techniques for fitting them to data.  Also considered are the
              large-sample properties of the estimated model parameters and the performance
              of model-based forecasts.  Many of the standard tools of linear time series
              analysis (e.g. the sample autocovariance function) have substantially different
              properties when the underlying process is nonlinear and this must be taken into
              account when they are used in conjunction with nonlinear models.  Nonlinear
              continuous time ARMA models have been found useful in the modeling of financial
              data.  Efficient estimation for these processes and for non-Gaussian and
              multivariate extensions of these are to be investigated to allow for the
              observed heavy-tailed behavior of financial time series and to permit the study
              of the dependence between related financial time series.  An alternative
              promising approach to the analysis of financial time series is to use all-pass
              linear filters driven by non-Gaussian noise as a possible alternative to the
              use of nonlinear models.  Integer-valued time series are of wide occurrence,
              for example the weekly numbers of accidents or diagnosed cases of some disease.
               As for the models considered above, the objective is to develop a systematic
              approach to the modelling and forecasting of such data.

In the last ten
              years there has been a steadily increasing realization that non-linear time
              series models provide much better representations of many empirically observed
              time series than the classical linear models.  Many of the properties of
              non-linear models are however not yet understood and there is a need for the
              development of new models accompanied by efficient model-fitting procedures. 
              At the same time there has been a surge of interest in continuous-time time
              series models, partly as a result of the very successful application of
              stochastic differential equation models to problems in finance, exemplified by
              the derivation of the Black-Scholes option-pricing formula and its
              generalizations.  This proposal is concerned with the development of non-linear
              models in both discrete and continuous time with particular emphasis on the
              application of these models to the representation and forecasting of financial
              data.  Another class of time series which arises frequently in applications and
              for which systematic analysis is relatively undeveloped are those in which the
              observations are integer-valued.  For these series also a systematic approach
              to model-building and forecasting is proposed.

