Title       : Biostratigraphy, Paleoceanography, and Community Dynamics of Siliceous
               Microfossils from the Silurian of the Canadian Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9972845

Award Number: 9972845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3994               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula J. Noble noblepj@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972845
Noble
	This study will fund the collection of geochemical and
              micropaleontological samples from the Silurian Cape Phillips Fm., Canadian
              Arctic.  It is part of a coordinated effort between U. S. and Canadian workers
              to extract the maximum amount of data from important and remote sections that
              can later be synthesized to produce a comprehensive story of the shelf margin
              history from Later Ordovician-early Devonian time.  The data collection in this
              project will address three specific problems:

1. Biostratigraphic tool
              development-The investigator has been working towards developing a
              biostratigraphic scheme for Ordovician-Silurian radiolarians, but lacks
              independent age control on Late Silurian sections.  The Cape Phillips Fm. has
              the best preserved Silurian radiolarians in the world, it is age is well
              constrained by graptolites, and it has the best possibility of providing the
              age control needed.  
2. Extinction/diversification events- Radiolarian
              response will be examined across two mid Silurian graptolite extinctions and
              subsequent diversifications.  Total organic Carbon, carbon isotope analysis of
              whole-rock inorganic and organic carbon, and elemental analysis of the
              non-carbonate fraction will be conducted across the extinction's to look for
              related geochemical signatures.
3. Siliceous spicules in paleoecology-The
              percentage of lithistid to hexactinellid spicules has previously been observed
              to vary with sea level rise in Late Ordovician sections.  Spicules will be
              examined in conjunction with the physical stratigraphy in order to test their
              sensitivity to local sea-level fluctuation.  These data will be tied into
              changes observed in the plankton community and the basin history.


