Title       : 'IGERT Formal Proposal: An IGERT Fellowship Program in Manufacturing Logistics'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9972780

Award Number: 9972780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3727121            (Estimated)
Investigator: S. David Wu david.wu@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Storer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick T. Harker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roy C. Herrenkohl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
              the establishment of a multidisciplinary, multi-institutional graduate training
              program of education and research in manufacturing logistics. The program will
              build upon the foundation of industry/university research carried out between
              the Manufacturing Logistics Institute at Lehigh University and the Wharton
              School of the University of Pennsylvania.  The proposed IGERT program will
              provide significant resources for both Ph.D. programs, transforming two
              traditionally strong programs into a multidisciplinary center for doctoral
              research in manufacturing logistics. The vision is to prepare Ph.D.'s capable
              of being global industrial or academic leaders in manufacturing logistics. 
              Manufacturing logistics refers to the planning, coordination and service
              functions required between the point where customer demands are determined and
              where they are fulfilled. The increasing international scope of these functions
              has created a need for broader-based research and education. This requires the
              integration of operations research, information technology, environmental
              sciences, and global logistics. Clear research guidelines are provided by a NSF
              workshop held at Lehigh in 1997. Program goals include achievement of
              multidisciplinary research proficiency, industry internships, international
              experiences, and leadership skills.  Thirty-six participants from various
              universities and industry will work together to achieve these goals. 

IGERT
              is an NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative,
              research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group of scientists
              and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of
              career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to
              develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend
              organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or
              institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for
              both training and research. In this second year of the program, awards are
              being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is
              supported by funds from the Directorates for Engineering, for Social,
              Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, and for Education and Human Resources.


