Title       : Numerical Analysis of Large Eddy Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9972622

Award Number: 9972622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Layton wjl+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972622

This proposal is to begin the mathematical development of large eddy
              simulation. Large eddy simulation (or LES) tries to predict the motion of the
              large structures in the turbulent flow of a fluid.  LES has been highly
              developed by the engineering computational fluid dynamics community since its
              inception in 1970. The present proposal is to provide a mathematical and
              numerical analytic foundation for the field. In particular, it includes:
              modeling-derivation of improved space filtered flow models, asymptotics-
              improved boundary conditions for such models, analysis-rigorous analytical
              study of the modeling error, numerical analysis-derivation and validation of
              algorithms for space filtered models, direct simulation- a new approach to LES
              of direct simulation of large eddies, simulation- computational testing and
              benchmarking of the models and algorithms under study.

Understanding
              turbulent flow is central to many important problems including environmental
              and energy related applications (global change, mixing of fuel and oxidizer in
              engines and drag reduction), aerodynamics (maneuvering flight of jet aircraft)
              and biophysical applications (blood flow in the heart, especially the left
              ventricle).  Turbulent flow is composed of coherent patches of swirling fluid
              called eddies.  These range in size from large storm systems such as hurricanes
              to the little swirls of air shed from a butterfly's wings. Large Eddy
              Simulation (LES for short) seeks to predict the motion of the largest and most
              important eddies uncoupled from the small eddies.  This uncoupling is
              important
because the large eddies are resolvable on a computational mesh (a
              collection of chunks of the physical problem) which can be handled by a
              supercomputer.  The proposed research centers on modeling the large eddies
              (such as storm fronts, hurricanes and tornadoes in the atmosphere) in turbulent
              flow, predicting their motion in computational experiments and validating
              mathematically the large eddy models and algorithms developed.  Current
              approaches to LES seem to be presently confronting some barriers to resolution,
              accuracy and predictability.  It seems likely that many of these barriers can
              be traced to the mathematical foundation of the models used, the boundary
              conditions imposed and the algorithms employed for the simulations.  The
              research undertaken is to develop these mathematical foundations as a guide for
              practical high performance computation.  This research promises to make it
              possible to extend the range of accuracy and reliability of predictions
              important to applications, such as those described above, where technological
              progress requires confronting turbulence.

