Title       : High Performance Integration of Advanced Tertiary Stores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9972212

Award Number: 9972212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170353             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell Long darrell@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rapidly growing disparity between processor and I/O performance must be
              addressed.  Two intriguing trends in storage systems are the appearance of new
              technologies that suffer from asymmetric read-write performance, and the
              widening gap between data transfer rate and access time.  A current example is
              a tertiary storage system with an automated library mechanism.  Such a system
              exemplifies the wide performance gap between data transfer rate and access time
              due to mechanical media handling.

The goal of this work is to address these
              issues through the development of techniques for high-performance integration
              of automated tertiary storage libraries.  These issues include:

1.
              Addressing the issue of read-write performance asymmetry, though the use of a
              log-structured, write-buffered architecture.

2. The minimization of
              mechanical access delays, by pre-grouping related data on the same media
              volume, as it is migrated from local storage.

This research will be of
              direct benefit to today's growing storage needs by allowing high-performance
              access to vast storage.  It addresses the important issue of latency reduction
              in cases where data rate far exceeds access speeds.  It also enables the
              efficient general-purpose adoption of emerging storage technologies, such as
              magneto-optical and volume holographic, by alleviating problems of read-write
              performance asymmetry.




