Title       : Thermo-mechanical Processes in Chemically Disordered Gels and Networks: Toward
               Molecular Design of Responsive Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9972138

Award Number: 9972138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene I. Shakhnovich shakhnovich@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972138
Shakhnovich
This award supports theoretical research on the
              thermo-mechanical response of disordered gels and networks.  The theoretical
              research at Harvard will be done in collaboration with experiments at MIT.  The
              thermo-mechanical response of disordered gels and networks plays a central role
              in materials science, polymer physics and biology, yet little is known about
              the molecular mechanisms which underly it.  A remarkable enhancement in
              elasticity, toughness, and yield strain has been observed in experimental
              studies of crosslinked random heteropolymers (RHP), e.g., vulcanized
              styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR), in contrast with its unvulcanized form. 
              However, a fundamental understanding of the role played by synthesis
              conditions, sequence heterogeneity and thermodynamical control variables in
              determining the network mechanical response is still lacking. 

A broad plan
              of activities that combine both theory and experiment for affecting an
              understanding of the complex response processes that occur in chemically
              disordered gels will be undertaken.  First, a statistical mechanical theory for
              the design of chemically disordered gels that consistently accounts for
              synthesis conditions will be developed.  The theory will be used to study the
              origin of the complex thermo-mechanical responsiveness observed in chemically
              disordered gels.  The goal is to develop and fully characterize the phase
              diagram of RHP gels at arbitrary synthesis, strain conditions, and final gel
              states.  The phase diagram will serve as a guide for a full understanding of
              thermo-mechanical properties of the RHP gels.

The theory will be applied to
              the following experimental scenarios: (1) The synthesis of chemical RHP gels,
              crosslinked at high temperatures, followed by annealing of the gel; (2) The
              synthesis of RHP gels at low crosslinking temperatures and heated
              post-synthesis; (3) RHP crosslinking near the microphase ordering transition of
              the pre-gel state, followed by annealing of the gel.  The role played by
              synthesis, thermodynamic, and molecular control variables in shaping the RHP
              gel phase diagram will be addressed. 

Also, detailed theoretical predictions
              will be outlined for the following set of experiments to analyze
              thermo-mechanical response of RHP gels: (1) RHP chemical gel low-temperature
              synthesis, followed by measurements of gel volume variations on heating; (2)
              RHP chemical gel crosslinking carried out in the strained state, followed by
              the heating/annealing of the RHP gel.  The role of solvent quality variations
              (especially electrostatic interactions) and thermodynamical control variables,
              sequence statistics, and syntheisis conditions in shaping the mechanical
              response of RHP gels will be addressed.  In particular, physical conditions
              which determine the order of the multiple volume transitions observed
              experimentally will be addressed. 

This award supports theoretical research
              on the thermo-mechanical response of disordered gels and networks.  The
              theoretical research at Harvard will be done in collaboration with experiments
              at MIT.  The thermo-mechanical response of disordered gels and networks plays a
              central role in materials science, polymer physics and biology, yet little is
              known about the molecular mechanisms which underly it.  A remarkable
              enhancement in elasticity, toughness, and yield strain has been observed in
              experimental studies of crosslinked random heteropolymers (RHP), e.g.,
              vulcanized styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR), in contrast with its unvulcanized
              form.  However, a fundamental understanding of the role played by synthesis
              conditions, sequence heterogeneity and thermodynamical control variables in
              determining the network mechanical response is still lacking. 




