Title       : Pfair-Scheduled Real-Time Systems: Extending Theory to Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9972211

Award Number: 9972211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Anderson anderson@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number CCR-9972211

Pfair-Scheduled Real-Time Systems: Extending
              Theory to Practice

James H. Anderson

The scope of real-time computing is
              increasing to include "next generation"
applications implemented across
              multiple processors.  Examples of such
applications include defense systems,
              avionics control systems, and
telepresence systems.  To develop such systems,
              effective techniques for
realizing timing constraints in multiprocessor
              systems are required.  A major
advance in the evolution of such techniques was
              recently achieved in the work
of Baruah and colleagues on Pfair scheduling. 
              Under Pfair scheduling, tasks
are required to execute at steady rates. 
              Executing tasks at steady rates has
important consequences.  For instance,
              Pfair scheduling algorithms have been
developed that optimally schedule
              periodic tasks on a multiprocessor in
polynomial time.  This is a problem that
              was previously viewed as being
almost undoubtedly NP-hard.  Unfortunately, the
              current theory of Pfair
scheduling is of limited practical value because it
              includes support only for
strictly periodic tasks that have no synchronization
              or data-sharing
requirements.  In this project, these shortcomings will be
              addressed by
developing a Pfair scheduling framework that includes support
              for
interprocess communication and synchronization, I/O, and fault
              tolerance.
This framework will be evaluated by implementing a Pfair-scheduled
              real-time
operating system, which will be used as a basis for experimental
              research
involving both synthetic and real-world applications.

