Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal:Education and Research Training in Structure & Function of
               Complex Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9972824

Award Number: 9972824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2699300            (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Dooley dmdooley@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gwen A. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research on the structure and function of complex biological
              systems. The program will focus on integrating knowledge and developing models
              of biological systems across organization levels and at multiple spatial and
              temporal scales. Systems to studied range from macromolecular complexes to
              networks of interacting nerve cells. Training will emphasize understanding
              complex biological systems in terms of the structures and interaction of their
              components, and will integrate advanced computational and mathematical
              approaches with a wide variety of experimental and analytical techniques. Key
              educational aspects are: two new, year-long, multidisciplinary courses for all
              students; lab rotations with a training focus, seminars in professional
              development and ethical practices of science, dual advisors, student
              involvement in collaborative, multidisciplinary research projects, a dedicated
              research seminar series, and intensive summer workshops led by investigators
              from other universities and industry. A highly productive group of faculty will
              participate, collectively spanning eight departments and three colleges of
              Montana State University-Bozeman. In conjunction with existing, successful MSU
              programs, special efforts are planned to increase the number of Native American
              students pursuing doctoral degrees in the biological sciences.

IGERT is an
              NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative,
              research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group of scientists
              and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of
              career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to
              develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend
              organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or
              institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for
              both training and research. In this second year of the program, awards are
              being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is
              supported by funds from the Directorates for Biological Sciences, for Computer
              and Information Science and Engineering, and for Education and Human
              Resources.

