Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: A NEW ERA IN ELECTRONICS EDUCATION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9972820

Award Number: 9972820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2172816            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard W. Schaper schaper@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Salamo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research in high performance miniaturized electronic devices.
              Advances in materials, processing, and packaging technologies must continue in
              the U.S. for the industry to be competitive in next generation devices. The
              U.S. needs to train a new generation of engineers and scientists skilled in the
              balancing act among the material, electrical, thermal, optical, mechanical,
              cost and manufacturing considerations that underlie high performance
              miniaturized electronic system design. The University of Arkansas provides this
              critical training through the integration of its high density electronic
              (HiDEC) fabrication facility with a unique multidisciplinary inter-college
              degree program. Students from diverse backgrounds are placed in an
              industry-like engineering group to integrate their academic education with
              project management training, while HiDEC state-of-the-art-equipment provides
              the students with interdisciplinary leading edge research opportunities. All
              students will receive, as part of their training, a multidisciplinary course
              curriculum, training in state-of-the-art fabrication and characterization
              facilities, thesis research designed to advance the state-of-the-art,
              experience working in interdisciplinary teams, writing and entrepreneurial
              skills, significant interaction with industry, and an international view of the
              high density electronics community. 

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
              to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs
              that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared
              to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides
              doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed
              multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational boundaries
              and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to establish a
              highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and research.
              In this second year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by funds from
              the EPSCoR program and from the Directorates for Engineering, for Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences (Office of Multidisciplinary Activities), for Social,
              Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, and for Education and Human Resources.

