Title       : IGERT: Penn State Biogeochemical Research Initiative for Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9972759

Award Number: 9972759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2741731            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Brantley brantley@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean E. Brenchley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine H. Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program at Penn
              State University in biogeochemical research and education. Microorganisms
              control the earth's environment through an astonishing array of chemical
              processes.  The presence of atmospheric O2, the acidification of mine-waste
              waters, and element cycling in soils and sediments are all products of these
              tiny chemical reactors.  Yet, geochemists often ignore biotic processes in the
              environment because of ignorance of biological systems. Possibly more than 99%
              of microbes on earth remain uncharacterized, perhaps because microbiologists
              often use geochemically unrealistic culturing media.  Unfortunately, few
              scientists are prepared to address biogeochemical questions due to
              cross-disciplinary differences in vocabulary, technique and scientific
              paradigm.  Thus biologists, geochemists and engineers each bring a narrow view
              to the study of environmental systems even though new techniques create great
              opportunities for advancement.  Superbly endowed with analytical and biological
              facilities, Penn State will address this problem by hosting a program that
              includes interdisciplinary graduate-student teams for research and
              cross-disciplinary course instruction, a Research Colloquium and student
              "charge cards" for access to analytical services.  Students will work within a
              team with advisors from two disciplines and will continue with funded
              biogeochemical research following IGERT support.  With the time and resources
              provided by IGERT, approximately 31 young scientists will employ modern
              analytical geochemistry and biogeochemistry to explore the interdisciplinary
              frontier.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the
              establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a
              diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage
              of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions
              with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate
              programs that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from
              several departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive,
              collaborative environment for both training and research. In this second year
              of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs
              that collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.
              This specific award is supported by funds from the Directorates for
              Geosciences, for Biological Sciences, for Engineering, and for Education and
              Human Resources.



