Title       : Combining Faculty Teamwork, Applied Learning Theory, and Information Technology:
               A Catalyst for Systemic Engineering Education Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2002   
File        : a9972758

Award Number: 9972758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419561             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Hanyak, Jr. hanyak@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian S. Hoyt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice F. Aburdene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Mastascusa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972758
Hanyak

This project addresses the systemic change needed in the
              engineering classroom by having
faculty collaborate in teams to re-envision
              their roles in the learning process with the ultimate goal of
(1) Learning and
              integrating instructional design techniques,
(2) Transforming the classroom
              into a cooperative learning environment and
(3) efficiently and effectively
              incorporating the use of information technology

Each of these change agents
              has been shown to be effective in a wide range of pedagogical studies.

To
              produce this type of change in the learning environment, the faculty team will
              draw upon the existing literature and experts in the fields of instructional
              practice, information technology, program assessment and collaboration, this
              faculty-based effort will (1) address the need for a curriculum/course design
              team to work from a shared set of common design principles, (2) apply the
              curriculum design principles to, develop a set of courses of diverse types, (3)
              use the. course materials by teaching the courses, (4) evaluate the course
              designs and refine those designs, and (5) disseminate and share the work by
              bringing an ever larger group of faculty onto the team.  Bucknell's initiative
              will focus on five primary areas of the curricula -- first-year engineering
              courses, the first discipline-specific courses, core engineering science
              courses, component analysis courses, and system design courses.

The project
              will involve a core of six faculty members from Bucknell's College of
              Engineering committed to developing and teaching courses designed around the
              principles central to this initiative.  Finally, Bucknell's faculty team will
              work actively to recruit 10 additional internal faculty and 30 faculty from
              other institutions to participate in two, one-week summer workshops during the
              third summer at Bucknell.  These workshops for the external teams will plant
              the seeds for systemic change at other institutions.  Each team will be
              assigned a Bucknell mentor/collaborator, and a team will collaborate regularly
              through video conferencing and email with that mentor and other Bucknell
              faculty during the academic year.

