Title       : Geometric Complexity Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9972568

Award Number: 9972568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Aronov aronov@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computational geometry began with the promise of unifying the multiplicity of
              efforts to solve geometric problems arising in diverse areas of computation
              such as statistics, biology, robot motion planning, graphics, image analysis,
              virtual reality, and data mining. In two decades, the field has produced a rich
              collection of tools for solving algorithmic problems of a geometric nature.  A
              recurring feature in the design and analysis of geometric problems is the
              strong link between the computational and combinatorial aspects of the
              questions under investigation. Understanding the combinatorial geometry behind
              the problem is fundamental to being able to find an efficient solution.  This
              project will explore combinatorial problems arising in geometric contexts in
              order to develop new tools and to refine tools already available for the design
              and analysis of geometric algorithms.

The primary goal is to develop
              powerful combinatorial tools which can be utilized to construct simpler and
              more efficient algorithms. It may be that there is considerable additional cost
              to analyze the complexity of these algorithms but this cost will be transparent
              to the end user.  The project will also investigate techniques that would make
              it possible to obtain more realistic estimates on the behavior of geometric
              algorithms on typical inputs. This might be accomplished, for example, by
              identifying some metrics that capture the "badness" of a data set. Such a
              metric might be able to distinguish worst-case situations from ``typical''
              ones, and provide an easy a priori 
estimate of how well a given computational
              procedure can handle a specific class of inputs.


