Title       : Dissertation Research: Population Genetic Aspects of Philopatry and Effective
               Population Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a9972743

Award Number: 9972743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9988               (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy A. Hoelzer hoelzer@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hoelzer 
9972743


Two fundamental predictions from the field of population
              genetics have yet to be satisfactorily tested in natural animal populations. 
              The first prediction is that philopatry (the tendency, common to social
              species, for individuals to settle and breed close to their place of birth)
              leads to increased genetic similarity of individuals in local areas and greater
              genetic differences between individuals from different localities.  The second
              prediction is that high variance in reproductive success (another tendency
              common to many social species, whereby some individuals produce more than their
              share of offspring while many others produce none) also increases the genetic
              similarity of individuals within a local population.  Cooperative breeding is a
              type of sociality seen in some birds and mammals; cooperative breeders are
              characterized by both greater philopatry and high variance in reproductive
              success relative to non-cooperative species.  This study uses two Australian
              bird species, the cooperatively breeding Brown Treecreeper (Climacteris
              picumnus) and the non-cooperative White-throated Treecreeper (Cormobates
              leucophaea), to test the predictions stated above.  The investigators will
              collect data on current levels of philopatry and variance in reproductive
              success in the two species, while simultaneously analyzing genetic data at
              varying spatial scales, ranging from local to landscape levels.  Unlike
              previous studies, this study takes advantage of recent improvements in
              lightweight radio transmitters to monitor individual movements, as well as
              recently developed genetic markers (microsatellite DNA) for assessing genetic
              similarities and differences between individuals. 

The predictions detailed
              above form two of the cornerstones of population genetics, yet this study will
              be the first to critically evaluate them outside of the laboratory.  Doing so
              will improve understanding of how the ecology, behavior, and genetics of a
              species interact at the population level to produce such an astonishing variety
              of social systems.  Specifically, these data will be used to test alternative
              theories regarding the evolution of altruistic behavior in general, and of
              cooperative breeding in particular.  The research will illuminate why one
              species becomes highly social, exhibiting many cooperative behaviors, while
              another closely related species remains relatively asocial, exhibiting
              predominately selfish behaviors.  Further, this study will promote a better
              understanding of how levels of sociality and cooperation in a species might
              affect the potential for further evolutionary change.

