Title       : IGERT: Training Program on Therapeutic and Diagnostic devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a9972770

Award Number: 9972770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2737012            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Doerschuk doerschu@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikolaos A. Peppas  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
              the establishment of a multidisciplinary, multi-institutional graduate training
              program of education and research in the area of Therapeutic and Diagnostic
              Devices (PTDD). The vision of PTDD is to be the premier source in the U.S. of
              well-educated engineers in the field of biomedical devices. The main mission of
              PTDD will be to prepare outstanding engineers with strong background in the
              fundamentals of engineering and significant crossdisciplinary expertise in the
              biomedical science area. The program is a collaborative effort of the Schools
              of Engineering, Veterinary Medicine, and Pharmacy of Purdue University, the
              School of Engineering and Technology of Indiana University-Purdue University at
              Indianapolis, and the School of Medicine of Indiana University. The objectives
              and strategies of the PTDD include strong industrial interaction with
              internships for the graduate participants; four new courses and three new
              teaching laboratories; and purchase of new equipment for the support of the new
              laboratories. Procedures will be adopted to advertise the new program and
              attract excellent graduate students with emphasis on attracting engineers from
              traditionally underrepresented areas. PTDD will have a major impact in
              educating students that will be able to design, analyze and implement new
              medical devices for therapy and diagnosis.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate
              programs that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be
              well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT
              provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new,
              well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational
              boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to
              establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and
              research. In this second year of the program, awards are being made to
              twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by
              funds from the Directorates for Engineering, for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences (Office of Multidisciplinary Activities), and for Education and Human
              Resources.

