Title       : Stability of Non-Autonomous and Random Linear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9972132

Award Number: 9972132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahesh G. Nerurkar nmahesh@crab.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972132
Nerurkar

The proposed research project deals with the study of
              stability and spectral 
behavior of a family of linear differential equations
              with time-dependent 
or random coefficients. Typically the underlying
              coefficients are 
`recurrent' (in particular quasi-periodic) functions of
              time. This includes 
examples of forced oscillations and (finite as well as
              infinite dimensional) 
quantum oscillators with external (time dependent)
              quasi-periodic and 
ergodic forcing fields. Many such examples have been
              numerically and 
theoretically investigated recently. Motivated by these
              examples, the 
project is geared towards finding precise analytical results.
              The standard 
method of proving stability results is via well established
              techniques like 
the KAM technique or the use of `hyperbolicity'. On the
              contrary, in this 
project we shall mainly focus on the unstable behavior. We
              analyze the 
stability properties of the linear system via the dynamical
              properties of 
suitable `skew-product flows' associated with it. For example,
              instability 
of forced oscillations is captured in terms of the absence of
              point spectrum 
of the associated quasi-energy operator and this in turn is
              reflected in the 
ergodic behavior of certain skew-product flows generated by
              the given 
linear system.  Consequently our technique is a blend of methods of
              
topological dynamics, ergodic theory, and ideas from control theory.
              
Viewing the desired perturbations as `controls with certain constraints'
              
allow us to apply methods of control theory to create chaotic behavior.
              
With this viewpoint and with the techniques developed thus far, the 
project
              plans to examine questions of genericity and prevalence of chaotic 
or
              unstable behavior, absence of zero Lyapunov exponents, ergodicity and
              
proximality for specific families of equations arising in physics and
              
engineering. Finally the non-linear implications of the theory developed
              
will be examined by developing results about time-dependent (or
              non-
stationary) linearization and normal forms.

This project investigates
              long term time evolution, particularly the 
unstable and chaotic behavior of
              certain classes of dynamical systems. 
Motivated by the recent theoretical and
              numerical study of forced quantum 
oscillators with random or quasi-periodic
              forcing, this project plans to 
provide the underlying analytical reasons and
              precisely predict the long 
term behavior of such systems. The systems we
              consider model several 
mechanisms of practical and theoretical interest such
              as (a) behavior of 
electrons and other `spin 1/2 particles' subjected to
              external random 
magnetic fields, (b) phonon conduction and polarization of
              light in optical 
fibers, and (c) propagation through random media such as
              (quasi)-crystals 
with irregularly distributed impurities. Typically most of
              the existing body 
of knowledge is about two extreme cases, namely either when
              the external 
forcing field has no randomness (e.g. is periodic) or is as
              random as can be 
(technically this means the process is stochastically
              independent). Using 
the analytical tools of ergodic theory, topological
              dynamics and control 
theory, the project will investigate finer details
              relating the chaotic nature 
of evolution of the system to the precise data
              about the nature of 
`correlation function' and `rate of mixing' of these
              random forcing 
processes. The project will attempt to find and identify the
              underlying 
features of these systems that determine various types of unstable
              behavior 
and obtain quantitative information about quantities such as the
              Lyapunov 
exponents which are indicators of the degree of chaos. Some
              by-products 
of our investigations will have important implications to
              engineering 
disciplines such as filtering theory and to systems and control
              engineering.

