Title       : Approximations and Modeling with Zonal Functions on Spheres and Euclidean Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9972004

Award Number: 9972004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52002              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Ragozin rag@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5941,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Ragozin plans to investigate several topics connected withmultivariate
              polynomial and generalized spline (energy minimizing)approximations, numerical
              integration, and fast computational methods for multivariable potentials and
              related functions.  These investigationswill aim to develop methods for
              approximating functional relationshipsamong (large) finite data sets when the
              underlying data points are drawn from finite dimensional spheres or other
              compact spaces with a high degree of homogeneity, or from high dimensional
              Euclidean spaces.  The high degree of symmetry and homogeneity of spheres and
              Euclidean spaces,and the use of radial functions, which respect much of the
              symmetry and homogeneity, provide a major unifying feature of the different
              investigations. In each of these domains there exist a well defined and
              effectively computable set of (invariant) polynomial kernels whichdepend on
              many fewer parameters then the underlying space, but which can and will be used
              to develop the sought after approximation, integration and fast computational
              processes. The development of explicit approximation processes on spheres and
              Euclidean spaces, together with computable bounds on the errors in these
              processes, will enhance the infrastructure for practical scientific
              computation.  By reliance on radial function expansions, practical computations
              based on scattered data sets become feasible.  The fast computational methods
              forpolyharmonic radial functions in Euclidean spaces will extend
              existingmethods for thin-plate splines in ordinary three space, and
              facilitateeffective  application of multivariate Laplacian spline interpolation
              andsmoothing techniques, including cross-validation, to extremely large data
              sets.Many scientific and engineering problems involve modelling the
              complexfunctional relationships between two, three or more
              continuousquantities. The aim of this research is to develop new
              mathematicaltechniques to approximate such relationships by simpler
              functions,together with estimates for how close these approximations come to
              thetruth. By use of combinations of simple functions which depend only onthe
              distance between two points in space or on the surface of a spheresuch as the
              earth, this work hopes to provide highly efficient means ofapproximation and
              modelling; computational codes which exploit thesemethods should be able to
              deal in practical time with extremely largedata sets.  For example, existing
              methods based on exact modelling require several quadrillion operations for
              sets containing 100,000 points. Methods based on the approximations developed
              here will reduce this by afactor of a billion, so only several million
              operations are required.Todays computers can rapidly handle this number of
              operations.
