Title       : Building on Youngsters' Strengths in a Diverse Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a9972791

Award Number: 9972791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $511300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith R. Blau jrblau@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Although native-born and immigrant minority youngsters are often educationally
              disadvantaged because of household poverty, discrimination, and high levels of
              community disorganization, it is also evident that many flourish. This study
              emphasizes the ways in which distinctive backgrounds can be sources of
              strengths for youngsters and for young adults, and how such strengths bolster
              resilience and enhance the likelihood of successful outcomes.

Within this
              framework, three perspectives bear on the research. One deals with group
              differences in values and motivations and how such differences affect outcomes.
              Because race, ethnicity, and gender differences are related to variation in
              motivation and learning styles, students are academically challenged in
              different ways. This study demonstrates how cultural values shape motivation
              and learning styles, and also how school and young adult outcomes are affected
              by whether such differences are recognized in families and schools. Moreover,
              motivational levels are related to achievement (learning) trajectories, but
              minority youth and females are particularly susceptible to "shock" (such as a
              family death or changing schools) that throw them off their trajectories. Thus,
              achievement is treated as a dynamic process that involves group variation in
              values, changing levels of motivation, and how students rebound from shocks to
              regain their learning trajectories.  

The second perspective relates to
              group differences in social attachments. Such attachments are defined in terms
              of types of relationships - peers, neighbors, teachers, family members, and
              others  and also in terms of their salience, or importance. There are group
              differences with respect to profiles involving types and salience of
              relationships, and, these, in turn, affect school outcomes. The third
              perspective relates to school and neighborhood, or contextual, variation, and
              how such variation directly and indirectly affects achievement. Contextual
              variation is defined in relational terms, including diversity (heterogeneity),
              inequality, and consolidated inequality (when inequality is systematically
              related to group differences). School and neighborhood characteristics that are
              generally used in education studies, as well as new measures of neighborhood
              characteristics, are included. 

The research uses Department of Education
              data sets: National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS), the High School
              Effectiveness Study (HSES), and the Common Core of Data (for schools).
              Neighborhood characteristics are drawn from the 1990 US census (zip-code level)
              and from IRS (zip-code level) data on community organizations.

New
              procedures are used to measure youths' profiles of types of relationships and
              their salience,  to parameterize contextual effects, and to analyze achievement
              trajectories. Achievement and school outcomes are considered in terms of
              processes that involve values, motivation, and attachments nested within
              family, school, and neighborhood environments. The research uses fuzzy-set and
              dynamic, multi-level modeling techniques to capture these processes.

