Title       : Quantitative Imaging and Analysis of Grain-Boundary Segregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9972670

Award Number: 9972670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519490             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Williams dbw1@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Rez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972670
Williams

This research explores why grain boundary segregation
              results in intergranular failure in some cases, but in other cases enhances the
              cohesive strength of the boundary.  Recent advances in electron energy-loss
              spectrometry (EELS) allow changes in the electronic structure of the atoms in
              the vicinity of grain boundaries to be studied.  Composition can be examined at
              the nanometer level and related to the presence or absence of segregation. 
              Studies of several segregating systems (Cu-Bi, Cu-Sb, Cu-Ag, and Ni-S) show a
              consistent trend relating the changes in the electron energy-loss spectrum to
              changes in the electronic structure of atoms close to the boundary.  In these
              systems, spectrum changes are absent when there is no segregation and when the
              segregant does not embrittle the material.  Theoretical studies are carried out
              to model the relationship between the changes in the electron spectrum and the
              changes in the bonding of the boundary atoms to the segregant.  These models
              are tested in experimental co-segregation studies where the presence of a
              second element can counteract the embrittling effects of the first segregant,
              in a manner that is not completely understood at the present time.
%%%
The
              properties of engineering materials are often controlled by their grain
              boundaries, particularly the number of boundaries (i.e. grain size) and the
              chemistry of the boundaries.  Because engineering materials are rarely, if
              ever, pure, the segregation of deliberately introduced alloying elements or of
              undesirable impurities can change the chemistry of the boundaries.  This
              segregation can either enhance or detract from the properties of the
              material.
***

