Title       : RUI: Correlated Electrons in Multilayer Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9972332

Award Number: 9972332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Hanna hanna@diamond.boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9162,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972332
Hanna
This is a grant in the Research at Undergraduate Institutions
              (RUI) program.  The proposal has two main goals: (1) carry out basic research
              on the novel properties of correlated electrons in multilayer semiconductors,
              and, (2) enhance undergraduate science education at Boise State University. 
              The latter will be done by providing undergraduates with research opportunities
              in physics and by strengthening the overall research environment.

The
              proposed research focuses on the effects of electron interactions in multilayer
              semiconducting devices.  Continual advancements in the ability to engineer the
              growth of semiconductor devices on the atomic scale have resulted in
              high-quality multilayer semiconductor structures whose carrier densities and
              layer separations are so small that interlayer correlations between electrons
              have important and measurable consequences.  This is especially true in the
              quantum Hall (QH) regime, where the application of a strong perpendicular
              magnetic field to two-dimensional electron (or hole) gases quenches the kinetic
              energy of the particles and greatly enhances the interactions.

Thos research
              will contribute to the understanding of the nature and experimental signatures
              of interlayer correlations in multilayer QH systems.  Previous work by the PI
              was the first to investigate the effects of interlayer exchange in
              realistically modeled triple-layer systems.  The calculations proposed here
              include: the effects of in-plane magnetic fields on double-and triple-layer QH
              systems; the effects of interlayer coherence in semiconductor superlattices;
              and, the effect of the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in QH bilayers on
              resistivity and Coulomb drag.

This is a grant in the Research at
              Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program.  The proposal has two main goals: (1)
              carry out basic research on the novel properties of correlated electrons in
              multilayer semiconductors, and, (2) enhance undergraduate science education at
              Boise State University.  The latter will be done by providing undergraduates
              with research opportunities in physics and by strengthening the overall
              research environment.

 

