Title       : Refined Approximation of Tail Probabilities, Expectation and Exponential Bounds
               for Partial Sums and Self-Normalized Martingales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9972417

Award Number: 9972417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Klass jane@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9260,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The investigator plans to do work in two principal areas, sums and
              self-normalized sums. He (together with a co-author) intends to write up a very
              accurate result which can be applied to the approximation of tail probabilities
              of both real-valued and Banach space-valued partial sums of independent 
              variates. Armed with certain functions defined from the marginal distributions
              of the variates, approximations of partial sum quantiles and p-th moments of
              great precision should follow. Secondly, the proposer (and co-authors) will
              address questions concerning exponential moment and tail probability upper
              bounds for self-normalized martingales. It is anticipated that statistical
              applications will occur as a consequence.
	Probabilistic and statistical
              issues arise in a broad variety of theoretical and applied contexts. Most
              commonly the issues involve the probability of an event, the expectation of a
              random function, or a test of hypothesis. Real world applications of such
              results are wide-spread, extending from theory to data analysis in the social
              sciences, pharmaceuticals, finance, economics, engineering, the physical
              sciences, and the performance of algorithms. The investigator has worked in the
              area of sums of independent random variables for many years. He (together with
              co-authors) now is pursuing results of very refined precision. Included in this
              list are substantial improvements in the approximation of tail probabilities of
              partial sums and the location of their quantiles, expectation bounds, plus tail
              probability, exponential and moment generating function bounds for so-called
              self-normalized martingales.
