Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Multidisciplinary Training Program in Computational
               Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9972762

Award Number: 9972762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2527630            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Carley kathleen.carley@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
              the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of education
              and research in Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems
              (CASOS). In the past decade the computational social sciences (e.g.,
              computational organization theory) and the social computer sciences (e.g.,
              multi-agent systems) have emerged. This has resulted in a unified perspective
              on groups, organizations, institutions and societies as intelligent adaptive
              agents composed of networks of socially-embedded, intelligent and adaptive
              agents that can be reasoned about, and supported by, computationally and
              socially sophisticated models and agents. The CASOS program will prepare
              students for this field by teaching them how to use computers to understand the
              complexities of human behavior and how to use knowledge of humans as social
              actors to improve computational agents. Program features include: integrated
              social and computer science curriculum; studio courses emphasizing real-world
              corporate concerns, model design, implementation and validation; mentoring
              program; research practicum, proposal competition; distance learning; and
              integrated summer workshop and conference. Classes and research will take place
              in the classroom/office of the future -- a distributed intelligent space where
              people have ubiquitous access to and can provide/receive information wherever,
              whenever and to/from whomever they want in an unbounded network of agents
              (human, webbots, robots, corporations, etc.); thus, reducing classroom/research
              barriers, enabling real-time computational analysis, data collection, and model
              validation, and increasing interaction with faculty and students at other
              institutions.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the
              establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a
              diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage
              of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions
              with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate
              programs that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from
              several departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive,
              collaborative environment for both training and research. In this second year
              of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs
              that collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.
              This specific award is supported by funds from the Directorates for Social,
              Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, for Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering, and for Education and Human Resources.

