Title       : Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9972748

Award Number: 9972748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianna A. Shubov mshubov@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane L. Winer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to request support for a one year visit to the
              Flight Systems Research Center at the Electrical Engineering Department of
              UCLA. The goals of this visit are the following: a) to study in depth 
the
              engineering and physical principles of aircraft wing modelling while working
              together with the research team of the Center; b) to continue work on the joint
              project which consists of theoretical, numerical and experimental study of a
              new one-dimensional aircraft wing model developed at the Center; c) to
              participate
in the designing of a new two-dimensional wing model and its
              theoretical and numerical investigation; d) to create a program for future
              research on mathematical problems arising in aircraft engineering; e) to
              develop a contribution to the graduate program in the form of new special
              course and seminar topics for both engineering and mathematical
              students.

One of the main directions of research conducted by the Center at
              UCLA in collaboration with NASA Dryden Flight Research Center is the problem of
              flutter supression in the aircraft wings. (Flutter is a special type of
              instability occurring in an aircraft wing at a specific speed. Damage inflicted
              by flutter results in significant 
cost to the aircraft industry.) Although an
              extensive experimental and numerical study of flutter phenome-
non has been
              carried out, the design of new efficient theoretical models and their
              analytical investigation are still open problems. The solution of those
              problems is essential for providing practical recommendations to aircraft
              industry engineers.  The PI has been in active collaboration with the Center
              for almost two years working on the asymptotic and spectral analysis of
              one-dimensional wing model. This work is the culminating point of the research
              conducted by the PI in recent years on spectral and asymptotic analysis of
              nonselfadjoint operators and its applications to control and stabilizaton of
              elastic structures.  The aforementioned research has been supported by five
              grants ( two from NSF and three - from the Advanced Research Program of Texas),
              16 papers have been published in archival journals, 4 papers are accepted and 3
              more papers - submitted, 18 invited talks have been presented at International
              conferences and other universities.  To successfully continue this research and
              to contribute to the development of a new two-dimensional, physically
              realistic, model of an aircraft wing, it is essential for the PI to spend a
              significant amount of time at the Center  acquiring experience in engineering
              and collaborating with the team of engineers.  This IGMS project is jointly
              supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
              Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
