Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Sound Production in Spiny Lobsters (Palinuridae):
               Morphological Constraints and the Evolution of Signal Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9972597

Award Number: 9972597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9812               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Nowicki snowicki@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila N. Patek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Organisms communicate using a diversity of signals, but there is relatively
              little known of the factors that contribute to this diversity.  One approach to
              addressing this question is to examine how the morphology involved in signal
              production may influence the way these signals can change over evolutionary
              time.  Limits on morphological variation (morphological constraints) during the
              evolution of a communication system are rarely addressed because
              signal-producing morphology is often too complex to be analyzed.  Spiny
              lobsters (Palinuridae) offer an important model system because both morphology
              and signal features can be easily quantified and because there is significant
              variation across this clade of organisms.  This proposed research addresses two
              specific aims: (1) to construct a combined morphological and molecular
              phylogeny of the spiny lobsters and (2) to use comparative methods to test for
              correlations between sound-producing morphology, the surrounding antennal
              morphology and signal features.  Results from these studies will be used to
              test hypotheses for how constraints on morphological variation influence signal
              diversity.  Through an understanding of how constraints on morphological
              variation can lead to patterns of signal diversity, this research will offer
              novel insights into variation in the structure and function of communication
              systems.



