Title       : IGERT: Computational Molecular Biology Training Group
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9972653

Award Number: 9972653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2416597            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Voytas voytas@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vasant G. Honavar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan F. Wendel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick S. Schnable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research
in computational molecular biology. Due to advances in
              molecular biology over the past fifteen years, biological questions can now be
              approached at new levels of complexity. Rather than dissecting individual
              components of a biological system, system-wide analytical approaches can be
              pursued. A critical factor in this paradigm shift has been the availability of
              vast amounts of genomic sequence and expression data. Iowa State University
              will establish a Computational Molecular Biology Training Group to provide
              graduate students with the necessary skills to explore complex biological
              questions. This group will be composed of 25 investigators with diverse areas
              of expertise, including evolutionary, molecular and structural biology,
              computer science, mathematics and statistics. Students will be trained to
              discern biological information from genome sequence and expression data and
              will focus on four interrelated areas of research: genomics, bioinformatics,
              genome evolution, and macromolecular structure and function. By infusing
              training in the biological sciences with the analytic perspective of
              mathematics and computer science, Iowa State University will create an exciting
              learning environment in which to prepare students for the challenges and
              opportunities presented by the post-genomics era.

IGERT is an NSF-wide
              program intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based
              graduate programs that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers
              to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options.
              IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new,
              well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational
              boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to
              establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and
              research. In this second year of the program, awards are being made to
              twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by
              funds from the Directorates for Biological Sciences, for Computer and
              Information Science and Engineering, for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              (Office of Multidisciplinary Activities), and for Education and Human
              Resources.

