Title       : Fast Algorithms for Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9972980

Award Number: 9972980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198105             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoram Bresler ybresler@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              FAST ALGORITHMS FOR TOMOGRAPHY

PI: Yoram Bresler

Tomography, or the
              reconstruction of an object from a collection of its line integrals from
              various directions (known as its Radon transform) is a well-studied problem. 
              Perhaps most importantly, it is the principle underlying most of the key
              diagnostic imaging modalities including x-ray Tomography (CT), PET and SPECT,
              certain forms of MRI, and emerging techniques such as electrical impedance
              tomography (EIT) and optical tomography.  Tomography is also the fundamental
              principle in numerous other problems and applications in science and
              engineering -- from electron microscopy of subcellular structures and
              nondestructive evaluation (NDE) in manufacturing, through geophysical
              exploration and environmental monitoring, to remote sensing by synthetic
              aperture radar (SAR).  The most widely used technique for solving the
              tomographic problem is known as Filtered Backprojection (FBP), and is
              ubiquitous in the realm of medical x-ray CT. But the FBP method is slow, and
              new technologies are making data acquisition possible at rates that cannot be
              handled by the FBP method and existing computer technology.  This research
              involves new ways of solving the tomography problem that use a very small
              fraction of the effort required by the FBP.

The investigator is studying a
              number of promising techniques for accelerating the FBP reconstruction
              algorithm.  He has discovered that the Radon transform can be factored in a
              special way, and that this new factorization leads to an O(N^2 log N) method
              (for reconstructing an N X N image from N projections) for solving the
              tomographic problems, as opposed to the FBP method, which is an O(N^3) method. 
              For large N, as are typically encountered in third or fourth generation x-ray
              CT systems, this represents a speedup of nearly two orders of magnitude.  This
              research also involves the use of this factorization to accelerate solutions to
              more complicated tomographic problems, in which data are missing or
              distorted.

