Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Nanophases in the Environment, Agriculture, and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9972741

Award Number: 9972741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2661738            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra Navrotsky anavrotsky@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              education and research at the interface of materials science and environmental
              science.  Nanophases, small particles with very high surface areas, occur
              ubiquitously and interact strongly with living matter.  The underlying
              characterization and fundamental science of nanomaterials is similar wherever
              such particles occur.  The NEAT program will educate students in four
              interrelated areas: the fundamental science and technology of nanophases, the
              transport and transformation of nanophases in the environment, the interaction
              of nanophases with the biosphere, and the policy issues raised by nanoparticles
              in the environment.  Students will come from backgrounds as diverse as solid
              state physics, geology, and microbiology.  A set of courses, lab rotations,
              internships, and research opportunities will educate these students broadly in
              more than one discipline.  With the California State College system, the
              community colleges, and other educational institutions, we will recruit
              students from a wide range of cultural and economic backgrounds.   The
              demographics of the State of California, and of the Central Valley agricultural
              area in particular, provides a rich pool of potential applicants from
              underrepresented groups.  We will build strong interactions with Livermore and
              Sandia National Laboratories, the U. S. Geological Survey, and industrial
              partners.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the
              establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a
              diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage
              of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions
              with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate
              programs that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from
              several departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive,
              collaborative environment for both training and research. In this second year
              of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs
              that collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.
              This specific award is supported by funds from the Directorates for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Office of Multidisciplinary Activities),
              Sciences, for Biological Sciences, for Engineering, and for Education and Human
              Resources.

