Title       : Practical Training in Emission Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9972906

Award Number: 9972906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard A. Mair bam@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Glover  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project provides practical training in medical imaging instrumentation,
              data acquisition, and image formation in the modalities of positron emission
              tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and
              magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The principal investigator (PI) will obtain
              this training by spending a sabbatical year in the Department of Radiology at
              Emory University School of Medicine.  The training provided will equip the PI
              with new research tools and information that will lead to new mathematical
              models and algorithms for image formation, enhancement, and analysis.   Of
              particular importance is the development of correct models for errors in data
              obtained in a clinical setting from these modalities.   In addition to the
              training received, this grant will result in the formation of large databases
              of data obtained from real PET,  SPECT, and  MRI machines.  This data will be
              taken to the PI's home institution and used to analyze various methods of image
              reconstruction, and enhancement. New mathematics courses and  
 educational
              materials in medical imaging will also be developed.  Furthermore, the research
              capabilities of the PI will be expanded to include collaboration  with
              radiologists on practical problems they face in these imaging modalities.  
              This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
