Title       : Mechanisms of Ferroelasticity and Ferroelastic Transformations in Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9972114

Award Number: 9972114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Waltraud M. Kriven w-kriven@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972114
Kriven

The objective of this project is to investigate mechanisms of
              ferroelasticity in ceramics in the context of ferroelastic phase
              transformations producing domains and their mutual arrangements in resulting
              microstructures. The current generation of actuators are based on inducing a
              mechanical response in ferroelectric materials by a variety of electrical,
              pyro-, piezo- or optical stimuli.  These stimuli initiate phase transformations
              in structures that are usually orthorhombic perovskites.  Normally the
              accompanying volume and/or unit cell shape changes are extremely small (much
              less than 1%) so that the strains delivered for actuation are of the order of
              10E-4.  This small strain is usually of little concern and often beneficial in
              sensor-actuator systems that are cycled extremely rapidly.  However, there are
              applications where there is a need for actuators that are capable of delivering
              large mechanical forces, both at ambient and at high temperatures.  One
              approach to achieving this goal is through the phenomena of ferroelasticity and
              ferroelastic transformations.  An understanding of the domain rearrangement
              mechanisms and their limitations will enable us to address the feasibility of
              mechanical poling of ferroelastic domains in non-perovskites, so as to produce
              textured or crystallographically aligned thick films of large force-generating
              actuator materials.  The use of non--perovskite crystal structures that are
              accompanied by significant volume and unit cell shape changes is the key to the
              large forces generated.  In this project, single crystals as well as
              polycrystalline specimens will be prepared and examined.  The crystal
              structures, lattice parameters and thermal expansion coefficients of phases in
              a ferroelastic transformation sequence will be determined.  Where possible, the
              high temperature crystal structures will be analyzed in situ, in air, at
              temperatures up to 2,000 deg C, using X-ray diffraction and synchrotron
              radiation, with some collaborative neutron diffraction studies.  Once armed
              with the basic crystallographic data, the investigation will be quantitative in
              studying mechanisms of ferroelastic domain rearrangements and deformation
              twinning as seen by a range of electron microscopy techniques (TEM, CBED, HREM
              and SEM, EBSP).  The experimental observations will be compared with the
              theoretical mechanisms proposed in the literature and by the PI.  In choosing
              materials, primarily oxides materials are considered because of their prolific
              phase transformations, that are presumably due to the mixed ionic-covalent type
              bonding comprising their crystal structures.  Initially some known or suspected
              ferroelastic transformations will be examined as model systems to understand
              the phenomena of ferroelasticity and ferroelastic transformations.  Later the
              search will be expanded to the forefront of knowledge in this field, and a
              choice will be made from known displacive transformations that have potential
              technological applicability. 
%%%
A comprehensive investigation of
              ferroelasticity and ferroelastic transformation mechanisms, using a variety of
              complementary techniques is planned. This promising approach may lead to large
              force, ambient and high temperature actuation for use in advanced technological
              applications.  The PI will be collaborating with researchers at various
              national laboratories and at other US and international institutions in this
              project that will also involve undergraduate students.
*** 

