Title       : Innovative Algorithms and Techniques for Large Scale Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a9972533

Award Number: 9972533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed H. Sameh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vivek Sarin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ananth Grama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to develop a variety of robust, effective, and parallelizable
              solvers and preconditioners for sparse linear systems arising from finite
              element modeling and dense linear systems arising from boundary element
              modeling approaches. As is evidenced from our preliminary results, a careful
              cross-breeding of techniques from these two areas is capable of yielding the
              breakthrough needed in designing effective parallel preconditioners and
              solvers. The techniques proposed for sparse linear systems are based on a
              hierarchy of representations using block low-rank matrices and multipole
              approximations of the inverse. The project will study the implications of these
              techniques for compression schemes used in approximate dense linear system
              solvers as well. The project will also investigate algebraic multilevel
              techniques for sparse linear systems in which hiearchical representations are
              used to obtain an alternate preconditioned system. 

Parallel formulations of
              all these techniques will be developed along with theoretical estimates for
              convergence and parallel performance. In addition to these, this study will
              investigate projection-based 
techniques that affect preconditioning
              implicitly through a set of concurrent projections onto appropriate subspaces.
              Such techniques include row-projection methods and are robust forms of
              approximate 
inverse preconditioners.

