Title       : Preconditioning Techniques for Algebraic Equations Arising from Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a9972490

Award Number: 9972490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard C. Elman elman@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dianne P. O'Leary  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Elman

This project concerns the development, analysis and testing of
              techniques
of numerical linear and nonlinear algebra for solving systems of
              equations
arising from discretization of a collection of partial differential
              equations.
The emphasis will be on preconditioning strategies and their
              combination 
with Krylov subspace iterative methods for linear and nonlinear
              systems.
These ideas will be applied to several examples of differential
              equations,
primarily coming from models of fluid dynamics.  Our focus will be
              on two 
types of problems, the saddle point problems produced by direct
              discretization 
of the primitive formulation of the incompressible
              Navier-Stokes equations, 
and the convection-diffusion equation.  These have
              been chosen because they 
are used in numerous engineering models of fluid
              flow, and because they contain
challenging mathematical and computational
              qualities that make them difficult 
to solve.  In particular, accurate
              discretization in two and three dimensions 
leads to large sparse systems of
              algebraic equations that are nonsymmetric,
and for the first problem,
              nonlinear and indefinite.  In addition, they have 
associated with them
              fundamental parameters such as Reynolds numbers and 
discretization mesh
              widths that, for the solution of problems of practical 
interest, cause many
              algorithms to converge slowly and require large-scale 
systems to attain
              accuracy.  Our goals are to extend and analyze certain 
preconditioning
              techniques designed for saddle point problems.  Plans include 
demonstration
              of the effectiveness of these preconditioners for general mixed 
finite
              element discretizations, development of rigorous mathematical techniques
for
              analyzing convergence, demonstration of their usefulness in realistic
              
settings involving general meshes and domains, and incorporation of
              fast
algorithms for the convection-diffusion equation into the solution
              process.

The purpose of developing computational algorithms is to enable the
              
efficient numerical solution of differential equations used in mathematical
              
modelling.  The use of such models is becoming an increasingly
              important
component in manufacturing and design (for example, of aerospace
              vehicles,
automobiles, cooling devices for nuclear devices) and in enhancing
              our
understanding of critical natural phenomena (for example, blood flows
              and
dispersal of environmental pollutants).  Understanding these
              phenomena
through purely experimental techniques is prohibitively expensive
              or
impossible, whereas the use of mathematical models introduces a basic
              
understanding of the physics by providing approximations to quantities
such
              as flow rates and pressures.  This leads to the identification of 
promising
              design features, such as wing shape in airplane manufacturing.  
(For example,
              many of the design decisions for the Boeing 777 jet were made 
using
              computational studies.)  Accurate solution of the mathematical models 
is only
              feasible, however, if reliable and fast solution algorithms are 
available. 
              The goal of this project is to develop such algorithms.


