Title       : Enhancing Undergraduate Participatory Research in Environmental Science with
               Field-Based Data Acquisition Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9972501

Award Number: 9972501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18530              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Tabbutt tabbuttK@elwha.evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Anthony  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerardo Chin-Leo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Teaching the theoretical interrelationships between biological, physical, and
              chemical systems to undergraduate environmental science students without
              practical field-based research to demonstrate these connections presents a
              pedagogic problem in the environmental sciences.

This project is using TI
              Calculator Based Labs (CBL) coupled with hand-held calculators and analog and
              digital Vernier probes. The memory capacity of the calculators allows up to
              10,000 data points to be logged from five probes simultaneously. Although
              designed for the lab, these data loggers and probes are being used in the field
              in this project. By deploying a network of data loggers and a variety of probes
              to collect data in a wide range of environmental parameters (precipitation,
              potention metric surface elevation, dissolved oxygen, dissolved ions, light
              intensity, pH, humidity, temperature), extensive data sets can be developed and
              spatial and temporal changes in conditions can be assessed, interpreted, and
              modeled by the students.  

The approach of using a network of data loggers
              has been incorporated as an integral part of two scheduled interdisciplinary,
              team-taught academic programs offered during the two-year grant period. 
              Students, ranging from freshmen to seniors, are designing research projects,
              deploying the data loggers, collecting and assessing the data, and constructing
              conceptual and computer models which mimic the natural systems. This
              participatory research is helping the students develop their critical thinking
              and quantitative skills and leading to a more comprehensive understanding of
              natural systems.  This approach follows the recommendations in Ann McNeal and
              Charlene D'Avanzo, "Student Active Science, Models of Innovation in College
              Science Teaching," (Fort Worth, TX: Saunders College Publishing, 1997).

