Title       : The University of Tennessee Engage Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a9972944

Award Number: 9972944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199569             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Parsons jparsons@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janie E. Seat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel C. Yoder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Pionke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fred E. Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              P. Gary Klukken  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972944
Parsons

The Engage program is a successful and exciting new approach
              to first year engineering studies at the University of Tennessee.  This
              National Science Foundation project will a) fund transition costs to scale the
              program up from pilot courses to the total engineering freshman class, b) add
              educational enhancements and enrichment programs to the plan, c) allow the
              expansion of the process to the upper years of the undergraduate curriculum,
              and d) effectively disseminate the process of these reforms to other
              universities and junior college feeder programs.

This initiative is a
              comprehensive approach to the educational needs of entering freshmen, from
              personal development and socialization to a new first year curriculum that
              builds on the educational lessons learned in the last eight years by the NSF
              Coalitions.  The program establishes an environment of collaborative learning
              with faculty as mentors, it integrates the subject matter of the freshman year
              and teaches problem solving by application, and it also addresses the increased
              retention of engineering students with an emphasis on under-represented groups.
               Faculty approval has already been obtained and the College of Engineering is
              in the process of implementing these changes.

The Engage program was
              developed with input from a survey of faculty in all departments, comments from
              the College Board of Advisors, comments from an appointed Faculty Advisory
              Committee, and information gathered during visits to other institutions with
              innovative first-year engineering programs.  The development team's central
              thrust was to continue to teach essential skills while finding techniques to
              address problem solving ability and design methodology along with additional
              soft skills such as teamwork and communication skills.  The resulting program
              integrates five Basic Engineering courses (with a total of 13 credit hours)
              into two team-taught six-hour courses. 

Among the unique aspects of the
              Engage program is the concept of the Engineering Freshman
Village.  The
              village will include classrooms, computer classrooms and a computer lab, a
              free-access hands-on lab space, a team design-project work area, a separate
              study area, faculty offices,
and student-assistant offices, all housed in a
              single building.  Engage has successfully completed a pilot program with 60
              students and the results were overwhelmingly positive.

