Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a9972756

Award Number: 9972756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2699005            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve E. Marder marder@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence F. Abbott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award supports
              the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of education
              and research in computational neuroscience. The goal is to train a cohort of
              young investigators to move seamlessly between theoretical and experimental
              work in the neurosciences. We will serve two populations of students: a) those
              wishing to move from the physical sciences and mathematics into biology, and b)
              those with prior experience in biology or psychology who wish additional
              training in exploiting and implementing quantitative methods for the analysis
              and modeling of neurobiological data. There will be 18 training faculty from 6
              academic departments (biology, biochemistry, chemistry, physics, computer
              science, and psychology) united by an interest in training students to use
              quantitative methods to understand the brain and behavior. New courses and
              training programs will be developed and established. All trainees will have
              both an experimental and theoretical mentor. Research aims include: 1)
              developing models of cellular processes, 2) understanding the functional
              consequences of short-term plasticity of synapses, 3) modeling memory, 4)
              modeling visual processes, 5) studying motor control, and 6) understanding
              oscillatory and rhythmic processes.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
              facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs
              that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared
              to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides
              doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed
              multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational boundaries
              and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to establish a
              highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and research.
              In this second year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by funds from
              the Directorates for Biological Sciences, for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
              Sciences, for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Office of Multidisciplinary Activities),
              and for Education and Human Resources.

