Title       : Computational Discrete Conformal Geometry and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9972769

Award Number: 9972769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Stephenson KENS@MATH.UTK.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9972769

The investigator further develops the software tool CirclePack and
              uses it to explore mathematical questions that arise in several areas of
              application.  Circle packing was introduced by Thurston, first in the context
              of orbifold constructions and then in the approximation of conformal mappings. 
              The topic has been developed to the point that it provides a surprisingly
              comprehensive discrete theory that both parallels and approximates the
              classical theory of analytic functions, i.e., conformal mappings in two
              dimensions.  Developments have been driven largely by classical connections ---
              discrete analyticity, extremal length, harmonic measure, Riemann mappings, and
              so forth --- and in turn those same connections account for circle packing's
              utility in a variety of other topics.  In function theory, the research focuses
              on circle packing techniques in studies of a conjecture of Smale, conformal
              tilings, and construction of Grothendieck's dessins d'enfants.  In
              applications, circle packing provides a unique new tool for graph embedding,
              and particular emphasis is placed on collaborations in brain-flattening and
              2-dim quenching.  Computability of circle packings is a central strength, but
              growing demands have placed considerable stress on the software package
              "CirclePack."  The project addresses porting and modularization issues, and
              investigates strategies for implementing parallel packing algorithms.

Many
              areas of science, technology, and mathematics rely in fundamental ways on
              combinatorial information, that is, patterns, both concrete and abstract ---
              crossing patterns in a twisted strand of DNA, atomic locations in a crystal,
              activation sites in the visual cortex.  In 2-dimensional settings such patterns
              are often represented as planar graphs, which then need to be presented
              visually.  A pleasing new approach has emerged from abstract topology.  A
              "circle packing" is a configuration of circles having a specified pattern of
              tangencies.  It has dual natures: "combinatoric" in the prescribed pattern, but
              "geometric" in the radii of the actual circles.  One should think of the
              circles as bringing a "spontaneous" geometry to what began as a purely abstract
              combinatorial situation.  Fortuitously, this geometry inherits key features of
              an important classical mathematical topic, conformal geometry, so it brings to
              applications over 150 years of theoretical development.  However, unlike the
              classical theory, circle packings are both concrete and computable.  This
              project involves the development and application of circle packing algorithms
              and display software, with particular emphasis on collaboration with an NIH
              project on "brain mapping," on the physics of 2-dimensional quenching, and on
              discrete analytic function theory in mathematical analysis.


