Title       : Bayesian Nonparametric Regression and Density Estimation Using CAR Priors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9972598

Award Number: 9972598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dongchu Sun dsun@stat.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Speckman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972598

The research deals with several closely related areas of Bayesian
              hierarchical models and function estimation problems.  The investigators
              explore the use of Bayesian techniques for function estimation and their
              frequentist properties and use those properties to help choose appropriate
              noninformative priors.  One aspect of their study is the use of conditional
              autoregressive models (CAR) and their generalizations to capture spatial
              variability and as prior distributions in nonparametric regression and density
              estimation problems.  Preliminary results suggest good performance for the
              Bayesian smoothing parameter choice.  Using the fundamental relationship
              between penalized methods for function estimation and Bayesian estimation with
              high order CAR models as priors, they use sampling-based techniques (such as
              Markov chain Monte Carlo) to deal with problems with large amounts of data. 
              The regression and density estimation problems are special classes of
              hierarchical generalized linear models.  A common feature is the need to
              specify prior distributions for hyperparameters.  The investigators develop
              noninformative priors for these purposes and assess their suitability.  

The
              methods being developed are motivated by problems in transportation, disease
              mapping and wildlife management.  The transportation problem consists of
              modeling the behavior of residents in a city and their choice of activities and
              destinations.  The disease mapping work estimates disease incidence by
              location, age and gender strata.  The wildlife management issues involve
              similar problems in estimating hunting success rates for small areas such as
              counties.  All of these problems entail a spatial component, large data sets,
              and statistical inference to small regions.  There is a great deal of current
              interest in these topics, but many theoretical issues have not been addressed. 
              Results are being developed to help understand some of the theoretical
              properties of existing methods and to suggest new ones.  By using objective
              Bayesian techniques, new methodology is being developed to handle a wide range
              of practical problems.  These methods are computer intensive but feasible with
              the latest computer technology.


