Title       : Physiological Principles Integrated Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9972334

Award Number: 9972334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53729              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Woller wollerm@uww.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Prior  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lance Urven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daryle A. Waechter-Brulla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Whitewater
	      800 West Main
	      Whitewater, WI  531901705    414/472-1027

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biological Sciences at the University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
              has made considerable strides toward achieving the necessary infrastructure to
              provide instructional and research opportunities using modern biological
              methods and equipment.  Implementation of this project is completely
              restructuring and integrating our laboratory instruction in modern Physiology
              and Cell Biology.  We have assembled an integrated cross-disciplinary
              instructional team to address a specific set of goals designed to expand the
              depth of physiological principles our students encounter at all levels of their
              training.  The core of the project is the acquisition of six MacLab
              computer-based physiographs which modernized traditional experimental offerings
              in several courses.  The MacLab units also provide hardware to conduct new
              laboratory exercises in Introductory Cell Biology, Animal Physiology, Human
              Anatomy & Physiology, and Developmental Biology (for biology majors).  These
              exercises involve measurement of membrane potentials under a variety of
              physiological conditions, and the laboratory exercises build on one another to
              provide students with growth experiences.  The MacLab units are also utilized
              in basic physiological laboratory exercises in our introductory science courses
              (Biological Foundations, Science and Technology in Society; for non-science
              majors.)  These units include Macintosh computers, bridge amplifiers,
              intracellular probes, myographs, spirometers, electrical stimulators, blood
              pressure transducers, and other small transducers.  These units provide the
              ability to investigate most of the major areas of physiology:  cell biology,
              muscle, nervous, circulatory, cardiac, respiratory, and reproduction.  The PIs
              are active mentors of undergraduates and these units are used as a tool to
              strengthen involvement in undergraduate research.  Results of the assessment of
              implementation will be presented to appropriate professional meetings and
              distributed through regional and national organizations.  The current effort is
              an adaptation of and builds upon comparable activities that have been
              successfully implemented at Alverno College and the University of
              Wisconsin-Madison.
