Title       : Electrochemical Preparation of Apatite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9972587

Award Number: 9972587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jody G. Redepenning jredepen@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972587
Redepenning

Ceramic coated metal bone implants are one of the
              largest applications of bioceramics.  They are used primarily in hip and knee
              implants. Previous work from the PI's laboratory has shown that that strongly
              adherent calcium phosphate coatings can be produced using a simple electrolytic
              procedure. In this procedure the implant to be coated is used as the cathode in
              an electrolytic cell. Reductions at the cathode produce a pH increase that is
              localized near the electrode surface. The pH increase is used to precipitate
              desired calcium phosphate materials on the surface of the implant.  This
              procedure exhibits several advantages over existing technology. The
              electrolytic non-line-of-sight procedure can be used to uniformly coat
              irregularly shaped objects while maintaining control over deposit
              crystallinity.  Additionally, the technology required to perform the
              depositions is quite inexpensive. In this project, the parameters which produce
              chemically stable, physically robust hydroxyapatite coatings on metallic
              prostheses will be studied.  Adjustable deposition parameters include current
              density, voltage, and composition and pH of the electrolyte.  Additionally, the
              use of ultrasonically agitated baths will be investigated to improve adhesion
              of the resulting ceramic films.  Thermal sintering will also be examined as a
              means of improving adhesion.  Chemical characterization of the coatings will
              include reflectance infrared spectroscopies, solid state NMR, x-ray
              diffraction, and atomic absorption spectroscopy.  Macroscopic morphology will
              be monitored using scanning electron microscopy.  Profilometry, tensile
              testing, and shear testing will be conducted in collaboration with Spire
              Corporation, Bedford, MA.
%%%
Ceramic coatings for bone implants are an
              important application of bioceramics.  Current deposition techniques are
              line-of-sight and thus cannot be used on complicated implant shapes.  The
              research performed on this grant will provide engineers with a deposition
              technique that can be used on complicated shapes, thus providing a great
              benefit to society.	
***  

