Title       : A Longitudinal, Multidicipline Study of HS Students Modeling in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9972963

Award Number: 9972963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411298             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Stewart jhstewar@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While understanding and reasoning in the sciences involve diverse intellectual
              activities,  one stands out as central the use of discipline-specific,
              explanatory models to conduct inquiries into natural phenomena.  The importance
              of explanatory models in science has been described by scientists (Mayr, 1991)
              as well as those who study science (Kitcher, 1984; Laudan, 1977; and Giere,
              1988).  Similarly science education reform documents (Science Education
              Standards , NRC, 1995; and Benchmarks for Scientific Literacy, AAAS, 1993)
              stress the importance of models and inquiry to students' understanding of
              science.  We agree with this position and feel that by the time students
              graduate from high school they should have had multiple opportunities to learn
              about the nature of science as a modeling activity.  Such opportunities include
              extensive inquiry experiences in which they develop, use, revise, and assess
              explanatory models in a variety of science disciplines.

Students must
              understand the role that explanatory models play in inquiry if they are to
              develop a realistic vision of what scientific practice entails.  This alone is
              a powerful argument in favor of model-based science instruction.  However, our
              previous research has shown that focusing on important disciplinary models in
              high school classrooms also helps students to understand and organize "big"
              ideas in science (Cartier, 1998).  Consequently, we have collaborated with high
              school science teachers to develop innovative courses and units of instruction
              that allow students numerous and varied experiences learning about science from
              a modeling perspective.  In the school within which we work first- and
              second-year students are required to enroll in two interdisciplinary courses,
              Science I and Science II.  In these courses, we have developed model-based
              instruction on the celestial motion, kinetic molecular theory, genetics,
              physiology, and evolution.  For third- and fourth-year students, we have
              developed model-based curricula for nine-week elective courses in astronomy,
              genetics, and evolutionary biology.  

To date, we have conducted research on
              students' reasoning in genetics and evolutionary biology in the elective
              fourth-year courses (with NSF support) and on teaching and classroom structure.
               With this proposal we seek funding to extend that research. Specifically, we
              are proposing a longitudinal study of students' reasoning and argumentation as
              it develops throughout the model- and inquiry-centered Science I and II courses
              (required for all students).  In particular, we will (1) study the development
              of students' understanding of the role of explanatory models in
              discipline-specific inquiries, and (2) examine how students use initial models
              to solve realistic problems in diverse disciplines, revise initial models in
              light of anomalous data, and assess the revised models using both empirical and
              conceptual criteria.  Finally, we will assess students' understanding of
              central concepts in the biological, earth, and physical sciences as they
              develop throughout the two-years of model-based instruction.  
 
