Title       : IGERT:Freshwater Graduate Studies Link Fundamental Science with Applications
               through Integration of Ecology, Hydrology, & Geochemistry in Regions with
               Contrasting Climates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a9972810

Award Number: 9972810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2741289            (Estimated)
Investigator: Amelia K. Ward award@biology.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur C. Benke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford N. Dahm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Wetzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Berry Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of an multidisciplinary, interregional graduate
              training program of education and research at the University of
              Alabama-Tuscaloosa and the University of New Mexico. The program will provide
              opportunities for students to study attributes of aquatic ecosystems in
              separate geographical regions that are at similar latitudes, but that have very
              different climatic conditions. These ecosystems both exemplify and magnify the
              pressing need for interdisciplinary collaborations in the context of
              contemporary problems confronting fresh waters worldwide. Faculty at both
              institutions have parallel interests in key disciplines of freshwater ecology,
              hydrology, and geochemistry that are essential for effective understanding and
              management of aquatic ecosystems. The new education/training program will
              include novel components that strengthen student disciplinary,
              interdisciplinary, and practical problem-solving expertise as well as ensure
              responsible science conduct, team-building and communication skills through
              inter-institutional education, and inter-site comparative projects. Internships
              with state/federal agencies such as the Bosque Improvement Group in New Mexico
              and the South Florida Water Management District will provide opportunities for
              students to apply fundamental research to practical problem-solving. The
              training program also is deeply committed to participation of a truly diverse
              student group that includes students from locally large populations of
              underrepresented minorities such as Hispanic, African-American, and Native
              American students. We envision developing graduate education that is genuinely
              multidisciplinary, inter-institutional, comparative across regions, and that
              links fundamental science with applications.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate
              programs that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be
              well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT
              provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new,
              well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational
              boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to
              establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and
              research. In this second year of the program, awards are being made to
              twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by
              funds from the EPSCoR program and from the Directorates for Biological
              Sciences, for Geosciences, for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, and
              for Education and Human Resources.

