Title       : Topics in Multivariate Survival Analysis and Counting Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9972525

Award Number: 9972525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorota M. Dabrowska dorota@brahms.ph.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Multivariate survival analysis is a rapidly growing area with a wide range of
              applications in medicine, genetic epidemiology, econometrics, astronomy and
              other fields. The purpose of this project is to develop estimation methods in
              some semiparametric models arising in analyses of multivariate survival
              data.

Two projects are discussed in this proposal. The first one deals with
              estimation in partial transformation models, specifically in partial Cox
              regression and partial accelerated failure  time model. These models are useful
              in goodness-of-fit testing and analyses of multivariate models involving time
              measurements recorded on two or more time scales. For estimation purposes we
              shall use local polynomial fitting.

The second project deals with
              multivariate frailty models. A common approach towards analysis of these models
              rests on nonparametric maximum likelihood estimation with the form of the
              estimates derived from the counting process definition of the frailty models.
              The latter often fails to apply to multivariate data since they can involve
              time measurements recorded on several time scales, or nonpredictable censoring
              and covariate processes.  In this project we consider an ad hoc estimation
              method designed for analysis of clustered familial data with multivariate
              failure time processes recorded on age scale, The estimation method allows to
              incorporate left truncation and accommodate calendar time effects arising in
              analyses of familial data.

The results of the first project can be applied
              to any dataset involving censored observations. Results of the second project
              will be applied towards analysis of datasets provided by the Australian Twin
              Registry and Demographic Data Base, Umea, Sweden.
