Title       : Modular Combination of Satisfiability Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9972311

Award Number: 9972311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211356             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehdi T. Harandi harandi@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Constraint-based Reasoning is a deductive paradigm that combines the versatility
              of general-purpose reasoning with the performance of specialized constraint
              solving. Currently, the full-scale applicability 
of constraint-based
              reasoning is hindered by the difficulty of combining existing constraint
              solvers, modularly, into more powerful solvers. The few solver combination
              methods developed so far have limited 
applicability because of their
              stringent requirements on the kind of constraint languages and theories that
              can be combined. 

The PI and his collaborators have previously considered
              the somewhat simpler problem of combining satisfiability procedures and have
              produced a combination framework as a generalization of Nelson-Oppen
              combination method to the case of constraint theories sharing function or
              predicate symbols. The results 
of this work has also led to a new combination
              method for the word problem. Further investigation is needed to make the
              developed combination method(s) applicable in practice.  This project aims at
              further investigating the main theoretical and practical issues involved in
              solver combination in the case of 
constraint theories with non-disjoint
              signatures. In particular, it aims at:  1) expanding and refining the existing
              combination framework to address some of its current shortcomings; 2)
              identifying practical applications of the framework and implementing instances
              of its combination method for some of these applications; 3) unifying the work
              on the combination framework above with the one on the combination of decision
              procedures for the word problem.

