Title       : Artificial Materials: Fabrication and Property Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9972620

Award Number: 9972620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Halloran John_Halloran@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972620
Halloran

'Artificial Materials' could become a new class of
              engineering materials with unprecedented properties.  An Artificial Material is
              a designed structure, built on a very fine scale.  It consists of one or
              several ordinary substances arranged according to a sophisticated design that
              leads to the unique macroscopic properties.  The designers of Artificial
              Materials promise "pre-determined" properties.  They have shown, theoretically,
              how to choose a particular property tensor, and design a structure that will
              display exactly those properties. This concept has outstanding potential for
              Materials Science, since it offers new types of unique and valuable properties,
              obtained from ordinary substances.  However, this potential has not been
              demonstrated physically.  Recently several researchers in the field of Optimal
              Design, using techniques of Topology Optimization, have designed Artificial
              Materials that are predicted to have outstanding properties, such as zero
              thermal expansion or remarkably high piezoelectric properties. In this
              high-risk/high-payoff  project, the PI will collaborate with these designers,
              and fabricate their structures from conventional ceramics, evaluate their
              properties, and compare experiment with theory.  Optimally Designed materials
              are fine scale arrays of solid and void, which require unique fabrication
              methods that can form sub-millimeter features.  A new technique developed by
              the PI, Microfabrication by Co-Extrusion, will be used to produce the
              Artificial Materials from two-dimensional designs with features in the
              50-micron size range.  Other fabrication techniques will be used as well:
              Indirect Ceramic Stereolithography to produce three-dimensional designs with
              features in the 300-micron size range, and Direct Ceramic Inkjet Deposition for
              designs in the 100-micron size range.  Ceramic-air composites will be
              fabricated from Optimal Designs obtained  from the PI's collaborators and then
              the piezoelectric and elastic properties will be determined and compared to
              theoretical predictions.  Artificial Materials with zero thermal expansion will
              be also be fabricated, using ceramic-filled polymer composites, and their
              thermoelastic properties will be characterized.
%%%
The objective of the
              program is to explore the practical application of Optimal Design by Topology
              Optimization to engineering materials, extend Image-Based Design techniques to
              materials processing, and create unique piezoelectric and thermoelastic
              materials. The concept of Artificial Materials came from the computational
              design community.  This type of material are not yet available because of the
              major challenge in fabrication.  The PI proposes to fabricate them using
              state-of-the-art ceramics processing techniques from designs obtained from his
              collaborators to perform this multidisciplinary project.  This effort will
              bring materials science closer to the goal of "materials by design."
***

