Title       : Confinement and Scaling of 4He at the Superfluid Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9972287

Award Number: 9972287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis M. Gasparini fmg@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972287
Gasparini

This is a condensed matter physics project employing
              micro-scale cells to investigate the critical behavior of helium-4. Properties
              of a system which is small on a relevant length scale are greatly modified when
              compared to its bulk limit. This is especially true near a phase transition.
              Issues which are normally irrelevant, such as  the shape of the sample or its
              surfaces now matter. Understanding of these small systems has wide
              implications. This is also relevant in the area for applications, given for
              example the continued miniaturization of devices. It is also true for
              theoretical reasons, since often calculations involve the extrapolation, not
              always justified, from a small  to a large sample. The research to be done
              combines silicon technology and  direct wafer bonding to form small structures
              in which liquid helium is introduced. It is the properties of this liquid near
              a phase transition which is studied. Graduate and undergraduate students are
              involved in this effort. The students are trained in silicon processing, low
              temperature technology, and a variety of experimental techniques and controls.
              Diagnostic tools involve laser optics and infrared imaging. Students receive an
              broad training interacting with researchers in different laboratories, both on
              campus and at national facilities. These student move on to a variety of
              careers in education and technology development.
%%%
One thinks of materials
              as having certain properties which do not depend on their size or shape. A
              metal will remain a metal no matter how small the sample. This is true within
              certain bounds. However, there is clearly a limit to this. One might think that
              a million atoms, or perhaps a thousand, might be as low as one could go. One
              does not know in general the answer to this, it requires investigations for
              specific properties and materials. Often very small samples will display new
              and different properties. This has technological implications in
              miniaturizations of devices. The research to be done will involve measurements
              of a small quantity of helium-4 undergoing a superfluid phase transformation.
              It requires the use of silicon technology, and a unique process developed in
              previous work, to construct structures as small a few hundred atoms. Students
              involved in this work, both graduate and undergraduates, will receive a broad
              technical training. This will include the use of facilities at the National
              Nanofabrication Facility at Cornell University, and local facilities for
              various diagnostic and experimental measurements. These students will be well
              diversified in their training, and able to move on to careers both in industry
              and academia.



