Title       : Neutron Scattering Experiments and Path Integral Monte Carlo Studies of
               Disordered Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9972011

Award Number: 9972011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry R. Glyde glyde@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972011
Glyde

This is a condensed matter physics project that employs
              inelastic neutron scattering measurements and Path Integral Monte Carlo
              simulation techniques to study the elementary excitations of Bose quantum
              liquids in disorder. Disorder is induced by confining liquid 4He  and 3He/4He
              mixtures in highly porous aerogel. The object is to determine the new features
              induced by disorder such as new low energy excitations, a gap in the dispersion
              curve, finite excitation lifetimes and how these features relate to the
              superfluid density, to Bose condensation and possible localization of the
              condensate. The momentum distribution and the condensate fraction in the same
              disordered materials will be measured and calculated independently by the same
              techniques. Thermodynamic and scaling properties of disordered and confined
              liquid 4He have been studied for 40 years, but there has been no parallel
              program to observe excitations. This project uses sophisticated neutron
              diffraction methods at the Institute Laue Langevin (Grenoble, France) and the
              ISIS facility at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (Oxford, UK). The work
              provides excellent training for graduate students and post-doctoral
              associates.
%%%
This project uses neutron diffraction methods to investigate
              the properties of liquid helium when the helium is confined in highly porous
              media like aerogel. The presence of the aerogel modifies the properties of the
              helium by restricting the 'motion' of the helium in the filamentous silica
              aerogel network. The propagation of sound in helium is affected, liquid
              motions, as well as the density of helium is affect by the silica network. The
              properties of helium found in the confined geometry will be compared with
              similar information for the bulk liquid. The information is of fundamental
              interest for quantum mechanics and for understanding the superfluid nature of
              liquid helium. This project uses sophisticated neutron diffraction methods at
              the Institute Laue Langevin (Grenoble, France) and the ISIS facility at the
              Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (Oxford, UK). The work provides excellent
              training for graduate students and post-doctoral associates.



