Title       : 1999 Summer Conference on General Topology and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9972550

Award Number: 9972550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon N. Rothman srothman@liu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Long Island Univ
	      University Center
	      Brookville, NY  11548    516/299-2527

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9972550

Principal Investigator: Sheldon
              Rothman

Abstract:

The conference will have five special sessions.  The
              session on  Set-Theoretic Topology and its Applications will stress the
              interplay  among the classical topics of topology and analysis, including the
              newly  defined field of study called set-theoretic analysis.  The Dynamical 
              Systems session will include the application of tools from continuum  theory to
              this subject.  A goal of the session on Topological Groups is  to discuss the
              new methods in this area used in solving problems in  functional analysis and
              stochastic processes.  Topological vector spaces  and rings of continuous
              functions will be the principal areas of the  Topological Algebraic Structures
              session.  The fifth special session,  Asymmetric Topology/Topology and Computer
              Science, will be devoted mostly  to applications of techniques from topology to
              computer science.  Talks  in this session will be on such topics as domain
              theory and semantics of  programming languages, and digital topology and
              computer visualization.   In addition to the special sessions two workshops
              will be given.  The  Dynamics and Topology of Entire Functions workshop will
              describe how  Cantor bouquets, indecomposable continua, explosion points, and a
               topological kneading invariant play a principal role in determining the 
              dynamics of certain maps, while the workshop on Topological Groups will 
              discuss projective limits and balanced groups.  

The Summer Conference
              series on General Topology and its Applications began in 1984 at the City
              College of New York with 35 participants and 13 talks; the 13th such
              Conference, in Mexico City, June 1998, was the third held abroad; it had about
              150 participants from across the United States and 27 other countries, and
              featured 110 talks. The reason for this growth is in the recent history of
              general topology. This field studies generalized shapes and limits, and was
              developed to solve problems elsewhere in mathematics. After a time of
              concentration on problems internal to it, the emphasis in topology is again
              turning toward applications to other areas. Almost half our invited speakers
              work outside topology, but apply it; so participants gain new research ideas
              and connections between other fields and topology.  Here is an  example
              relating topology and computer science: Exact computation of real  numbers is
              impossible as long as only finite amounts of information can  be stored. But
              using topology the set of real numbers and some other such  important examples
              can be shown to have "approximation models" that allow  arbitrarily accurate
              computation of their elements, an essential for all  sensitive calculations
              such as those used for weather prediction and  space flight.  Joint work by
              Conference participants, including some  which took place at our Conferences,
              led to proof that an object has an  approximation model precisely if it is a
              "Polish space". This is  particularly satisfying since Polish spaces are among
              the first objects  discovered by topologists, and have been studied for almost
              a century

