Title       : Food Mechanics, Foraging Behavior, and The Evolution of 'Robust' (Cebus apella)
               and 'Gracile' (Cebus olivaceus) Capuchin Monkeys in Guyana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9972603

Award Number: 9972603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Garber p-garber@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  The goal of this project is to compare the food mechanics, and food
              processing behavior of tufted capuchins (Cebus apella) and weeper capuchins
              (Cebus olivaceus) at the Iwokrama Rainforest Reserve, Guyana.  Capuchins are
              New World monkeys ranging from Central to southern South America.  The genus
              Cebus exhibits two distinct morphological types; the tufted or "robust" type
              consisting of a single species and three species of  untufted or "gracile"
              types, including C. olivaceus, the species of interest to this study.  The
              tufted type is noted for its more "robust" and powerful masticatory system. 
              However, little is known regarding differences in the mechanical properties of
              foods eaten by each species and how such differences relate to capuchin
              anatomy.  The main objectives of this study are to collect behavioral data on
              species differences in patterns of food preparation and processing (manual and
              oral), and detailed seasonal data on the physical properties of the foods they
              ingest. 
     The study of ecomorphological distinctions between "robust" and
              "gracile" species of extant capuchin offers a unique opportunity to test
              questions concerning variability in the feeding ecology of other "robust" and
              "gracile" primates such as extinct primates in human ancestry.  This is due not
              only to the masticatory similarities they share with early human-like
              ancestors, but also to the broad set of features they share with great apes and
              modern humans, such as slow infant development, tool-use in various contexts,
              and the largest relative brain size of any primate except humans.  In addition,
              research concerning the relationship between the mechanical properties of foods
              and the masticatory systems of primates has seen growing interest over the last
              decade.  Data on differences in masticatory morphology and on the mechanical
              properties of available fruits and seeds have provided critical insight into
              species-specific differences in anatomy and feeding ecology.  This project will
              add to this knowledge by identifying more discrete mechanical categories for
              foods, and by relating these categories to more subtle morphological
              differences between congeneric primate species.




