Title       : Calculus of Variations in L-infinity and Nonlinear PDE's
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9972043

Award Number: 9972043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel N. Barron enb@math.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Changyou Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972043
Barron

The areas of proposed study of this project involve the
              multidimensional 
and vector valued analogue of optimization problems with
              essential 
supremum cost functional. In particular it is planned to consider
              the 
determination of the necessary and sufficient conditions under which such
              
functionals will possess a minimizer. The project will also study
              
homogenization problems involving these functionals and representation
              
theorems for the associated set functions. Variational problems involving
              
these functionals with constraints on the minimizers will also be
              
considered. The problems under study lead to very nonlinear equations. 
The
              techniques to be used in this project will therefore be nonlinear 
analysis
              involving dynamical systems, viscosity solutions for partial 
differential
              equations, variational inequalities, and nonsmooth analysis.

The focus of
              this project is optimization of systems where one seeks to 
minimize the worst
              that can occur. Examples where this is appropriate 
include the following
              important problems: (1) Determine the shape of a 
load bearing beam so as to
              minimize the maximum strains and stresses 
over the length of the beam. In the
              past one designs the beam minimizing 
the total average energy, but cracks may
              still occur. (2) Find a 
chemotherapy regimen for treatment of cancer seeking
              to minimize the 
maximum tumor load. This is much more realistic than
              minimizing the 
average tumor load. (3) Minimize the maximum noise in a
              reflected radar 
beam. (4) Determine a control which will steer a trajectory
              as close as 
possible to a target. (5) Find a portfolio that will maximize the
              minimum 
wealth over some time period. These are all examples of significant
              and 
interesting problems in which the appropriate point of view is the worst
              
case scenario. They arise in medicine, engineering, economics, and many
              
other fields. Furthermore, the analysis of the worst case gives the designer
              
a benchmark on which to judge all competing designs.

