Title       : New Experimental Challenges in Organofluorine Chemistry; A New Dimension in
               Elemental Fluorine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9972888

Award Number: 9972888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Lagow RJLagow@Mail.Utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project explores the synthesis of a wide variety of organofluorine
              compounds.  The principal means by which this is achieved involves the use of
              molecular fluorine, for which new procedures have been devised that will permit
              the study of its reaction with a wide variety of substrates.  In addition, much
              larger quantities of these new materials will be accessible.  Many of the new
              substances prepared during the previous periods of support have been shown to
              possess useful properties that are appropriate for a number of applications. 
              Further study will extend the scope of these reactions and because of the
              expansion in the number of substrate types, new chemistry may well be
              discovered.  

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program supports the research of Professor Richard J. Lagow of the University
              of Texas at Austin.  Professor Lagow's research targets new methods and
              reactions that incorporate fluorine atoms into the structure of organic
              molecules, typically by replacement of hydrogen atoms.  Part of the anticipated
              progress in this project centers on the use of a novel reactor for the
              convenient and safe use of molecular fluorine under controlled conditions.  In
              this way, the variety of molecules that can be exposed to fluorination will be
              expanded significantly.  The properties of these new organofluorine compounds
              will be evaluated for potential applications, of which there are many.  For
              instance, organofluorine compounds are being studied as blood substitutes and
              as lubricants for sensitive microelectronic
              devices.
























