Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Variable Speed Electromechanical Drive Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9972752

Award Number: 9972752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2740141            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariesa L. Crow crow@ece.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fikret Ercal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xavier J. Avula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Drewniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harlan U. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary, multi-institutional graduate
              training program in education, research and development on variable-speed
              electromechanical drive systems.  This activity is a joint effort of fourteen
              faculty from the Departments of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering,
              Ceramic Engineering, Computer Science, and English from the University of
              Missouri-Rolla and the Departments of Electrical Engineering and Mechanical
              Engineering at Purdue University.  This project integrates graduate students,
              faculty, and affiliates from industry and national laboratories to: i)
              characterize the electrical, mechanical, thermal, and acoustic
              power-electronics-induced effects on system components, ii) develop
              computer-aided analysis and design methodologies, iii) develop EMI, acoustic,
              and vibration mitigation strategies, and iv) develop system-level integration
              and control. The novel educational initiatives of this project include:
              multidisciplinary research teams of student consultants; industrial internships
              to introduce students to industrial requirements and focus their research; an
              intensive writing program to improve communication skills; research and
              engineering ethics seminars; multi-university course-sharing to expose students
              to a wide variety of ideas and expertise unique to each institution; and an
              emphasis on laboratory skills to help students integrate theoretical and
              practical aspects of research.  Approximately forty graduate students will be
              supported with IGERT funds over five years.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate
              programs that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be
              well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT
              provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new,
              well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational
              boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to
              establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and
              research. In this second year of the program, awards are being made to twenty
              one institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by funds from
              the Directorates for Engineering, for Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering, and for Education and Human Resources.

