Title       : POWRE: Isolation and characterization of salt-sensitive mutants in the archaeal
               halophile, Haloferax volcanii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9972968

Award Number: 9972968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly A. Bidle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE project focuses on the isolation and characterization of
              salt-sensitive mutants of the halophilic Archaeon, Haloferax volcanii. The
              extreme halophiles belonging to the domain Archaea require salt concentrations
              for growth that range from -1.5 M up to 5.2 M NaCl, an upper limit in excess of
              ten times the salinity of seawater. Halophiles are found in such hostile
              environments as the Dead Sea and the Great Salt Lake, where high concentrations
              of salt preclude the growth of almost all other known organisms. To date, there
              are no documented reports that have used genetic techniques such as mutagenesis
              with the specific intent of creating salt-sensitive mutants in the halophilic
              Archaea. In this study, gene disruption mutagenesis will be performed to obtain
              H. volcanii mutants that are no longer capable of growing at 3.5 M NaCl, the
              optimal salt concentration for this organism. Mutants will be analyzed to
              determine the specific location of the gene(s) that was disrupted to cause the
              salt-sensitive phenotype. The gene(s) responsible for salt- sensitivity will be
              identified and characterized. Preliminary studies will be conducted on these
              genes to determine how they are regulated in response to salinity in the
              environment. The data gathered will lead to future studies examining gene
              regulation in the extreme halophiles. This study will provide the first crucial
              steps towards understanding how the halophiles are able to adapt in vivo to
              hypersaline environments on the molecular level.  Furthermore, any genetic
              information that can be gathered about the adaptational mechanisms used by the
              Archaea to combat the effects of the harsh environments they inhabit is of
              importance.  This project is of an exploratory nature and has the potential to
              advance Dr. Bidle's career under the objectives of the POWRE program.
