Title       : Organometallic Reaction Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9972183

Award Number: 9972183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Casey casey@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports research on mechanisms of organometallic reactions by Dr. Charles P.
              Casey of the Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin at Madison.  Three
              distinct areas of research will be pursued: investigations of d-0 yttrium and
              zirconium olefin complexes; development of pi-propargyl metal complexes; and
              the chemistry of rhenium carbene complexes. The systems chosen for the first
              area of investigation will permit measurement of the rate of inversion at the
              metal center and the rate constants for the addition of a metal alkyl group to
              complexed alkenes.  This information is important for understanding the
              fundamental steps in olefin polymerization and the stereochemistry of
              polymerization with chiral metallocene catalysts.  In the second topic,
              reactions of nucleophiles with pi-propargyl complexes will be investigated in
              order to uncover a basic understanding of the processes that generate these
              species. These investigations are targeted toward an understanding of such
              synthetically important reactions as the double nucleophilic additions to
              propargyl carbonates.  Finally, the stereochemistry of addition of phosphines
              with rhenium carbene complexes will be studied, along with the formation of
              some unusual complexes designed to give information about modes of association
              of metals with double-bonded carbon compounds and about using variation in ring
              strain to favor formation of desired products.  

Organometallic chemistry
              has proved to be very useful in homogeneous catalysis and in developing new
              methods and reagents for synthesis of organic compounds. The reactions chosen
              for investigation are relevant to the behavior of commercially important
              processes.  Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the
              research.



