Title       : Curriculum Development for Ecology, Evolution, & Conservation Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2001   
File        : a9972366

Award Number: 9972366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Price   (Principal Investigator current)
              Grant C. Gerrish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Mautz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The isolated and simplified ecosystems of Hawaii offer both natural laboratories
              for ecological and evolutionary research and challenges for the conservation of
              this unique biota.  The last few decades have seen a broad-front development of
              research and training in response to these opportunities and conservation
              responsibilities.  The Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation Biology  (EECB)
              program at UH Hilo melds these interagency activities and mandates into a
              integrated undergraduate curriculum for the first time in the state.  The Big
              Island of Hawaii offers extreme local climatic diversity in temperature and
              rainfall with exceptional opportunities for field laboratory experiences.  In
              addition, the unique biota of Hawaii provides a tremendous resource of plants
              and animals to investigate in undergraduate laboratory courses.  The EECB
              program teaches basic and advanced concepts of ecology and evolution by
              adapting the powerful research design of an NSF-funded Hawaiian rain forest
              ecosystem study that utilizes an elevation gradient that begins near the UHH
              campus.  Field laboratory classes visit these established sites and conduct
              similar fieldwork, using vegetation monitoring training material developed by
              the Secretariat for Conservation Biology, an interagency umbrella organization.
               The EECB program also adapts curriculum from the NSF-sponsored Undergraduate
              Faculty Enhancement Workshop on "Molecular Genetic Analysis Applied to
              Evolution, Ecology, and Systematic Biology:  An Extended Laboratory Course." 
              In addition, several computer simulation programs are being incorporated into
              the undergraduate courses.  Some of these programs have been developed in
              previous NSF-sponsored projects, including "Populus"--an evolutionary genetic
              program.  Animal physiological ecology components of the proposed curriculum
              are adapted from courses and curricula at Cornell University, UCLA, UC-Irvine,
              and Western Washington University.  Most such curricula focus on animal
              adaptation to climatic diversity and offer field experience with their local
              ecosystems.   
