Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal:Integrated Training in the Evolution of Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a9972830

Award Number: 9972830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2740320            (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Postlethwait jpostle@uoneuro.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              education and research in the field of evolutionary developmental biology. A
              major goal of biology is to understand the mechanisms responsible for the
              origin of biodiversity. A significant impediment to resolving these issues is
              the historical fractionation of the life sciences -- the lack of an integrated
              understanding of the mechanisms by which organisms obtain their form during
              development and by which morphological diversification originates via
              population-genetic mechanisms. To overcome these intellectual barriers, we are
              initiating an interdisciplinary training program focused on the evolution of
              development, to our knowledge the first of its kind. Novel aspects of our
              training activities include the establishment of: 1) a collaborative
              research-based program linking training in developmental and evolutionary
              biology, with a strong emphasis on genomics; 2) a formal graduate course in the
              evolution of development; 3) a unique dual-mentoring system involving a
              distinguished set of faculty in developmental and evolutionary biology; 4) an
              annual program of events focused on specialized areas in evolutionary
              developmental biology; and 5) a funding program that facilitates the
              involvement of minorities and off-campus students. Establishment of this
              program, combined with an anticipated state-funded initiative, should help
              define the University of Oregon as an international center in the emerging
              field of evolutionary developmental biology.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate
              programs that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be
              well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT
              provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new,
              well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational
              boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to
              establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and
              research. In this second year of the program, awards are being made to
              twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by
              funds from the Directorates for Biological Sciences, for Computer and
              Information Science and Engineering, and for Education and Human Resources.


