Title       : FRG: Mechanical Instabilities in Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9972941

Award Number: 9972941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $670000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter W. Milligan milligan@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Shiflet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elias C. Aifantis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972941
Milligan

In this research, the fundamental aspects of deformation
              instabilities in four classes of materials are studied to understand the
              similarities and differences in mechanical response and deformation mechanisms.
               The materials chosen are metallic glasses, multi-phase alloys containing a
              metallic glass matrix, metals with grain sizes between 30 nm and 3 microns, and
              amorphous polymers.  Each of these materials exhibits a tension-compression
              asymmetry in the flow strength and deforms by shear banding on planes, which
              are not predicted by classical continuum mechanics.  The understanding of these
              phenomena is incomplete, and there are large discrepancies in the literature
              concerning the sense of deviation of the shear band plane as well as whether
              the deviation and tension-compression asymmetry are due to hydrostatic pressure
              or normal stress effects.  Further, the sense of the deviation of the shear
              band plane, which provides insight into the deformation mechanisms, is
              inconsistently reported in the literature, even for the same material. 
              Performing mechanical tests on a single machine in a single laboratory should
              clarify these issues.  Shear bands are characterized by advanced techniques,
              including atomic force microscopy and atomic resolution transmission electron
              microscopy aided by focussed ion beam thinning techniques.  Studies of local
              chemistry changes in and around the shear bands are conducted with resolutions
              on the order of 1 nm.  Mechanics analyses promote understanding of shear band
              widths, angles, spacing and statistical distributions, as well as effects of
              stress state and shear band configuration on the overall constitutive behavior.
               The grant is co-funded with the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and
              the Engineering CMS Mechanics and Materials Program.
%%%
Bulk metallic
              glasses and bulk nanostructured metals are two classes of novel structural
              materials, which have attracted substantial interest.  Bulk metallic glasses
              have found commercial applications in sports equipment and the continued
              development of nanostructured metals and composites might lead to
              commercialization of these materials.  A common link between bulk metallic
              glasses and nanostructured metals is their mechanical behavior.  Both materials
              shear band as the first and only mechanism of plastic deformation and exhibit
              no strain hardening.  Similar behavior is observed for many amorphous polymers.
               This shear banding is of fundamental interest and of critical technological
              importance to the further development of these materials since shear banding is
              responsible for limited tensile ductility and anomalously low fatigue
              performance.
***

