Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Molecularly Designed Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a9972776

Award Number: 9972776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742000            (Estimated)
Investigator: M. David Curtis mdcurtis@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Laine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research associated with emerging technologies of Molecularly
              Designed Materials. Two principal focus areas are: (1) Electronic and Photonic
              Materials, and (2) Designed Nanostructures. Projects share the theme of
              designing molecules for some new technological use, or to optimize the
              performance of such materials in devices, e.g. LEDs , TFTs, sensors, etc.
              Faculty participants are from the Departments of Chemistry, Materials Science
              and Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Applied Physics, Electrical Engineering,
              and the School of Public Health, as well as the Macromolecular Science and
              Engineering Center, and the Center for Display Technology and Manufacturing.
              Scientists from National and industrial laboratories are also intimately
              involved in the research and training. Educational breadth is furnished by a
              novel curriculum that features a cohesive set of courses drawn from 4
              departments, new modular courses, and a research internship rotation. The
              research environment is characterized by, state-of-the-art facilities. The
              breadth of the collaborative research and the integrated course work insures a
              broadly educated student, familiar with the important issues in the science and
              technology of molecularly designed materials.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate
              programs that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be
              well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT
              provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new,
              well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational
              boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to
              establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and
              research. In this second year of the program, awards are being made to
              twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by
              funds from the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities), Geosciences, for Engineering, and for Education
              and Human Resources. 

