Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolution and Consequences of Variation in Life
               Histories and Development of Marine Gastropods in the genus Crepidula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9972555

Award Number: 9972555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Chernoff bcxx@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972555
Chernoff and Collin

	The species diversity of groups of organisms is
              influenced by many different factors, both external (the environment) and
              internal (physiology, life history). One key factor in the extinction and
              diversification of marine organisms is thought to be dispersal ability. Marine
              invertebrates (including starfish, clams, and snails) typically develop from a
              free-floating planktonic larval stage, either feeding or nonfeeding in
              behavior. These larvae provide a means of dispersal for animals that are often
              sedentary during their adult life. However, some species develop without going
              through such a larval stage (direct development). Direct developers hatch as
              miniature adults in the place where the eggs were deposited, and have low
              potential for dispersal. Differences in dispersal ability between species with
              planktonic larvae and species with direct development are associated with
              differences in extinction rates and with the rates of origin of new species.
              Species with planktonic larvae have lower rates of extinction and are less
              likely to give rise to new species. Because dispersal ability may have a strong
              influence on taxonomic diversity, it is important to understand the causes of
              variation in dispersal ability. Graduate student Rachel Collin, mentored by
              adviser Dr. Barry Chernoff at the University of Chicago, is studying larval
              development modes and phylogenetic relationships in one such group of marine
              organisms.
	Crepidula, a genus of marine snails with about 50 species,
              contains some species with direct development and some species with planktonic
              larvae. The genus offers an ideal opportunity to test hypotheses about the
              causes of differences in development type. DNA sequences for three genes for
              each species will be analyzed in order to determine the genealogical
              relationships among the species and proposed close relatives. In addition, live
              animals will be observed in the field and their development will be described.
              These observations will be combined with a hypothesis of species relationships
              to determine if direct development is correlated with ecological factors like
              body size, habitat depth, and latitude. This research will determine if genetic
              differences are greater for species with direct development than for species
              with planktonic larvae, and if close relatives are more likely to have the same
              development type than more distant relatives. The results of this research will
              improve understanding of how changes in larval development affect the
              diversification or extinction of marine invertebrate groups.

