Title       : Relaxations and Molecular Motions in Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9972225

Award Number: 9972225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Boyd boyd@poly2.mse.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972225
Boyd

The present research deals with parallel or companion
              approaches to elucidation of relaxation mechanisms.  The first involves careful
              experimental characterization of well chosen systems and the second invokes
              atomistic level simulations of molecular motions.  Dielectric relaxation
              spectroscopy is the principal experimental tool to be employed as it allows
              measurements over an extremely broad temporal range.  Molecular dynamics (MD)
              simulations, which generate atom positions over a time trajectory are to be
              used to study molecular motions in the same systems as studied experimentally. 
              The specific probems to be addressed concern the following.  The aromatic
              polyester poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) has prominent relaxation below it
              glass transition.  The molecular motions underlying it are not understood.  Its
              close relative poly(ethylene naphthylate) (PEN) has two such processes and thus
              is even less understood.  Thorough dielectric characterization of both the
              subglass processes and the glass transition region is to be carried out on both
              polymers and their copolymers.  Special attention is to be given to the high
              frequency, short time region where direct comparisons with MD simulations on
              the same systems can be made.  Another system for study will be linear
              aliphatic polyester copolymers.  Both the subglass processes and glass
              transition region where direct comparisons with MD simulations on the same
              systems can be made.  Another system for study will be linear aliphatic
              polyester copolymers.  Both the subglass processes and glass transition region
              will be investigated.  Companion MD simulations are to be made.  Simulation
              efforts on liquid crystalline wholly aromatic polyesters will be continued as
              well.  In all of these areas a considerably more detailed understanding of how
              relaxation processes and molecular motions are connected will evolve.

The
              chemical industry of the United States is an important segment of the nation's
              economy.  It is one of the segments that continues to contribute a positive
              balance in international trade.  Its backbone is the manufacture and processing
              of polymers.  These materials have become interwoven into every aspect of
              everyday life.  Their behavior, and hence the choice of a given material for a
              given application, depends sensitively on the presence of relaxation processes.
               The latter are well defined regions of temperature and time over which
              properties change, often dramatically.  The presence of the processes is due to
              the onset of various types of molecular motions with increasing temperature. 
              In order to rationally tailor existing materials for new applications and
              design new ones, it is important that relaxations be understood at the most
              fundamental level possible.  This requires understanding of the underlying
              molecular motions.  Achieving this insight is an important goal of polymer
              science.

