Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogeny,Floral Evolution, and Patterns of Homoplasy in
               Pedicularis (Scrophulariaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9972612

Award Number: 9972612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9657               (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Baum   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Donoghue  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972612
Donoghue and Ree
	Graduate student Richard Ree, under the direction of
              Dr. Michael Donoghue at Harvard University, is studying the phylogenetic
              relationships and patterns of evolution in morphological characters in the
              genus Pedicularis (louseworts, of family Scrophulariaceae), a northern
              hemisphere lineage of flowering plants that has undergone extraordinary
              diversification in the mountains of south-central China and neighboring
              regions. Conflicting taxonomic classifications of the numerous species in this
              genus (ca.. 500 described species in total) have resulted from differing
              emphases on floral features versus vegetative characters by taxonomists in
              their mostly intuitive assessments of similarity between species. The primary
              aim of the project is to test the hypothesis that major differences among
              classifications of Pedicularis reflect differential rates of evolutionary
              change in vegetative versus flower characters. Molecular data from nuclear and
              chloroplast DNA sequences, supplemented with morphological data, will be used
              to construct a phylogenetic (genealogical) framework for a sample of ca. 90 of
              the estimated 270 Asiatic species of the genus. Patterns and rates of character
              change will then be explored using methods of inferring ancestral states and
              assessing heterogeneity in rates across lineages.
	The project is the first
              effort to apply modern, explicit phylogenetic methods to the study and
              interpretation of floral and vegetative diversity in the genus Pedicularis, and
              it will provide a framework for extended analyses on other species in the genus
              and in related Scrophulariaceae. Furthermore, the research targets one of the
              most species-rich regions in the eastern Himalayan biodiversity "hotspot" and
              hence will provide insights into the processes that have made this remote
              region the most diverse in the northern temperate zone.

