Title       : The Dynamics of Driven Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9972022

Award Number: 9972022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36129              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Spiegel eas@astro.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972022
Spiegel

In this project we shall study three kinds of parametrically
              driven systems: 
(1) a periodically driven, ordinary differential equation,
              (2) the partial 
differential equations of thermal convection with
              time-dependent 
boundary conditions and (3) maps of the line with
              time-dependent control 
parameters. The aim of this work is to gain insight
              into the ways that 
environmental variations complicate the behavior of
              natural systems.  In 
the case of the ODE, we shall consider a periodically
              driven nonlinear 
oscillator that exhibits chaos.  We aim to develop the
              equivalent of the 
Shil'nikov theory for such nonautonomous equations.  The
              absence of 
fixed points of the implied flow presents interesting difficulties
              for this 
approach.  To investigate the convection equations with
              time-dependent 
boundary temperatures, we shall use a modal expansion
              procedure that 
allows careful accounting of the vertical structure of the
              problem and we 
shall check our results against direct numerical simulation. 
              This 
procedure will allow us to include complicating effects like rotation. 
              Our 
exploration of nonautonomous maps will focus on the nature of the
              
intermittency that they can exhibit.  In such systems the basin boundaries
              
may become riddled and we shall compare the onset of this phenomenon 
to the
              analogous case without dissipation when cantori form.

The simplest chaotic
              systems do the same things over and over again but 
never the same way twice. 
              Details of their behavior can easily be 
modified by external perturbations,
              no matter how small.  However, when 
the external perturbations are
              persistent, they can cause the disturbed 
systems to switch their overall
              behavior patterns dramatically, as 
illustrated by the famous water-drop
              torture.   Weak but chaotic forcing 
can lead to erratic outbursts of activity
              punctuated by calm periods in a 
process known as on-off intermittency.  The
              minima in solar activity that 
occur every few centuries and last for decades
              illustrate this behavior. We 
wish to gain insight into how responses to
              persistent external perturbations 
vary according to whether the perturbations
              are regular or irregular in 
time.  We know already that simple models of the
              earth's climate, when 
subjected to the effect of continued slight
              fluctuations in solar output can 
show swings in global conditions.  We aim to
              deepen our mathematical 
understanding of such effects through the study of
              tractable models of 
perturbed chaotic systems.  The results from such studies
              may provide 
guidance for large-scale numerical modeling of complex phenomena
              such 
as climate variations and population dynamics.

