Title       : Rigorous Micro-Macro Estimates For Low-Symmetry Polycrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9972234

Award Number: 9972234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Ponte Castaneda ponte@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Rigorous micro-macro estimates for low-symmetry polycrystals.

A fundamental
              problem in materials engineering is the computation of the
macroscopic
              behavior of polycrystalline aggregates from the microscopic
behavior of their
              constituent single-crystal grains and statistical
information about the grain
              size, shape and distribution. Exactly 50 years
since its introduction by G.I.
              Taylor, this is still being done by means of
the uniform strain-rate
              approximation. While appropriate for
high-symmetry/low-anisotropy crystals,
              such as FCC and BCC materials, the
Taylor approach is highly inaccurate for
              low-symmetry/high-anisotropy
polycrystals, such as HCP and ionic materials,
              especially when the number
of independent slip systems is deficient (less than
              five). In addition, it
is well known that the Taylor theory leads to texture
              predictions that are
significantly sharper than experimentally observed. To
              address these two
long-standing limitations of the Taylor model, we propose to
              implement a
rigorous nonlinear homogenization method (the so-called
              second-order
procedure) that has already been used with great success by the
              PI for
metal-matrix and other types of composites materials. The
              ultimate
objective is the development of constitutive models for
              implementation in
finite element simulations of deformation processing
              operations, fully
accounting for crystallographic and morphological texture
              evolution in
these materials. This research program will have an impact in
              the
development of improved manufacturing operations for
              light-weight,
high-strength structural alloys (e.g., titanium), which are of
              great
importance in many industries.


