Title       : Small Ball Probabilities and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9972012

Award Number: 9972012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wenbo Li wli@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This research centers on estimating the probability of rare events of small
              ball type. The two major objectives are to develop new methods of estimating
              small ball probabilities for Gaussian and closely related random processes, and
              to systematically study the existing techniques and applications which are
              spread over various topics. The recent completion of the connection between
              small ball probabilities and metric entropy problems allows applications of
              tools and results from functional analysis to provide one of the most powerful
              methods in the lower bound estimate for Gaussian processes. In turn, it
              suggests many further questions connected to applications in probability theory
              and approximation theory. The PI intends to extend this study to other random
              processes such as Gaussian chaos and stable processes. This research should
              lead to significant new knowledge about small ball probabilities and provide
              basic tools for the study of random processes.
	The primary focus of this
              research is a better understanding of rare random phenomena related to Gaussian
              processes and others which serve as models in many applications. These types of
              problems often arise in estimating the chances for rare events to occur in
              areas where such events are of fundamental importance, such as weather,
              economic indices, epidemics etc. This research should improve our understanding
              of rare random events and provide basic tools for the study of our random
              environment.

