Title       : On the Approximation of Linear Operators with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9972591

Award Number: 9972591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Athanasios C. Antoulas aca@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          Abstract of project DMS-9972591: 
On the approximation of linear
              operators with applications
           by A.C. Antoulas, Rice
              University
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The goal of this project is to investigate problems of approximation of 
linear operators. The approximation method considered is based on the 
singular value decomposition of the operator in question. More precisely, 
we propose to study the existence of a unifying framework for the optimal 
and sub-optimal approximation of (i) unstructured operators in finite 
dimensions, and (ii) structured (Hankel) operators in infinite 
dimensions. It is expected that this study will shed light on a large 
class of singular-value-decomposition based approximation problems.

In order to predict the behavior of dynamical systems such as, a 
compact disc (CD) player,  a chemical reaction, or a multi-story building, 
and appropriately modify (control) this behavior according to given 
specifications, a mathematical model is needed. Often, (detailed) models 
for these dynamical systems can be obtained using so-called finite-element
methods. The resulting complexity of such models is very high. However, 
for both simulation and control purposes low-complexity models are needed,
an important requirement being that these simplified models retain key 
features of the original high-complexity systems. The purpose of this 
project is to study approximation methods which yield low-complexity 
models with (theoretically) guaranteed properties. This is a necessary 
step towards addressing, in a second phase, the problem of control of 
such dynamical systems. It is expected that this project, besides its 
significance for mathematics, will have an impact on application problems 
arising in several engineering disciplines, and on the theorerical 
foundations of high performance computing. 


Sub-project on internet based education
---------------------------------------

The advent of the internet is radically changing the way teaching is 
done at universities. An important new concept in this regard is that 
of "Asynchronous Learning", where students learn anytime, anywhere, 
and at their own pace, using the internet. A key ingredient in this 
mode of learing is access to online exercises, with the capability of
instantaneous grading and feedback both for the student and for the 
instructor. In traditional courses, the instructor gets feedback on 
how well students have understood a certain concept at a later time,
when instruction has moved on to a new topic, and re-elaboration 
becomes cumbersome. This issue can be addressed by making available 
online excercises and tests which are graded instantaneously. Careful 
selection of the exercises is required however, so as to help the 
beginner and challenge the advanced learner. We propose to study the 
issue of "automatic problem generation and grading" for a course in 
the broad area of linear algebra and dynamical systems. We will start 
by reviewing and evaluating several existing methods for computer-based 
generation and grading of assignemnts, for instance: (i) the "Mallard" 
instructional environment developed at the University of Illinois, 
(ii) the "Autodidact" instructional environment developed at the 
University of Grenoble; the former is a general platform which can in 
principle be adapted to handle many different courses, while the latter 
is geared towards courses in dynamical systems and control. It will 
subsequently be decided whether to adopt one of these existing 
platforms and/or the degree of modification required to address the 
needs of the chosen course.


