Title       : Temperature, Stress and Microstructural Influences on the Luminescence
               Properties of Rare Earth Activated Yttrium Oxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a9972509

Award Number: 9972509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kassner mkassner@mae.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanna M. McKittrick  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972509
McKittrick

Photoluminescence is the process by which photons
              (infrared , visible, ultraviolet [UV]) are emitted from a solid under
              excitation by higher energy photons.  Rare earth activated oxides (e.g.,
              europium-doped yttrium oxide are a class of solids that emit visible light when
              bombarded with UV photons.  These materials have application in information
              displays, lighting, and scintillators.  The luminescence emission intensity,
              spectral energy distribution (intensity as a function of wavelength), and
              luminescence decay rate are influenced by the application of temperature or
              stress.  Previous work on quantifying these effects has been done almost
              exclusively on single crystals.  Technologically important materials, such as
              polycrystalline thin-films, have not been examined.  A better understanding of
              the effect of external influences on the luminescence properties of thin- films
              is necessary for these materials to have more wide-spread industrial use.  The
              objective of this project is twofold:  (1) determine the applicability of
              theoretically predicted luminescence behavior to experimental values obtained
              on rare earth doped yttrium oxide single crystals or polycrystalline compacts
              as a function of temperature and stress and to (2) identify and quantify the
              temperature, stress and microstructure dependent luminescence properties of
              thin-films and compare these values to what was obtained previously.   In the
              research, luminescence property data on single crystals of rare earth activated
              yttrium oxide (and/or polycrystalline yttrium oxide as a function of
              temperature and stress wil be obtained and compared with the currently
              available fundamental equations predicting the behavior; thin-films will be
              fabricated and the luminescence properties examined as compared with the single
              crystal data as a function of temperature and stress; the effect of grain
              boundary density, dislocation density, segregation of activators and grain size
              on the thin-film luminescence properties will be quantified; and a model and
              predictive relationships will be provided that are based on the fundamental
              equations that include the effect of temperature, microstructural features and
              residual stress on the luminescence properties of thin-film rare earth
              activated yttrium oxide. 
%%%
Luminescent solids are used in many consumer
              applications, the most well known of these is as phosphors for computer display
              screens.  This project will examine and try to understand the behavior of one
              class of these materials in order to increase the efficiently and thus decrease
              the cost of the materials.  The project will be carried out by two researchers,
              one an expert in luminescent materials and one an expert in mechanical
              properties.
*** 

