Title       : Domain Decomposition in Control of Multiple Link Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9972034

Award Number: 9972034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86842              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Lagnese lagnese@math.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972034
Lagnese

This research will explore optimal control, approximate
              controllability, 
and exact controllability of systems of partial differential
              equations on 
one-dimensional graphs or on two-dimensional polygonal networks
              by 
means of domain decomposition. The basic idea of domain decomposition 
in
              this context is to decouple the global optimality system through an 
iterative
              procedure on individual elements, in which the couplings at the 
vertices
              and/or edges are replaced by certain boundary conditions. At each 
iteration
              the local problems, which are themselves local optimality 
systems, may be
              solved in parallel.  The choice of boundary conditions in 
the local problems
              must be such that, in particular, the transmission 
conditions in the global
              optimality system are restored in the limit of the 
iterations. The motivation
              for this approach is twofold. On the one hand, 
controllability properties and
              optimal control laws are more readily 
available at the local, subdomain,
              level.  Consequently, there is good 
reason to believe that it may be possible
              to construct suitable control laws 
for the global system by local iterations,
              even in situations where such 
control properties are not a priori known at
              the global level. On the other 
hand, and perhaps more importantly, the
              approach is motivated by its 
numerical potential. Complex, heterogeneous
              structures or media, after 
some discretization, inevitably lead to very large
              systems to be solved 
numerically. The transmission conditions in the global
              problems, which of 
course must be also realized numerically, are very
              difficult to handle 
numerically at the global level.  It is very natural,
              therefore, to decompose 
such structures into their canonical constituents, to
              discretize those and 
then run the computations in parallel with the
              communications between 
elements taking place once an iteration step is
              completed.

In many practical applications it is necessary to devise control
              laws to 
regulate the dynamic behavior of structures such as trusses, frames,
              robot 
arms, solar panels, antennae, airfoils or deformable mirrors that are
              
comprised of multiple  interconnected flexible elements such as beams,
              
membranes, plates, shells or combinations thereof. This research will
              
explore optimal control, approximate controllability, and exact
              
controllability of such structures by means of domain decomposition. The
              
basic idea of domain decomposition in this context is to devise optimal
              
control laws for the global structure through iterations of optimal control
              
laws on individual elements. At each iteration the local control laws may
              
be simultaneously obtained through parallel computations.  The  
motivation
              for this approach is twofold. On the one hand, controllability 
properties and
              optimal control laws are more readily available for 
individual flexible
              elements. Consequently, there is good reason to believe 
that it may be
              possible to construct optimal control laws for the global 
structure by
              iterations on individual control laws, even in situation where 
such control
              properties are not a priori known at the global level. On the 
other hand, and
              perhaps more importantly, the approach is motivated by 
its numerical
              potential. Complex, heterogeneous structures or media, after 
some
              discretization, lead to very large systems to be solved numerically. 
The
              coupling conditions among individual elements that comprise the 
global
              structure are very difficult to handle numerically at the global level.  
It
              is very natural, therefore, to decompose such structures into their 
canonical
              constituents, to discretize those and the then run the 
computations in
              parallel with the communications between elements  
taking place once an
              iteration step is completed.

