Title       : Graphical Markov Models with Interpretable Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a9972008

Award Number: 9972008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Richardson tsr@stat.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1305,9149,EGCH,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972008

One of the most central ideas of multivariate statistics is the
              modeling of dependencies among a set of stochastic variables. The aim of such
              an analysis is often to try to provide some insight into the process which
              generated the data. Graphical Markov models (GMMs) use graphs to represent
              multivariate statistical dependencies in a parsimonious and computationally
              efficient manner. Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) also provide a natural
              formalism for representing data generation mechanisms.  In the case of
              observational data it is often not known whether all of the relevant variables
              have been measured, or whether unmeasured 'confounding' variables are present.
              Since the class of DAG models is not closed under marginalization, if a subset
              of the variables involved in a data generating DAG are observed, then the
              resulting statistical model for the observed margin will not necessarily
              correspond to a DAG. This project will develop graphical Markov models that can
              represent the conditional independence relations imposed by a DAG model on an
              observed marginal.  This involves parametrizing distributions described
              implicitly via a set of conditional independence constraints; developing
              techniques for estimating these models, and formulating computationally
              tractable algorithms for performing model selection.

Among their many
              applications, GMMs have become prevalent in statistical science for the
              analysis of categorical data in contingency tables, for the modeling of
              spatially-dependent processes such as the spread of epidemics in human and
              animal populations, and for the development of early warning systems for severe
              weather conditions.  They are used in computer science (as Bayesian networks)
              for information processing and retrieval, for robotics, computer vision, and
              pattern recognition, for the debugging of complex programs (such as Windows
              95), and for the representation of expert systems for medical diagnosis.  In
              decision science (as influenced diagrams) as models for information flow and
              control and for combining the opinions of many decision-makers.  Similar models
              have long been used infield such as genetics, sociology, econometrics, and
              cycle metrics.  A crucial feature of all these models is that they represent
              complex networks of causal dependencies.  In addition, these models allow for
              fast computational implementation.  These features have led directly to their
              central role in the development of software that can "reason" about real world
              problems.

