Title       : Theoretical Studies of the Quantum Hall Effect and Nonlinear Mesoscopic
               Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9972683

Award Number: 9972683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Johnson mdj@physics.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research to study fundamental properties of the
              integer and fractional quantum Hall effects, and to study mesoscopic transport.
               The PI has developed an ensemble density functional theory approach to study
              the fractional quantum Hall effect in large inhomogeneous systems such as
              quantum dots.  The theory enables the inclusion of electron correlations, spin,
              arbitrary confinements, finite layer thickness, Landau-level mixing and finite
              temperature.   The ensemble density functional theory will be used to study the
              properties of quantum dots in large magnetic fields.  Comparison with addition
              spectrum, magnetoluminescence, and tunneling experiments will show how measured
              features result from changes in electron density, correlation state, and spin
              and edge structures. The ensemble density functional theory will be further
              developed to include the off-diagonal long-range order of the fractional
              quantum Hall effect and then applied to quantum dots. 
 The PI also plans to
              study the edge modes of quantum Hall systems.  The focus of this research is on
              recent experimental data for which a Luttinger liquid description works when it
              should not.   The PI intends to test whether this is a consequence of
              correlations in the lowest Landau level.  The ensemble density functional
              theory will be used to investigate edge structures under different conditions
              in dots.
Another thrust of the PI's research involves a transport formalism
              that he developed for steady-state mesoscopic systems which is valid beyond the
              linear response regime.  The formalism will be applied to study specific
              non-ideal systems, including quantum point contacts.  The PI plans to explore
              model systems comparing his approach to traditional approaches, such as
              nonequilibrium Green's functions, with the aim of gaining insight into
              steady-state highly nonequilibrium statistical mechanics including the role of
              boundary conditions. 
%%%
This award supports theoretical research on quantum
              dots in high magnetic fields and in transport properties of mesoscopic devices.
               The research will use state-of-the-art methods that can include materials
              specific properties and specific geometries to study possible new electronic
              states that are believed to occur in high magnetic fields.  This research is
              fundamental, but lays groundwork that may be important for developing the
              electronic device technologies of the 21st century.   The proposed work
              provides educational opportunities for training the next generation of
              condensed matter theorists.
***

