Title       : Research in Enumerative Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9972648

Award Number: 9972648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira M. Gessel gessel@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972648

The investigator studies study topics in enumerative combinatorics
              related to continued fractions, differential operators,  polytopes associated
              with bin-packing algorithms, and identities for Bernoulli numbers and related
              sequences.  The work on  continued fractions extends Flajolet's combinatorial
              approach in two directions: first, to some well-known continued fractions, such
              as those associated with the moments of Jacobi polynomials, and second, to a
              little-studied generalization of continued fractions called "Lukasiewicz
              continued fractions" or "multicontinued fractions".  The work on differential
              operators interprets their actions on  monomials in terms of paths or directed
              graphs, which may represent a very general class of combinatorial objects,
              which include those arising from continued fractions.  The work on bin-packing
              algorithms applies methods from permutation enumeration to study the behavior
              of certain bin-packing and dual bin-packing algorithms.  The theory  of
              hypergeometric series gives a well-understood way of dealing with certain types
              of identities, but there are many identies that are not of this form, of which
              the Bernoulli numbers and related sequences are among the most interesting. 
              The investigator studies these identities, with a view to developing general
              ways to deal with them.

The investigator studies topics in enumerative
              combinatorics, an area of mathematics that involves counting the number of ways
              that various kinds of operations can be performed, or the number of objects of
              a particular type that can be constructed.  This area of mathematics has many
              applications to the analysis of computer programs, and also has applications to
              statistics, physics, chemistry, and communications.  This work extends
              techniques for solving several different kinds of enumeration problems.  One of
              the topics, for example, shows that the analysis of a method for efficiently
              filling containers with objects of various sizes is closely related to the
              enumeration of certain kinds of permutations. 

