Title       : RUI: An Inventory of Scaled Chrysophytes and Diatoms in Seepage Lakes Along the
               East Coast of the United States: A Basis for the Future Conservation of
               Microscopic Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9972120

Award Number: 9972120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Siver pasiv@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Kociolek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-9972120
Siver

	The primary focus of this project will be to survey and
              inventory
the scaled chrysophyte and diatom floras in seepage lakes and ponds
              along
a transect from Maine to Florida, with a focus on coastal Maine, Cape
              Cod,
the Carolina Bay region and central Florida.  Although seepage lakes
              from
each region along this transect differ in their origin, they are
              similar
in being acidic, poorly buffered, and high in sodium and
              chloride
concentrations.  We plan to critically examine collections in order
              to
fully depict each flora, describe new species, gain knowledge on
              rare
taxa, and identify habitats that are particularly rich and diverse
              with
these organisms. We will use our data to address the following
              question.
How many waterbodies within each region, or between all regions,
              will need
to be set aside and protected in order to conserve the
              biodiversity
contained within these two organismal groups?  A basic
              understanding of
this question is needed before conservation and biodiversity
              management
plans can be designed and implemented for these and other
              microscopic
taxa.  We will also continue to develop our World Wide Web-based
              resources
to inventory, archive and disseminate research results using
              searchable
databases, expand our library of images of important taxa, and to
              continue
to expand our ecological knowledge of these siliceous algal
              groups.
Lastly, we will train a group of undergraduates in the techniques
              and
approaches used in the taxonomy and identification of scaled
              chrysophytes
and diatoms.  


