Title       : Some Problems in Stochastic Flows and Couplings of Diffusions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a9972961

Award Number: 9972961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Cranston cran@dbl.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The principal investigator will study diffusions on manifolds and stochastic
              flows. The work on diffusions is aimed at various aspects of coupling and their
              applications. One goal is to develop a method for coupling a diffusion which
              arises from a Dirichlet form. A potential application of this work is a
              probabilistic proof of the Moser Harnack inequality. Another goal is to study
              the efficiency of the commonly used mirror coupling on manifolds. A goal of
              this work is to gain potential new insights of the influence of geometry on the
              bottom of the spectrum. A third problem is to determine which diffusions with
              the normalized Riemannian volume as equilibrium distribution converge to
              equilibrium the fastest. The principal problems in flows focus on rates of
              dispersion of bodies under stochastic flows. 
	This research concentrates on
              the diffusion of particles on geometric structures called manifolds. It arises
              from the theory of Brownian motion and exploits well known connections between
              diffusions and the spread of heat in bodies (manifolds). Part of the research
              deals with rates of change of temperature distributions on manifolds while
              another deals with the rate of convergence to a steady state temperature
              distribution. These can be studied by diffusion theory and the influence of the
              geometry of the manifold on these quantities can be determined. The work on
              dispersion of stochastic flows is essentially the determination of how fast an
              oil slick will spread if all the oil particles are undergoing diffusive or
              Brownian motion. Applications of this work can be made to pollution control
              problems.
