Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic analysis of the family Calamoceratidae
               (Trichoptera), and a revision of the Neotropical genera Phylloicus and
               Banyallarga
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9972724

Award Number: 9972724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9617               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph W. Holzenthal holze001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972724
Holzenthal and Prather
Caddisflies (Trichoptera) are common and
              abundant organisms in rivers and lakes world wide. As important members of
              aquatic food webs, they feed on organic material and other aquatic
              invertebrates and themselves are fed upon by fish. Caddisflies are very
              sensitive to pollution and are important biological indicators of water
              quality. In the Neotropics, the poor state of taxonomic classification and
              identification for the group hinders their use for water quality monitoring.
              Research into their evolution, biology, and ecology is also hampered by our
              limited ability to identify species. Caddisflies in the genera Banyallarga and
              Phylloicus (family Calamoceratidae) make up one of these poorly known groups.
              These species are conspicuous members of the Neotropical caddisfly fauna, being
              relatively large and, unlike most caddisflies, with strikingly colored wings in
              the adult stage. Their conspicuousness and abundance make them potentially very
              useful as bioindicators.  Unfortunately, published descriptions and
              illustrations, many dating back to the last century, are inadequate for species
              identification. Many suspected new species are undescribed from collections
              made over the last several decades, and evolutionary relationships among these
              species have never been examined.
Graduate student Aysha Prather, under the
              direction of Dr. Ralph Holzenthal at the University of Minnesota, is conducting
              a combined morphological and molecular analysis of museum specimens of the two
              genera and of related genera, to produce a taxonomic revision and genus-level
              phylogenetic analyses. Morphological characters measured from larval and adult
              stages of all known species and from museum collections of suspected new
              species will provide the major materials for the taxonomic description of
              species, the construction of reliable identification keys, range maps of
              geographic distributions, and illustrations of critical identifying features of
              the organisms. DNA sequence data from the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I
              gene and morphological characters will provide information on the relationships
              of the two genera to other calamoceratid caddisflies and the placement of the
              family among related families. This project will provide a taxonomic foundation
              and phylogenetic framework within this group of caddisflies to advance future
              research in systematics, ecology, behavior, and water quality monitoring.


