Title       : Entrepreneurial Engineering Program: Innovative Incubator Sequence (EntErPrIISe)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9972938

Award Number: 9972938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest T. Smerdon                       
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86149              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory P. Crawford Gregory_Crawford@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Suuberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972938
Crawford

It is generally agreed that the environment for engineering
              practice is undergoing rapid changes, driven by many diverse factors.  A
              significant fraction of engineering graduates will quickly find themselves in
              job environments very different from those that they may have been prepared for
              in traditional engineering programs.  Much economic growth is now tied to
              small, high technology firms (spin-offs or start-ups) in which the role of a
              few professionals is critical to success.  Engineers in these environments
              cannot afford to be narrowly compartmentalized in their knowledge or thinking. 
              They must be as comfortable talking to potential customers and investors,      
                                                                 be able to work closely with
              business professionals, and be more aware of the market, the legal and
              environmental constraints, to name a few.

A two semester course will be
              developed at Brown University to introduce selected senior-level students to
              the entrepreneurial environment.  This course would build upon this framework
              by assembling teams of students from different engineering disciplines to work
              on new product ideas developed in close cooperation with local industries.  The
              four-to eight member teams will also involve an important additional component
              - the participation of students from non-engineering disciplines, who have
              general business interests and background.  The intent is to simulate a group
              of diverse professionals united in working towards the goal of commercializing
              a new technology-based product.  Teams will be supervised by a combination of
              in-house faculty (the PI's and other engineering and business-oriented faculty)
              and representatives of the companies sponsoring the problems.  The students
              will be expected to handle issues related to marketing, costing, design,
              prototyping, manufacturing design, intellectual property, environmental and
              legal aspects of their product.  They will prepare business plans, formally
              present them to their respective corporate sponsors, revise them, and take the
              product up to the point of commercial introduction.  In the early portions of
              the course, they will be guided by seminars on entrepreneurial activity.  In
              the end a manual to aid institutions planning such courses will be prepared at
              the conclusion of the experimental course offering, which will detail the
              experiences in interfacing the academic partners with the industrial
              partners.

