Title       : Implementation of a Novel Studio Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9972502

Award Number: 9972502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93765              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Sorensen sor@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne Maleki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              pThe New Studio format for teaching introductory physics to large undergraduate
              classes retains the lecture format and combines traditional recitation and
              laboratory instruction creating an environment in which many interactive
              learning strategies are implemented. This New Studio, where students are taught
              two hours twice a week has 30 students working in groups of three at tables
              equipped with modern instructional technology and apparatus. The group setting
              allows for peer instruction and development of group skills.  Instructional
              materials that are centered on group work, microcomputer based technology tools
              and problem solving are adapted and implemented in the New Studio setting.  The
              daily sequence of the course includes the lecture to instruct economically
              large sections of students, but is strengthened by non-traditional classroom
              interactive strategies such as the use of  ClassTalk and concept questions. The
              lecture, supported by the New Studio, engages students with simple
              experiments/demonstrations coordinated with the previous night's problem set. 
              After the students explore the three to four concepts using these
              demonstrations,  they reconsider the problem set with the guidance of their
              instructors and their peers.  The New Studio concept is motivated by our
              departmental assessment of more traditional physics instruction and is based on
              adapting and implementing several of the interactive instructional materials
              and techniques demonstrated as effective in recent physics education
              research.



