Title       : IGERT Formal Proposal: Problem-centered research training: Integrating formal
               and empirical methods in the cognitive science of language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9972807

Award Number: 9972807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2653399            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Smolensky smolensky@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda Rapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Brent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Jusczyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geraldine Legendre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research in a new paradigm of graduate education:
              Problem-Centered training, delimited not by the boundaries of an academic
              discipline, but by the demands of solving a problem. Students are trained in a
              broad range of research methods derived from a diverse set of traditional
              disciplines. The general problem targeted by this IGERT program is: "How does
              the brain achieve its function?" The program focuses on one particularly
              important cognitive function: language. Basic research on language has
              long-term implications for diagnosis and treatment of language-related
              neurological and learning disorders, for literacy and language education, and
              for digital language technologies. The computational framework of cognitive
              science allows the problem to be formulated more precisely: What are the
              representational structures, processing algorithms, and learning algorithms
              underlying our linguistic abilities? How are these representations and
              algorithms realized in the brain? Studying with internationally recognized
              leaders at Johns Hopkins, IGERT trainees acquire both theoretical and empirical
              sophistication through a uniquely multidisciplinary range of research methods:
              (i) computational and mathematical modeling of language processing and
              learning, including symbolic methods and neural networks, in a range of
              linguistic formalisms; (ii) psychological experimentation on adult and infant
              language processing and learning; (iii) neuroimaging of brain activity during
              language processing; (iv) grammatical analysis of the language of adults,
              children, and second-language learners; (v) neuropsychology of language
              deficits from acquired and developmental neurological damage; and (vi)
              computational methods of automatic speech and language processing.

IGERT is
              an NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative,
              research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group of scientists
              and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of
              career options. IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to
              develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend
              organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or
              institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for
              both training and research. In this second year of the program, awards are
              being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is
              supported by funds from the Directorates for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
              Sciences, for Biological Sciences, for Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering, and for Education and Human Resources. 

