Title       : Fluorescence, Phosphorescence and Excitation Techniques in the Undergraduate
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9972505

Award Number: 9972505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33632              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy M. Shachter ashachter@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Atom Yee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda S. Brunauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick E. Hoggard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              By using a spectrofluorimeter, students are acquiring skills in fluorescence,
              phosphorescence and excitation techniques.  Twelve specific experiments are
              being adapted from either the research literature or from the Journal of
              Chemical Education.  In addition, eight new experimental procedures are being
              developed. The spectrofluorimeter is used in the physical chemistry laboratory
              to study quenching of excited states and to use selection rules to assign
              excited states. In the inorganic laboratory, the instrument is used to
              characterize compounds synthesized in the laboratory, to study the
              photophysical properties of important excited state complexes, to distinguish
              between fluorescence and phosphorescence, to follow the progress of a
              photochemical reaction, and to record a sharp-line excitation spectrum in order
              to determine ligand field properties. The quantitative determination of trace
              metal concentrations through the fluorescence of porphyrin complexes is
              conducted in our analytical course. Protein conformational analysis and
              concentration determination is investigated by using fluorescence techniques in
              our biochemistry course. Finally, environmental applications of fluorescence
              methods are being incorporated into a non-science majors course and general
              chemistry laboratory.  All materials developed are to be available on the
              internet and presented at chemical education conferences. In addition, several
              undergraduate research projects involving the spectrofluorimeter are underway.
              Research results are to be presented by undergraduates at local, regional and
              national conferences and published with undergraduate co-authors.





