Title       : Processes With Dependent Increments: Boundary Crossing, Self-Normalization and
               Limit Theorems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9972237

Award Number: 9972237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor H. de la Pena vp@stat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The principal investigator (PI) considers problems which involve sums of
              dependent variables and whose solutions require the use of existing and new
              results of the theory of decoupling. Decoupling theory has been very successful
              in translating problems involving dependent variables into ones involving
              independent variables through the use of inequalities specially designed for
              that purpose. In this research the PI will study three major problems, and
              consider approaches (including decoupling methods) that may be used in solving
              them. The first problem involves a general and natural approach to approximate
              the expected waiting time for a random process to hit a boundary in terms of
              the function determined by the expected value of the supremum of the process.
              This approach permits the use of the historical averages in developing useful
              approximations. The second problem concerns an approximation to the speed of
              convergence of sums of dependent variables in terms of known results for sums
              of independent variables. This problem has the potential of widely expanding
              the applicability of the principle of conditioning, a method that extends the
              martingale central limit theorem. The third problem develops probability
              approximations for self-normalized martingales. Results from this problem have
              the potential to impact several areas of probability and statistics, including
              the theory of hypothesis testing and confidence intervals, since typically
              self-normalized variables serve as pivotal quantities in the construction of
              confidence intervals and tests of hypothesis.
	A common assumption made in the
              development of statistical and probabilistic methods concerns the predicate
              that the variables or processes are independent or have independence
              properties, that is, what happens to one of the variables does not affect what
              happens to the other. This independence assumption has the effect of
              simplifying the mathematical complexity of the problem and is quite common in
              practice. Due to this simplification it seems natural to seek approaches that
              would permit the use of results involving independent variables in the case the
              variables are dependent. The PI has been heavily involved in such a project
              through the development of ``Decoupling'' theory which has the above paradigm
              as its goal. His first problem in the current research is to develop a
              probabilistic theory for the use of historical data to obtain estimates of the
              time dependent processes take to reach a boundary. His preliminary work
              provides useful connections between the study of this problem and the study of
              the case of boundary crossing by non-random functions through the use of the
              average (or expected) behavior of the processes involved. This work has the
              potential to impact profoundly several areas of scientific knowledge where
              boundary crossing times are important and historical knowledge of the behavior
              of the process in question is available. Examples of specific areas of
              application include approximations to waiting time for: 1) an earthquake to
              happen, 2) for the next tornado to arrive, 3) for a dam to overflow, 4) for a
              computer to crash. All this when historical records are available. The second
              problem involves the development of results connecting the efficiency of
              approximations used involving independent variables to obtain similar
              approximations for dependent variables, a potentially cost saving device for
              choosing between competing statistical procedures. The third problem involves
              the study of self-normalized statistics based on dependent variables or
              processes. This type of statistic provides key quantities used in the
              development of confidence intervals for parameters. An example of how
              dependence enters into this type of problem concerns the development of
              interval estimates for the percentage of voters which will vote for a given
              candidate in the case the voters do not act independently but influence each
              other's 
decisions.
