Title       : Innovative Finite Element Methods for Modeling Multiphase Contaminant Flows in
               Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a9972147

Award Number: 9972147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Ewing   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1317,9197,9216,9263,EGCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ewing
9972147
     Complex physical phenomena involving multiphase
              contaminant
flows and transport in porous media are often modeled by
              coupled
systems of nonlinear partial differential equations.  Recent
advances
              in computational capabilities (particularly with the
advent of new parallel
              architectures) have greatly expanded the
potential for incorporating more
              physics into the differential
equations.  While such changes to the model can
              increase its
ability to represent accurately the underlying real process,
              this
must be verified in each phase of the modeling process
              utilizing
physical, mathematical, numerical, and computational concepts.
The
              investigator and his colleague develop analytical and
numerical methods for
              the differential equations describing
multiphase contaminant flows and
              transport in porous media.  The
first objective is a theoretical analysis of
              these nonlinear
partial differential equations.  Special topics to be treated
              are
regularity, stability, and bifurcation phenomena.  The second
objective
              is to study and develop finite element methods capable
of capturing sharp
              solution fronts, producing accurate fluid
velocities, conserving mass, giving
              high-order approximations in
time, and being efficiently adapted in local grid
              refinement.
Here the investigators develop finite element methods
              for
treating systems of nonlinear transport-diffusion equations via
concepts
              of Eulerian-Lagrangian localized adjoint methods and
mixed finite element
              methods coupled with high-order
time-stepping procedures.  The third objective
              is to develop
efficient parallelizable iterative solution techniques for
              the
resulting discrete problems.
     This project continues ongoing
              development of accurate
numerical techniques, efficient computational codes,
              and
supporting mathematical analysis for modeling of multiphase flows
and
              transport in groundwater hydrology that has applications in
design of
              remediation and clean-up technologies.  The development
of improved methods
              for assessing groundwater contamination by
hazardous wastes has become
              increasingly important.  Indeed,
groundwater supplies are increasingly
              threatened by organic,
inorganic, and radioactive contaminants introduced into
              the
environment by improper disposal or accidental release.  Estimates
of
              remediation costs at U.S. government sites alone range into
the hundreds of
              billions of dollars.  Protecting the quality of
groundwater supplies is a
              grand challenge problem of broad
societal importance.  There are also a number
              of industrial
applications of the proposed research.  The production
              and
managment of oil reservoirs are governed by equations and
technologies
              that are nearly identical to those exploited in
groundwater hydrology.  The
              manufacture of high quality fiber
reinforced plastic composites for automotive
              and aerospace
application is controlled by technology similar to that
              studied
in this project.  Design of semiconductors uses equations
              very
analogous to those for groundwater transport.  In these
              areas,
technology transfer can be easily carried out.  In particular,
because
              of their intellectual content and strong links to
industry, this variety of
              problems provides an excellent vehicle
for students to learn techniques in
              applied and computational
mathematics.


