Title       : Modular Wireless Communications Curriculum Development and Dissemination for
               Four-Year Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9972380

Award Number: 9972380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Misty Baker mbaker@gwec.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy X. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Global Wireless Education
	      PO Box 443
	      Avon, MN  56310    320/267-8418

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Explosive growth in the wireless areas of cellular and digital personal
              communications services over the past few years has been shadowed by a decrease
              in the availability of trained workers.  Included in the trained workers needed
              are four-year graduates with electrical engineering, computer engineering,
              electronics/technician, or software/lprogramming degrees with a concentration
              in wireless technology. The mission of Global Wireless Education Consortium
              (GWEC (pronounced GeeWec) is to increase the quality and the quantity of
              technicians, engineers, and information technology specialists for the wireless
              industry.  GWEC is supported by industry members:  Motorola, Lucent
              Technologies, Ericsson, AT&T Wireless, Northern Telecom, Nokia, Movilnet,
              Midwest Wireless Communications, Telcordia Technologies, and AirTouch
              Communications.  Twenty-seven schools are GWEC Education Partners including
              eighteen four-year or Masters level programs.  GWEC initiatives apply to the
              CCLI themes of innovative educational materials addressing an enormous national
              and international need for well-prepared graduates with wireless knowledge. 
              This project includes: A)  Innovative materials for national distribution that
              have evaluated, tested and developed with industry and education experts. B) 
              Professional faculty development through tested and evaluated methods. C) 
              Teaching and learning strategies that have been integrated with practical
              application experiences providing students with theory and application. D) 
              Care to include minority programs and foster the growth of additional minority
              involvement.
