Title       : Three-Band Quantum Coherences in Semiconductors: Theory and Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2001   
File        : a9972195

Award Number: 9972195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf H. Binder rbinder@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Axel Schulzgen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
Whereas in atomic and molecular three-level systems a number of important
              nonlinear coherent optical effects, such as electromagnetically-induced
              transparency, lasing without inversion, dark states, and adiabatic population
              transfer are by now well established, the potential of finding  analogous
              effects in semiconductors has not yet been exploited. The purpose of this
              research is the application of these techniques of atomic/molecular physics to
              the study of condensed matter systems.  Specifically, experimental and
              theoretical studies will be performed of excitonic three-band coherences in
              semiconductor quantum wells. The main goal is the identification of
              similarities and fundamental differences between excitonic three-band systems
              on the one hand and their atomic three-level counterparts on the other hand.
              Experimentally, the work is based on femtosecond two-color laser pulses, which
              couple to the heavy-hole and the light-hole exciton, respectively. The
              theoretical analysis includes the description of radiative and non-radiative
              quantum coherences, bandstructure effects, and quantum mechanical many-body
              correlations. The nonlinear coherent effects and basic physical issues under
              consideration are (i) excitonic three-band Rabi oscillations, (ii) coherent
              dark states in semiconductors, (iii) adiabatic heavy-hole-to-light-hole
              population transfer, and (iv) the influence of charge-carrier correlations on
              these effects, for example intervalence-band charge-carrier scattering,
              exciton-exciton scattering, and biexcitonic effects.  This research will be
              conducted with graduate students who will thereby acquire research skills in a
              forefront area of condensed matter physics and materials science.  These skills
              will enable them to be productive members of the technical workforce of the
              21st century.
***
In atoms, laser light is usually not simply absorbed, but
              leads to coherent and reversible excitations of electrons. In the simplest and
              probably most fundamental scenario, the light induces an oscillatory behavior
              that consists of excitation and de-excitation of the electrons in the atom.
              Semiconductors, on the other hand, tend to simply absorb light, not allowing
              for such coherent and reversible processes. However, recent experiments have
              shown that, on ultrashort timescales, semiconductors do exhibit certain
              coherent effects, which bear some resemblance to their atomic counterparts. In
              this project, we try to observe and establish some of these semiconductor-atom
              analogies through a combination of experiments with ultrashort light pulses and
              a theory that allows for a quantum mechanical description of semiconductors. We
              focus on semiconductor systems that involve two coupled electronic transitions,
              because the atomic counterpart to these systems, the so-called three-level
              atoms, promise far-reaching applications in nonlinear optics and laser physics.
              The results of these investigations have great potential to advance the
              development and use of semiconductors in technological devices.  This research
              involves graduate students who will receive training in one of the forefront
              areas of contemporary condensed matter physics and materials science.  This
              training will prepare them to be productive members of the technological
              workforce of the 21st Century.
%%% 

