Title       : Networks for Science and Mathematics Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9972999

Award Number: 9972999
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1253366            (Estimated)
Investigator: Earl B. Hunt ehunt@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research deals with the improvement of secondary school education
              in
science and mathematics. Previous research by ourselves and others
              has
shown the value of engaging students in interactive self-assessments
              and
problem solving while learning science and mathematics. However it
              has
proven difficult to disseminate these techniques to teachers for
              a
variety of reasons. A new technique of dissemination will be
              attempted,
using the World Wide Web (WWW) and internet technologies. The
              technique
also ties into state and nationwide movements toward assessments
              to
achieve and maintain standards. In order to assist teachers in
              preparing
students for these assessments we will place interactive problem
              solving
activities on the WWW. These questions and activities permit
              student
self-assessment of progress and teacher assessment of class progress
              while
students are learning before the students take the
              "standards"
examinations. The exercises themselves will be developed
              by
highly experienced teachers, who will also be available by email
              to
support classroom teachers using the WWW based learning activities.
              The
technique will be tested by developing exercises that are
              coordinated
with the State of Washington's Essential Academic Learning
              Requirements,
which provide the basis for the State of Washington assessments
              for
science and mathematics. The results will be evaluated by comparing
              the
statewide assessment scores obtained by students and classes who have
              or
have not used the WWW based learning activities.

