Title       : Modeling and Scaling of Material Processing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9972185

Award Number: 9972185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald W. Young gwyoung@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Subramaniya I. Hariharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project that is supported by this award concerns the development and
              
application of mathematical methods for the formulation, analysis and
              
solution of material processing system models. Specifically, the aims 
are
              to examine time-dependent sharp-interface solidification models, 
phase-field
              models, and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) models. 
The general goals of the
              projects are to examine simple model problems 
to determine the process
              sensitivity to the operating conditions, describe 
the scientific phenomena of
              heat, mass, and momentum transport within 
the system, and to elucidate the
              coupled dynamics of these transport 
mechanisms.  This will include the
              investigation of time varying evolution 
of solidifying fronts and
              concentration profiles in a two-dimensional 
configuration, a multi-parameter
              asymptotic expansion approach for 
investigation of phase-field models, and an
              asymptotic approach for 
the investigation of a stagnation flow CVD reactor
              and development of an 
evolution equation for the gas/solid interface of the
              deposited film.  

This award will support research that deals with the
              verification of mathematical models
that are pertinent to industrial material
              processing. Solidification is
a common phenomenon in an industrial setting. It
              describes the state change 
from liquid to solid. Experimentally, it has been
              observed that the 
solidification process yields solidified surfaces which
              are
dendritic (finger-like) in nature. Computer simulations also show these
              structures.
The correctness of these simulations still lacks verification.
              The
first two parts of the work will address this very issue on a
              mathematically 
rigorous basis. The third part of this work concerns thin film
              formation as related to
designing high performance materials. One such process
              for making this
film is called Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD). Mathematical
              models for the 
deposition reactors are often complex, and computer
              simulations are typically 
used to extract useful information from the
              mathematical models. The research will
result in simpler models which can be
              studied in more detail. A complex computer 
code can then be verified  against
              the simpler models for correctness.



