Title       : Modeling of Micro-Optics and Electromagnetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9972292

Award Number: 9972292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46208              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Bao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The PI proposes training on the professional and academic development of two
              Mathematical Sciences Industry-Based Graduate Research Assistants. The first
              objective of the training activities
is to prepare the graduate students with
              skills and experiences that will make them strong competitors in an
              academic/industrial environment.  Another objective is to produce the graduate
              students who have qualifications that will make them important contributors to
              science and technology developments in an academic/industrial environment.  The
              proposed research focuses on computational methods and numerical analysis for
              modeling and design of optical micro-structures  in linear and nonlinear media,
              and solving inverse source problems for Maxwell's equations.  The research will
              extend our existing collaboration with industry and develop a new industrial
              collaboration. It will provide opportunities for the graduate assistants to
              engage in University-Industry joint research programs and make important
              contributions to an exciting area of applied and industrial mathematics.

The
              main topics of the proposed research are as follows:

(1) Computational
              modeling of micro diffractive optics.

Continuous developments of interface
              least-squares finite element methods for diffraction problems in TM
              polarization.  Formulation and numerical analysis for the diffraction problem
              by
biperiodic structures. 

(2) Modeling and design in nonlinear diffractive
              optics.

Well-posedness study of a PDE model. Optimal design of nonlinear
              gratings.  Inverse diffraction problems.
The effect of thin coatings of
              nonlinear material on second harmonic generation.
 
(3) Inverse source
              problems for Maxwell's equations in magnetoencephalography (MEG).
              

Determination of locations of epileptic foci in the living human brain. 
              Modeling, computation, and asymptotic analysis of the model problem.

The
              research has significant potential for evolving new science and providing
              industry with guidance to design and fabricate new optical devices and to solve
              the inverse source problems in electromagnetics.  This GOALI project is jointly
              supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
              Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
