Title       : Statistical Methods in Fast Functional MRI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a9972082

Award Number: 9972082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Shepp shepp@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cun-Hui Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal focuses on developing statistical methods and related theory 
for
              fast functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), to sharply improve 
the
              time-resolution of present techniques.  Our objective is to improve the
              
time-resolution of functional magnetic resonance imaging by sampling only a
              
small fraction of the Fourier transform of the spin density, and using a
              
wavelet filter to approximately obtain, not the usual susceptibility map,
              
but instead an integral, representing the total activity, of the difference
              
in susceptibility between task and pre-task, over a prespecified region of
              
interest in the brain at successive time-points.  This space/time trade-off
              
thus allows us to obtain, at high time-resolution, the total activity in a
              
specified region of the brain, believed to process the specific
              stimulus/task, 
to learn or verify where the brain function takes place.  An
              example of the 
use of the technique is to learn where in the brain the
              "rolodex" of memory 
is located whereby one recognizes a familiar face in a
              fraction of a second.  
To try to find where the rolodex is located by a
              method which requires more 
than a second is a doubtful project; better
              time-resolution is required (but 
high spatial resolution is not). Although
              some researchers claim faster
measurement capabilities they sacrifice
              signal/noise.

Statistical methods and related theory will be developed to
              sharply improve 
time-resolution for the technique of functional magnetic
              resonance imaging (fMRI).  Our objective is to improve the time-resolution of
              fMRI by acquiring data from only a small fraction of the MRI sampling space, to
              approximately obtain the total activity of the difference in susceptibility
              between task and pre-task, over a prespecified region of interest in the brain
              at successive time-points.  For a typical region of the brain, say describing
              the hippocampus, believed to be involved in memory, our optimal choice of the
              sampling region should give a ten fold speed-up compared to the usual method of
              sampling. An example of the use of the technique is to learn where in the brain
              the "rolodex" of memory is located whereby one recognizes a familiar face in a
              fraction of a second.  This fast fMRI is expected to have profound and
              far-reaching consequences in the understanding of brain function, a problem of
              central scientific interest at the present time.  
