Title       : Introductory Physics: Integrative Approaches to Inquiry-Based Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9972423

Award Number: 9972423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91268              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Gauthier gauthier@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Behringer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Berndt Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Duke University is developing a new model for introductory physics laboratories
              within the traditional course structure that enhances student engagement in the
              material and promotes better conceptual understanding of fundamental physics
              principles. To fully integrate the lecture, recitation, and laboratory
              components of the course,  qualitative tutorials on a physics principle
              followed by a hands-on experimental activity are adapted and implemented from
              the Tutorials in Introductory Physics   (Prentice Hall, New York, 1998) in the
              laboratory component of the course.  Quantitative computer-based experimental
              activities are developed in consultation with members of the physics education
              research community to complement the existing Tutorials in Introductory
              Physics.  For the computer-based experimental activities, the Duke team is
              adapting materials from RealTime Physics Active Learning Laboratories (Wiley,
              New York, 1998) as well as those from the Workshop Physics Activity Guide
              (Wiley, New York, 1997).  The laboratory physical environment promotes
              collaborative group learning integrated with technology and provides an
              important prototype for educational approaches currently pursued by Duke in the
              sciences.   The laboratory environment is based on a design by Laws (Dickinson
              College) and collaborators in the Workshop Physics project and is described at
              the Dickinson web site
              (http://physics.dickinson.edu/PhysicsPages/Workshop_Physics/Instructor_Resources/Equipment/Equipment_Home.htm).   A comprehensive laboratory Mentor training program is used to train the Mentors in effective use of inquiry-based instructional methods in collaboration with the Duke Center for Teaching, Learning, and Writing, and it is connected to the existing pre-service teacher preparation, Physics Graduate Teaching Certificate programs, and Preparing Future Faculty programs. The mentor program is adapted from the physics program developed at the University of Minnesota (http://www.physics.umn.edu/groups/physed/Research/MNModel/orient.html)
and the Science of Life program developed at Duke as part of the NSF-funded RAIRE project entitled Integrating Research & Education: Extending and Sharing Successful Models. Project results are assessed using a combination of quantitative and qualitative tools to determine the effect our program has on student conceptual understanding and perception of physics.  Dissemination of the materials and findings are promoted at the local campus, state and national levels through oral presentations, publications in peer-reviewed journals, and freely over the World Wide Web. 




