Title       : Dynamics and Structure in Complex Disordered FIC Electolytes: Is There a Maximum
               Ionic Conductivity in the Solid State?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9972466

Award Number: 9972466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494376             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve W. Martin swmartin@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9972466
Martin

This project will develop fundamental new understandings of
              charge transport in disordered electrolytes.  The ever increasing dependence
              upon and the performance requirements of electrochemically-based portable
              energy sources, such as batteries and fuel cells, will rapidly outpace the
              current technological benchmarks being set by the core technologies of these
              devices.  Battery and fuel cell electrolytes, for example, will have to
              increase their ionic conductivity by more than a couple of orders of magnitude
              to keep pace with the ever increasing drain rates required of these devices.
              That such increases in the ionic conductivities of the solid electrolytes in
              batteries and fuel cells are possible was not questioned a few years ago.  New
              research by the PI has shown that such may not the be the case.  His work on
              chemically optimized fast ion conducting (FIC) glasses has shown that a strong
              non-Arrhenius temperature dependence of the ionic conductivity limits the ionic
              conductivity to values 100 to 1000 times below that expected.  This phenomenon
              will have tremendous design implications for the multitude of
              electrochemical-energy based devices that are on the marketplace today and
              whose numbers are growing at an exponential rate.  In this project, the
              conductivity of new silver-ion conductors will be measured to higher
              temperatures and wider frequency ranges to determine if the conductivity
              reaches a saturating or maximum value.  Then, new lithium-ion conductors will
              be measured to see if the non-Arrhenius conductivity is universal.  Wide
              frequency range nuclear spin lattice relaxation rate (NSLR) and conductivity
              measurements will be combined to determine if a temperature independent
              distribution of activation energies can be used to fit the temperature  and
              frequency dependence of both the NSLR and the conductivity.  Such fitting will
              be a powerful test of whether simple activated process theory describes the ion
              dynamics or whether additional dynamical effects must be included.  In
              addition, theoretical models of the temperature and frequency dependence of the
              conductivity that include strong many-body interactions will be developed,
              inelastic neutron scattering and high frequency conductivity studies of the
              full time-domain response from the strongly interacting regime into the short
              time weakly interacting regime will be performed, molecular dynamics
              simulations of the atomic-level conduction topologies will be developed, and
              elastic neutron scattering studies will be performed to probe glass structure
              at the intermediate range level where site connectivity is important.  The
              project will involve graduate student research teams working with undergraduate
              and high school students in a strong collaboration with both US and
              international researchers as well as a domestic battery manufacturer.
              
%%%
The ever increasing dependence upon and the performance requirements of
              electrochemically-based portable energy sources, such as batteries and fuel
              cells, used in so many consumer products, demand better and better energy
              sources. This project will provide understanding of the relationships between
              the chemistry of the electrolyte and its performance and thus will enable
              design at the nano-scale of new electrolytes with order of magnitude increases
              in ionic conductivities.  The strong research team the PI has built, along with
              the international collaborations, promise advances in this area.
***  

