Title       : IGERT: NeuroEngineering Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9972802

Award Number: 9972802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2542720            (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan J. Tobin atobin@mednet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack W. Judy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award
              supports establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of
              education and research involving the UCLA Brain Research Institute (BRI), and
              the UCLA School of Engineering and Applied Science (SEAS). These groups have
              joined forces in a major new enterprise -- the development of a center of
              educational excellence for multidisciplinary neuroscience and its translation
              into engineering and technological applications. To accomplish this vision,
              they are initiating the NeuroEngineering Training (NET) Program, a joint
              endeavor between the Interdepartmental Ph.D. Program for Neuroscience and the
              Biomedical Engineering Ph.D. Program in SEAS.  The program will be supplemented
              with the active involvement of industry and government laboratories. NET will
              enable students: (1) with a background in biological science to develop and
              execute projects that make use of state-of-the-art technology, including
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS); (2) with a background in engineering to
              develop and execute projects that address problems that have a neuroscientific
              base -- including locomotion and pattern generation, central control of
              movement, and the processing of sensory information; and (3) to develop the
              capacity for the multidisciplinary teamwork that will be necessary for new
              scientific insights and dramatic technological progress in the 21st century. 
              Most importantly NET will convert the enormous enthusiasm for this type of
              collaboration into a lasting intellectual discipline and an institutional
              framework to sustain innovation.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
              facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs
              that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared
              to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. IGERT provides
              doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed
              multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational boundaries
              and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to establish a
              highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and research.
              In this second year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one
              institutions for programs that collectively span all areas of science and
              engineering supported by NSF. This specific award is supported by funds from
              the Directorates for Biological Sciences, for Engineering, and for Education
              and Human Resources.


