Title       : Experimental Studies of Thin Film Magnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9972113

Award Number: 9972113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Erskine erskine@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972113
Erskine

This experimental project investigates structure --
              magnetic-property relationships in ultrathin films and ultrathin-film-based
              systems, including multilayer stacks and micron-scale two-dimensional
              structures. There are strong interactions with theoretical groups. This
              provides a means of testing theoretical models and numerical simulations
              specific to the thin film magnetics area. Phenomena of interest include novel
              magnetic anisotropy mechanisms resulting from low dimensionally,
              epitaxy-related films stress and broken transnational symmetry, oscillatory
              interlayer magnetic couplings, interactions between magnetic structures and
              flux vortices in magnet/superconductor thin film interfaces. The research
              involves photoelectron spectroscopy, high-speed Kerr polarimetry, and a range
              of characterization methods. A particular strength of the project is the
              ability to study the speed with which magnetic domains relax, or change their
              state of polarization. This provides fundamental information about magnetic
              switching times, an area of great technological as well as fundamental
              interest. The program contributes to regional scientific/technological
              infrastructure through training of students and through significant additions
              to the Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices (CAMD). 
%%%
This is
              an experimental solid state physics project dealing with thin film magnetism.
              The research involves (1) static magnetic phenomena, (2) dynamic magnetic
              phenomena, and (3) coupled topological defects in magnetic/superconducting
              films. The thin film structures and magnetic phenomena in this project are
              echoed in magnetic structures found in computer hard discs, read heads, and
              other magnetic structures. The interest in this work is on fundamental
              parameters that can be experimentally obtained and compared with theoretical
              models and simulations. A particular strength of the project is the ability to
              study the speed with which magnetic domains relax, or change their state of
              polarization. This provides fundamental information about magnetic switching
              times, an area of great technological interest. The program contributes to
              regional scientific/technological infrastructure through training of students
              and through significant additions to the Center for Advanced Microstructures
              and Devices (CAMD). 


