Title       : Experimental Rheology of Magmatic Emulsions and Foams: Effects of Composition,
               Temperature, Shear Rate and Bubble Content
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9972922

Award Number: 9972922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Spera spera@magma.geol.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972922
Spera
The rheological properties of bubble-bearing magmas are of
              interest for fundamental as well as practical reasons.  Because bubbles are
              deformable, bubble shapes change during flow and this gives rise to a
              shear-rate dependent viscosity for the emulsion (melt + vapor). At low shear
              rate, bubbles retain a  surface tension -dominated spherical shape and the
              ratio of the emulsion viscosity to the bubble-free melt viscosity increases as
              the bubble content increases. At high rates of shear just the opposite occurs;
              the viscosity of the emulsion decreases relative to the melt as the bubble
              content increases. Because small amounts of volatile components such as H2O and
              CO2 are ubiquitous in magmas and because these compounds are sparingly soluble,
              virtually all magmas become volatile-saturated (hence bubbly) at low pressure
              and upon eruption. Quantification of the rheological properties of magma
              emulsions and froths as a function of temperature, shear rate, bubble-content
              and melt composition using a high torque precision concentric cylinder
              viscometer specifically fabricated for this purpose will provide basic
              information concerning the rheological properties of bubble-beraing magmas. 
              These rheological data will be summarized by developing constitutive relations
              that can be used in physical volcanological modelling studies and will fill
an
              important gap in our knowledge regarding the viscometric properties of
              magma.


