Title       : Structure/Property Relationships in Electroactive Oligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9972880

Award Number: 9972880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Galvin megalvin@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972880                                                                         
                                                                                             
                     Galvin                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              This project addresses charge transport in
              molecular systems to gain greater understanding and control of charge mobility.
              The research is multidisciplinary and  will be carried out collaboratively: 
              synthesis led by the PI, charge transport studies by the Co-PI, and charge
              transport theory in collaboration with E. Conwell(U. Roch.). The project
              involves development of synthetic methodology and new materials, structural and
              morphological characterization of those materials, measurements of charge
              mobilities, trap depths and densities and development of a theoretical
              framework in which to evaluate and understand experimental results. Focus is on
              well-defined oligomeric materials because separation of energetic and
              morphological disorder, as well as control of purity, is deemed more tractable
              in these materials than in their polymeric analogs. Materials to be studied
              include: a)a series of sidegroup substituted thienylenevinylene oligomers with
              both different conjugation lengths and with fixed conjugation length but
              varying sidegroup; b)an analogous set of phenylenevinylene oligomers;
              c)unsubstituted thiophene oligomers with varying conjugation length.
              Measurements to be performed in these materials include: a)thin-film organic
              transistor and time-of-flight photoconductivity measurements of hole mobility
              versus temperature and electric field; b)mobility measurement versus deliberate
              impurity incorporation. [One type of impurity to be studied is low HOMO-LUMO
              gap oligomers mixed into high gap oligomers to simulate energetic disorder.
              Another is molecular oxygen to understand its previously observed effect on
              transport in sexithiophene.]; c)thermally stimulated current measurements of
              shallow trap energy distributions; d)systematic variation of thin-film
              transistor geometry to better understand what factors other than carrier
              mobility contribute to their current-voltage characteristics. Theoretical work
              includes: a)incorporation of energetic disorder and spatial correlation into
              the polaronic theory of transport in organic crystals forwarded by Kenkre;
              b)theoretical consideration of impurity and interface scattering which can
              explain relatively weak temperature dependence at low temperatures in organic
              thin-film transistors; and c)quantitative accounting of the field dependence of
              mobility
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
              materials science having high potential technological relevance. The research
              will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to
              important aspects of organic materials based photonic devices. The basic
              knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute
              to improving the perform-ance of advanced display devices and systems.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area.
***

