Title       : Tunneling Experiments of Recent Interest: Zero Bias Conductance Peak and
               Pseudogap Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9972071

Award Number: 9972071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwok-Wai Ng kwng@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972071
Ng

In this project new and more sophisticated tunneling experiments
              will be performed on high-Tc superconductors.  Specifically, Zero Bias
              Conductance Peak (ZBCP) and pseudogap measurements will be performed on
              superconductors.  This project consists of three parts.  The first part
              consists of the study of the response of ZBCP under different experimental
              conditions such as 1) the tunneling direction, 2) the presence of both magnetic
              and non-magnetic barrier impurities, and 3) the presence of microwave
              radiation. The second part involves careful measurements on the pseudogap found
              in underdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8-d (BSCCO).  The dependence of the pseudogap on the
              oxygen content, magnetic field, and the temperature will be investigated.  The
              relationship between the dip feature commonly observed in the superconducting
              state and the pseudogap will also be investigated by means of high Tc
              superconductor - to - high Tc superconductor tunneling.    In the third part of
              the project,  two new experiments will be performed to study the ZBCP and also
              the pseudogap state in common.  The first experiment is to search for the
              occurrence of Andreev reflection in underdoped BSCCO when T > Tc.  If there are
              pre-form pairs in the pseudogap phase, then Andreev reflection will produce a
              weak ZBCP in the tunneling conductance curve.  The other technique is to use
              colossal magnetoresistance (CMR) material as a counter electrode.  The spin
              polarized electrons will depress  the height of ZBCP.  These spin-polarized
              electrons will also suppress the pseudogap if the pseudogap is related to the
              pair pre-formation in underdoped high Tc superconductors.   
%%%
It is now
              well established that high-temperature superconductors demonstrate many
              interesting properties that do not appear in other conventional (ordinary)
              superconductors. Ordinary superconductors operate at only very low temperatures
              yet are already used in many advanced technologies. There is a great effort
              underway to improve the behavior of high-temperature superconductors to allow
              them to be more easily and more economically integrated into technological
              devices, such as the transmission of electrical power over long distances,
              energy storage devices, electric motors, etc.  These applications do depend,
              however, on a better understanding of high-temperature superconductivity.  A
              satisfactory fundamental theory of high-temperature superconductivity is not
              yet available and this research is directed to the performance of critical
              experiments to assist in the establishment of an acceptable theory.  This
              research will involve graduate as well as undergraduate students and
              postdoctoral research associates who will thereby receive training in one of
              the forefront areas of contemporary condensed-matter physics and materials
              science.  This training will prepare them for productive careers in the
              technological work force during the 21st Century.




