Title       : Investigation of Domain Wall Mobility and Domain Reversal in Magnetic Metal
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9972538

Award Number: 9972538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Wigen wigen.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972538
Wigen

This is a condensed matter physics project which addresses the
              magnetic properties of thin films. Fundamental investigations of the
              magnetization reversal process in nanostructured magnetic materials, such as
              thin films, are relevant to information storage densities in the films and to
              the basic read/write operation. This project will employ ferromagnetic
              resonance (FMR) and other techniques to study the influence of film morphology
              on  the dynamics of domain wall motion, a major factor in the read/write
              process. Of interest is the role of the anisotropy energy on the wall
              structure, especially on the Neel cap regions of the domain wall. A picosecond
              strobe laser beam and magneto-optic Kerr effect spectrometer will also be used
              to investigate the domain wall mobility in cobalt films and wires. The project
              provides excellent training for graduate students in areas of fundamental
              physics and in areas of technical magnetism relevant to the information storage
              industry. Students also benefit from the use of state-of-the art instruments
              and techniques employed in the experiments.
%%%
This project will pursue
              fundamental investigations of the physics of magnetization reversal processes
              in nano-structured magnetic materials. The studies will investigate processes
              that are important in the context of materials employed in the information
              storage technology arena. A primary area of interest is the magnetization
              reversal dynamics in thin metal films. This is a critical factor in information
              storage densities and read/write operations in next-generation computers. The
              experiments employ magnetic resonance, laser probes, and magneto-optic Kerr
              effects instrumentation. The training that students and post-doctoral research
              scientists receive while working on the experiments will prepare them for
              cutting edge materials and device related careers in industry, academe, or
              government.

