Title       : Integrated Statistics and Computer Application Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9972494

Award Number: 9972494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melinda A. Holt mholt@twu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie-Anne Demuynck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Woman's University
	      BOX 425619 T W U STATION
	      Denton, TX  762045619    940/898-3375

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a two-year project developing and implementing a sequence of two 6-hour
              courses integrating statistics and computer applications courses.  The proposed
              courses adapt elements from the project "A Computer Lab for an Integrated
              Introductory Computer Science Course" from Sam Houston State University, the
              text "The Basic Practice of Statistics" by David S. Moore, and "Workshop
              Statistics: Discovery with Data" by Allan J. Rossman.  This sequence addresses
              two issues.

First, as in many universities across the United States, the
              elementary statistics courses at Texas Woman's University have been taught in
              lecture format with minimal use of technology.  Recent trends in statistical
              education use technology to provide experiential learning.  Often, however,
              technology is simply added to statistics courses and not fully integrated as a
              necessary tool for analysis and communication.  In turn, computer application
              skills are often taught outside of a context in which they might be used and
              appreciated.  As the authors of Shaping the Future note, students tend to
              compartmentalize their knowledge. The new sequence combats this by integrating
              two courses formerly taught individually.

The second issue is the loss of
              talented students because of introductory courses viewed as unwelcoming and
              intimidating.  This is especially true of underrepresented groups including
              women at both the introductory and advanced levels.  This project combats this
              by providing female mentors for women in the new courses and for graduate
              students.  A student assistant works side-by-side with each PI preparing for
              each new course, assists in the classroom, and participates in the evaluation
              and dissemination of results.  These students, in turn, serve as mentors for
              students taking the new courses.
