Title       : Static and Dynamic Configurations in Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9972040

Award Number: 9972040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71303              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chun Liu liu@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is focused on mathematical problems arising from the
study of
              liquid crystal materials, especially on understanding
static configurations
              flow patterns. One area of the research is to 
study the defect and molecule
              configurations
of minimizing solutions of the liquid crystal energies
              under
different (both strong and weak anchoring) boundary conditions
              and
external fields. Such energies include the Oseen-Frank energy for
              nematic
liquid crystals, the Landau-de Gennes energy for smectic ones, etc..
              The
awardeee will apply the regularity theory for solutions of partial
              differential 
equations to these problems. Liquid crystal materials also
              experience complicated
phase transitions under different conditions. A
              systematic effort will be
made to study the stability of the configurations
              and bifurcation
phenomena in different regimes. Finally this research
              addresses 
the dynamic properties of different types of liquid crystals.
              Recent
experimental and theoretical results indicate that there is an
              interesting
coupling between the molecule director field and the flow velocity
              field.
Therefore it is important to consider these vector fields
              simultaneously
and study the interaction between them. The proposer will
              investigate
both the theoretical and computational aspects of this coupling
              problem.
The focus is to illustrate the flow effects on  the different
              configurations. 
The anisotropic characteristics of the material will cause
              the flow 
to exhibit non-Newtonian features which in turn corresponds to
              defects and
different molecule patterns.

As a special phase of matter,
              liquid crystals were discovered
more than a century ago. Liquid crystal
              displays (LCD)
have been widely used in industries. The fundamental
              research
of such materials is very important. For example, the presence of
              defects
not only affects the manufacturing procedure of the devices,  but
              also
provides a new kind of display where the defects contributes to
              higher
accuracy and memory of the material under external fields. This
              research will
focus on mathematical models for liquid crystals, in particular
              on possible defect
configurations and their behavior over time.  This study of
              static and 
dynamic defect structures will help to improve the modeling and
              design
of such devices. Moreover, an improved understanding of liquid crystals
              
has benefits for broader classes of materials that are important, such
              as
polymeric and biological materials.


